                                    1
                                                      REPORTABLE
               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.6318 OF 2010
MAHANTH SATYANAND @ RAMJEE SINGH                     Appellant(s)
                               Versus
SHYAM LAL CHAUHAN AND OTHERS                         Respondent(s)
                               WITH
                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6319 OF 2010
SWAMI TRIYOGANAND                                    Appellant
                               Versus
SHYAM LAL CHAUHAN AND OTHERS                         Respondent(s)
                       JUDGMENT
N.V. RAMANA, J.
          These appeals by special leave are directed against an
interim order dated 24.2.2009 passed by the learned Single Judge
of the High Court of Judicature at Patna in Second Appeal No. 169
of 1993.In the said appeal, while dealing with I.A. No. 7162 of 1999
and I.A. No. 8089 of 1999, filed by two applicants and each of them

                                     2
claiming to be the sole legal representative of the deceased
appellant No.1 before the High Court, the High Court has allowed
both the applications of rival contenders and permitted both of
them to raise their respective arguments in the subject matter of
pending civil suit.
2.          The genesis of the case is traceable to a Suit filed by the
respondents herein against one Swami Sheo Dharmanand and two
others seeking the relief of declaration that they are trespassers and
for   consequential    relief of  grant    of  permanent    injunction.
Consequent to its dismissal, plaintiffs—respondents filed First
Appeal before the Sub-Judge, Bhabhua which was allowed. The
aggrieved defendants preferred Second Appeal before the High
Court. During the pendency of Second Appeal before the High
Court, one of the original defendants i.e. Swami Sheo Dharmanand
(Appellant No. 1 before the High Court) died. Afterwards, the
appellants herein, filed their separate I.As. in the Second Appeal
seeking to implead themselves as actual chela and successor of the
deceased. The High Court, by its order dated 2.7.2008 remanded
the matter to the trial Court to submit a report under Order 22 Rule
5of the Code of Civil procedure, 1908 [hereinafter referred as ‘CPC’
for brevity]. The relevant portion of the order dated 2.7.2008 passed

                                     3
by the High Court reads:
            “It is necessary to determine the question of legal
      representative of deceased appellant. Order 22 Rule 5
      CPC provides procedure for determination of above
      question. It runs as follows :-
            5. Determination of question as to legal
            representative :- Where a question arises as
            to whether any person is or is not the legal
            representative of a deceased plaintiff or a
            deceased defendant, such question shall be
            determined by the Court:-
            Provided that where such question arises
            before an appellate Court, that court may,
            before determining the question, direct any
            subordinate court to try the question and to
            return the records together with evidence, if
            any, recorded at such trial, its findings and
            reasons therefore, and the appellate court may
            take the same into consideration in
            determining the question.
            Thus, in view of the above provision, the matter of
      determination of legal representative of deceased
      appellant No.1 Sheo Dharma Nand @ Deo Shankar
      Tiwary is sent to the lower court i.e. Sub Judge-I,
      Bhabua who will try the question and return the records
      to this court along with his findings and evidence, if any,
      within two months of receipt of this order.”
3.          The trial Court after taking into consideration the
relevant issues involved in the case both on factual and legal
aspects has given a report dated 4 th December, 2008 that Swami
Satyanand Maharaj (appellant in Civil Appeal No. 6318 of 2010) is
the legal representative of the deceased and sent the report to the

                                     4
High Court. Aggrieved thereby, the applicant (appellant in C.A. No.
6319 of 2010) has filed his objections before the High Court and in
response to the same, the other applicant (appellant in C.A. No.
6318 of 2010) has filed counter affidavit. After hearing the parties at
length, the High Court has passed the impugned order allowing the
I.As of both the applicants and permitted both of them to
participate in the pending second appeal proceedings.             It is
appropriate to extract here Paragraph 19 of the impugned order
which is in the following terms:
      “In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, this Court
      feels it necessary and proper to dispose of all the three
      applications, namely, I.A. No. 7162 of 1999, I.A. No. 8089
      of 1999 and I.A. No.357 of 2005 with a direction that
      both the applicants, namely, Swami Triyoganand alias
      Ram Narayan Prasad (applicant of IA No. 7162 of 1999)
      and Mahanth Satyanand alias Ramjee Singh (applicant of
      I.A. No. 8089 of 1999) be substituted in place of deceased
      appellant No.1 Sheo Dharmanad alias Deo Shankar
      Tewary. Both of them will be entitled to be represented
      through their respective counsel and also to raise their
      respective arguments with respect to the subject matter
      of the suit at the time of final hearing of this second
      appeal but they shall not be entitled to raise any point
      which may be contrary to the stand, pleadings and
      evidence of the original defendant-appellant No.1”.
4.          Now the question that falls for our consideration in these
appeals is whether the High Court was right in allowing the
applications of both the rival claimants in the pending appeal

                                     5
entitling them to raise their respective arguments in the second
appeal, without determining as to who is the actual legal
representative of the deceased under Order 22 Rule 5 CPC.
5.         The main contention of the appellants is that the High
Court has committed a grave error of law by allowing both the
impleadment applications preferred by the rival contenders staking
claim to be the genuine legal representatives of the deceased,
without determining the question under the prescribed provisions of
law as to who is the legal representative of the deceased appellant.
The High Court’s order is not in consonance with the provisions of
Order 22 Rule 5 of CPC and it is unjust that instead of deciding the
paramount question, the High Court had simply passed the order
entitling both the contenders to raise their respective arguments in
the subject matter of Suit. The order of the High Court is perverse,
not in the interest of justice and contrary to the settled principles of
law.
6.         The counsel on behalf of the respondent has argued in
support of the order passed by the High Court and submitted that
the High Court has rightly allowed both the applications by giving
opportunity to contest the appeal.

                                      6
7.           Then the issue that crops up for consideration is, what is
the course to be adopted by the Court when such an applications
are filed before the Court.
8.           The procedural aspect to be followed when an application
is filed under Order 22 Rule 5, CPC is no longer res integra as this
Court in Jaladi Suguna (deceased) through Lrs. Vs. Satya Sai
Central Trust and Others, (2008) 8 SCC 521, has interpreted
Order 22 Rule 5 of CPC in the following terms:
       “Filing an application to bring the legal representatives
       on record, does not amount to bringing the legal
       representatives on record. When an LR application is
       filed, the court should consider it and decide whether
       the     persons    named      therein    as   the     legal
       representatives, should be brought on record to
       represent the estate of the deceased. Until such
       decision by the court, the persons claiming to be the legal
       representatives have no right to represent the estate of
       the deceased, nor prosecute or defend the case. If there
       is a dispute as to who is the legal representative, a
       decision should be rendered on such dispute. Only
       when the question of legal representative is
       determined      by    the    court    and    such     legal
       representative is brought on record, it can be said
       that the estate of the deceased is represented.
                               …   …    …
       The provisions of Rule IV and V of Order XXII are
       mandatory. When a respondent in an appeal dies, the
       court cannot simply say that it will hear all rival
       claimants to the estate of the deceased respondent

                                    7
     and proceed to dispose of the appeal. Nor can it
     implead      all   persons    claiming     to  be     legal
     representatives, as parties to the appeal without
     deciding who will represent the estate of the
     deceased and proceed to hear the appeal on merits.
     The court cannot also postpone the decision as to
     who is the legal representative of the deceased
     respondent, for being decided along with the appeal
     on merits. The Code clearly provides that where a
     question arises as to whether any person is or is not the
     legal representative of a deceased respondent, such
     question shall be determined by the court.
                             …    …    …
     Though Rule V does not specifically provide that
     determination of legal representative should precede the
     hearing of the appeal on merits, Rule 4 read with Rule
     11 makes it clear that the appeal can be heard only
     after the legal representatives are brought on record”.
                                          (emphasis supplied)
9.        Perceiving the present case in the above framework, the
High Court, after noticing that two individual applicants have
claimed to be the chelas of the deceased Mahanth and were
contending to be his legal representatives, has rightly by an order
dated 2nd July, 2008 referred the matter to the Subordinate Judge,
Bhabhua for determination under Order 22 Rule 5 of CPC.
Accordingly, the trial Court decided the question and sent back the
matter with its report dated 4 th December, 2008. Before the High
Court, the rival contender has filed an objection and in response to
the same, the other applicant has filed his counter affidavit.

                                     8
Thereafter, the High Court, instead of deciding on merits the
question of legal representative of the deceased out of the two
contenders, has simply substituted both the contenders in the place
of the deceased appellant before it.
10.         Apparently, the issue of bringing on record the legal
representative in a pending appeal has to be dealt with in a manner
prescribed under the provisions of Order 22 Rule 5. From the
context of the settled legal position, it is clear that when a question
arises before the Court in a pending matter as to who will come on
record as the legal heir of the deceased, the Court shall, before
proceeding to decide with the substantive issues involved in the
case, first and foremost, shall decide who is the legal representative
of the deceased. It is also well settled that when a party dies at the
stage of second appeal and there are rival contenders claiming to be
the legal representatives of the deceased, as in the present case,
there is a burden cast upon the Court to first decide as to who is
the legal representative of the deceased. Without doing so, the
Court cannot proceed with the disposal of the case on hand. At the
same time, the Court cannot make all the contenders as parties.
The aspect of deciding legal representative cannot also be
postponed with a view to decide the same at the time of final

                                       9
disposal of the appeal on merits. It is significant that the statute
has clearly mandated that if the question of deciding the legal
representative of a legatee arises before an appellate Court, it may
direct the subordinate Court to make enquiries by leading evidence
if any through the process of trial and record its finding as to who is
the legal representative. After considering the finding recorded by
the trial Court, the appellate Court can decide and bring on record
the legal representative of the deceased.
11.        It is indisputable that the procedural laws are meant to
advance justice. A procedure contemplated under the code which is
mandatory in nature shall not be skipped or ignored by the Courts.
Whereas, in the instant case, the High Court’s approach has diluted
the purport of Order 22 Rule 5 of the CPC and is contrary to the law
laid down by this Court in Jaladi Suguna (supra). Such an
approach of the High Court cannot be sustained.
12.        Although we are apprised of the fact that alleged legal
representatives relying on certain customs to prove whether a
Grihastya could be a Guru under the relevant sampradaya. We need
not concern our self with the aforesaid findings on merit given by
the trial court at this stage. It is for the High Court to consider the

                                    10
aforesaid report of the trial Court and determine the disputed
question of fact. It may not be out of context to note that the
determination under Order XXII Rule 5 of CPC is summary in
nature and for limited purpose. Order passed on the impleadment
applications, determining a particular person as legal representative
has no effect of final decision or operates as res-judicata between
the legal representatives as to the question of who should ascend as
Guru. At the cost of repetition, we may note that the determination
by the High Court would be limited to the question, as to who
should be brought on record in the place of deceased for the
purposes of continuing the suit alone, and nothing beyond that.
13.        In view of the foregoing reasons, we set aside the order of
the High Court and remit the matter back to the High Court for
determining the issue as per the provisions of Order 22 Rule 5. The
High Court shall decide the question on merits as to who is the
legal representative of the deceased Swami Sheo Dharmanand on
the basis of the reports submitted by the trial Court and also taking
into account any objections or material which the parties rely upon.
Only thereafter, the High Court shall proceed with the hearing of
second appeal. We request the High Court to take up the matter as
early as possible and dispose of the same expeditiously in

                                  11
accordance with law.
14.       Before parting with the appeals, we make it clear that we
have not expressed any opinion on the merits of the case. Any
observation made by us in this judgment should not be construed
as an expression of this Court and the High Court has to deal with
the same in accordance with the provisions of law.
15.       The    appeals   are  allowed   in    the      above       terms.
Consequently, all the pending applications, if any, shall also stand
disposed of. No costs.
                                             ..............................J.
                                              (N.V. RAMANA)
                                              .............................J.
                                                (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
New Delhi,
February 8, 2018


