                                                                                        1
                                                                     NON-REPORTABLE
                                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1360 OF 2017
                                   (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.7068/2016)
                    Madhavan & Ors                                      ..…. Appellants
                                                      Versus
                    The State of Tamil Nadu                             …...Respondent
                                              JUDGMENT
                    A.M. KHANWILKAR, J.
                    1.    The appellants (Accused Nos. 1 to 5, respectively) were tried
                    for an offence punishable under Sections 147, 324, 324 r/w 149,
                    355 r/w 149, 506 (ii), 506 (ii) r/w 149, 302 and 302 r/w 149.
                    The appellant no. 2 is the wife of appellant no. 1. The appellant
                    nos. 3 and 5 are the sons of appellant nos. 1 and 2.             The
Signature Not Verified
                    appellant no. 4 is the wife of appellant no. 3. According to the
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR
Date: 2017.08.14
12:57:49 IST
Reason:
                    prosecution, on 4.12.2004, at about 7.00 a.m., near the house of

                                                                  2
PW1-Saradha, due to previous enmity in connection with some
land dispute between the appellants’ family and the family of the
deceased, the appellants with the common object of causing the
death of the deceased Periyasamy (husband of PW1) and causing
hurt to witnesses Saradha (PW1) and Tamil Selvan (PW2), formed
themselves into an unlawful assembly and committed riot. The
appellant no. 1 assaulted PW1 and PW2 with “Thadi” (wooden
log) on their left leg knee and chest respectively, causing simple
injuries. During the altercation, appellant no. 2 caught hold of
PW2 and appellant no. 4 pulled the tuft of PW1 and dishonoured
her. The appellant nos. 1 to 4 criminally intimidated PW2 and
also assaulted deceased Periyasamy indiscriminately on his chest
with thadi. The appellant no. 5 also assaulted Periyasamy with
thadi on his left side chest and left leg. Resultantly, Periyasamy
suffered injuries and was rushed to the hospital in a serious
condition. Finally, whilst in hospital Periyasamy was declared
dead on 9th December, 2004.
2.    In this background, the appellants were charged and tried
for the aforementioned offence.     The prosecution examined 18
witnesses to prove the charges against the appellants.          The
defence of the appellants, as can be discerned from the written

                                                                  3
statement filed by the appellants purported to be under Section
313 of the Criminal Procedure Code, was that the complainant
party was the aggressor. They started the fight and assaulted the
appellants. The appellants had suffered injuries. However, the
prosecution failed to explain the injuries sustained by the
appellants. The prosecution also failed to explain as to why the
complaint made by the appellants was not pursued to its logical
end after investigation. According to the appellants, the genesis
of the crime has been suppressed by the prosecution. Further,
the evidence produced by the prosecution was contradictory and
did not establish the guilt of the appellants.      The appellants,
however, did not produce any oral evidence.
3.    The Additional District and Sessions Judge, Krishnagiri,
who tried the appellants in Sessions Case No. 62 of 2006, after
analyzing the evidence produced by the prosecution and
adverting to each of the contentions raised by the appellants vide
judgment dated 19th November, 2008, found all the appellants
guilty of the stated offence. The operative part of the judgment of
the Trial Court reads thus:--

                                                    4
“In the result,
      In respect of 1st charge:
      A.1 to A.5 are found guilty for the offence
punishable u/sec. 147 of IPC., convicted and
sentenced to undergo RI for TWO years each and
shall pay a fine of Rs. 500/- each ID to undergo SI
for SIX months.
      In respect of 2nd charge:
      A.1 and A.4 are found guilty for the offence
punishable u/sec. 334 (2 counts) of IPC.,
convicted and sentenced to undergo SI for ONE
month each and shall pay a fine of Rs. 500/-
each. ID SI for 20 days each.
      In respect of 3rd charge:
      A.1, A.3 and A.5 found not guilty for the
offence punishable u/sec. 324 r/w. 149 of IPC.,
and they have acquitted from their charges u/sec.
235(1) of CrPC.,
      In respect of 4th charge:
      A.2 and A.4 found not guilty for the offence
punishable u/sec. 355 of IPC., and they have
acquitted from their charges u/sec. 235(1) of
Cr.pc.
      In respect of 5th charge:
      A.1, A.3 and A.5 found not guilty for the
offence punishable u/sec. 355 r/w.149 of IPC.,
and they have acquitted from their charges
u/sec.235(1) of Cr.P.C.,

                                                   5
      In respect of 6th charge:
      A.1, A.3 found not guilty for the offence
punishable u/sec.506(ii) of IPC., and they have
acquitted from the charges u/sec.235(1) of Crpc.,
      In respect of 7th charge:
      A.2, A.4 and A.5 found not guilty for the
offence punishable u/sec.506(ii) r/w 149 of IPC.,
and they have acquitted from the charges
u/sec.235(1) of Crpc.,
      In respect of 8th charge:
      A.3 and A.5 found guilty for the offence
punishable u/sec.304 Part (2) of IPC., convicted
and sentenced to undergo RI for TEN Years each
and shall pay a fine of Rs. 1000/- each ID SI for
12 months.
      In respect of 9th charge:
      A.1 is alone found guilty for the offence
punishable u/sec.304 Part (2) of IPC., convicted
and sentenced to undergo RI for TEN Years and
shall pay a fine of Rs. 10000/-ID SI for 12
months.
      A.2 and A.4 found not guilty for the offence
punishable u/sec.304 part (2) r/w.149 of IPC A.2
and A.4 acquitted from their charges u/sec.235(1)
of IPC.
      Substantive sentences of imprisonment are
ordered to run concurrently. Period of detention
undergone if any by the A.1 to A.5 to be set off
against the sentence of imprisonment imposed on
them. M.O.1 is destroyed after the appeal time is
over.”

                                                                 6
4.    The appellants challenged the decision of the Trial Court by
way of Criminal Appeal No. 832 of 2008 before the High Court of
Judicature at Madras.     In this appeal, five main points were
urged by the appellants, as noted in paragraph 14 of the
impugned judgment. These contentions were a reiteration of the
points urged before the Trial Court on behalf of the appellants.
The same have been appropriately considered by the Trial Court
and rejected, being devoid of merits. The High Court was pleased
to affirm the view taken by the Trial Court as just and proper and
rejected the said contentions. In other words, both the Courts
have concurrently found that the evidence of eye witnesses, in
particular, PWs 1, 2 and 5, was credible and sufficient to bring
home the guilt against the appellants for the concerned offences.
The evidence clearly shows that on 4.12.2004 in the morning at 7
o’clock when PW1 was erecting fence around the nursery, at that
time appellants gathered on the spot and smashed the fence.
When PW1 questioned them, she was assaulted by appellant no.
4 and also by appellant nos. 1 and 3. Her husband, deceased
(Periyasamy) rushed to support and rescue PW1. The appellant
nos. 1, 2 and 5 assaulted Periyasamy on left side of his head,
chest and cheek with thadi. The injuries caused to the members

                                                                  7
of the complainant party have been proved by the prosecution
including by examining Dr. Chandrasekaran PW 11. He had not
only examined PW1 and PW2 immediately after the incident but
also the appellants. The injuries suffered by the appellants were,
however, found to be simple injuries. The nature of injuries
caused to deceased Periyasamy has been corroborated by Dr. R
Vallinayagam PW16, who conducted his post mortem.           He has
opined that about eleven ante mortem external injuries and rigor
marks were present all over the body of deceased Periyasamy.
The internal injuries caused to him have also been noted in the
post mortem report (Ex. P10).          He opined that deceased
succumbed to death due to injury sustained on his head. The
Trial Court rejected the contention of the appellants that the true
genesis of the offence is not forthcoming and in fact has been
suppressed by the prosecution by not offering explanation for
pursuing the Crime No. 375 of 2004 registered at the instance of
the appellants. The Trial Court held that there was no tangible
reason to discard the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 5 which was
truthful and reliable. The Trial Court also held that the evidence
establishes that a free fight started between the family of the
appellants and the family of the complainant party in which

                                                                8
Periyasamy suffered injuries caused by thadi to which he finally
succumbed. The Trial Court rejected the contention raised by the
appellants that the prosecution bypassed the earlier report and
the statement given by PW1 in Krishnagiri Government Hospital.
The Trial Court also rejected the plea taken by the appellants
that the place of occurrence was doubtful. The High Court has
agreed with the conclusions reached by the Trial Court on each
ground urged by the appellants.
5.   We have heard the learned counsel for both sides. We have
perused the evidence adverted to by the two Courts below to
record the finding of guilt against the appellants. After careful
consideration of the said evidence, we have no hesitation in
taking the view that the finding and conclusion reached by the
two Courts below for convicting the appellants for the concerned
offence is unexceptionable.     The evidence clearly shows the
manner in which the incident took place. Even though the
appellants have taken a stand in the written statement purported
to be filed under Section 313 of the Code, they did not produce
any evidence but merely chose to rely on the infirmity of not
pursuing Crime No. 374 of 2004 to its logical end. That infirmity
cannot belie the evidence produced by the prosecution which has

                                                                  9
been found to be truthful and reliable. We are not inclined to
interfere with the concurrent findings of facts as recorded by the
two Courts below. The involvement of the appellants has been
spoken by the eye witnesses including the injured eye witnesses
PW1 and PW2. Much ado was made by the appellants about the
failure of the prosecution to explain the injuries suffered by the
appellants (accused party) and to contend that the real genesis of
the crime was not forthcoming. This contention has been rejected
by the Trial Court as well as the High Court, having found that
the injuries suffered by them were simple injuries and would not
make any difference to the case established by the prosecution.
We have no reason to deviate from the concurrent view so taken
by the two Courts below. Suffice it to observe that the finding of
guilt recorded against each of the appellants is in conformity with
the evidence produced by the prosecution. Hence, the order of
conviction against the appellants needs no interference.
6.    Learned Counsel for the appellants, alternatively, contended
that the sentence awarded to the appellants is excessive. For,
the Courts below have found that the incident occurred due to
sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and
without the accused having taken undue advantage or acted in a

                                                                10
cruel or unusual manner and that the appellants had used only
thadi which was easily available on the spot, it was not a
pre-meditated crime committed with the intention to cause death
or to cause such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
Besides, there was previous enmity between the two families due
to a pending dispute which led to the incident. He submits that
neither the Trial Court nor the High Court has analysed the issue
regarding quantum of sentence, keeping in mind the principle of
nature of offence as also the circumstances in which the offender
committed the crime and other mitigating circumstances.       The
learned counsel for the State fairly submits that on the quantum
of sentence, he would leave it to the Court to take appropriate
view.
7.    In the first place, it be noted that the Trial Court, whilst
awarding sentence to the respective appellants, has not made
any analysis of the relevant facts, as can be discerned from
paragraph 67 of the judgment of the Trial Court. The same reads
thus:-
           “67. When the A.1, A.2 and A.5 were questioned
           u/sec. 235 (2) of Crpc., with regard to the
           quantum of sentence which may be imposed on
           them; they have replied as follows:

                                                               11
                A1: Give minimal sentence.
                A2: Give minimal sentence.
                A3: Give minimal sentence.
                A4: Give minimal sentence.
                A5: Give minimal sentence.
                Question of sentence heard. Their replies
           have been recorded. The reply of the accused
           persons and their family circumstances are
           considered carefully. They have committed the
           above said offence. Their conduct in this regard
           have also been considered deeply.”
8.    Notably, the High Court has not considered the issue of
quantum of sentence at all, but mechanically proceeded to affirm
the sentence awarded by the Trial Court. From the factual
position, which has emerged from the record, it is noticed that
there was a pre-existing property dispute between the two
families. The incident in question happened all of a sudden
without any premeditation after PW1 questioned the appellants
about their behavior. It was a free fight between the two family
members.     Both sides suffered injuries during the altercation.
The fatal injury caused to Periyasamy was by the use of thadi
(wooden log) which was easily available on the spot. The
appellants, on their own, immediately reported the matter to the
local police alleging that the complainant party was the
aggressor. No antecedent or involvement in any other criminal

                                                                       12
case has been reported against the appellants.          Taking oral view
of the matter, therefore, we find force in the argument of the
appellants that the quantum of sentence is excessive.
9.   We may usefully refer to the decision of this Court (one of
us, Justice Dipak Misra speaking for the Court) in the case of
Gopal Singh Versus State of Uttarakhand1 enunciated the
necessity to adhere to the principle of proportionality in
sentencing policy. In paragraphs 18 and 19 of the said decision,
the Court observed thus:
     “18. Just punishment is the collective cry of the society.
     While the collective cry has to be kept uppermost in the
     mind, simultaneously the principle of proportionality
     between the crime and punishment cannot be totally
     brushed aside. The principle of just punishment is the
     bedrock of sentencing in respect of a criminal offence. A
     punishment should not be disproportionately excessive.
     The concept of proportionality allows a significant
     discretion to the Judge but the same has to be guided by
     certain principles. In certain cases, the nature of
     culpability, the antecedents of the accused, the factum of
     age, the potentiality of the convict to become a criminal in
     future, capability of his reformation and to lead an
     acceptable life in the prevalent milieu, the effect –
     propensity to become a social threat or nuisance, and
     sometimes lapse of time in the commission of the crime
     and his conduct in the interregnum bearing in mind the
     nature of the offence, the relationship between the parties
     and attractability of the doctrine of bringing the convict to
     the value-based social mainstream may be the guiding
     factors. Needless to emphasize, these are certain
     illustrative aspects put forth in a condensed manner. We
     may hasten to add that there can neither be a strait-jacket
1     (2013) 7 SCC 545

                                                                 13
     formula nor a solvable theory in mathematical exactitude.
     It would be dependent on the facts of the case and
     rationalized judicial discretion. Neither the personal
     perception of a Judge nor self-adhered moralistic vision
     nor hypothetical apprehensions should be allowed to
     have any play. For every offence, a drastic measure
     cannot be thought of. Similarly, an offender cannot be
     allowed to be treated with leniency solely on the ground
     of discretion vested in a Court. The real requisite is to
     weigh the circumstances in which the crime has been
     committed and other concomitant factors which we have
     indicated hereinbefore and also have been stated in a
     number of pronouncements by this Court. On such
     touchstone, the sentences are to be imposed. The
     discretion should not be in the realm of fancy. It should
     be embedded in the conceptual essence of just
     punishment.
     19. A Court, while imposing sentence, has to keep in view
     the various complex matters in mind. To structure a
     methodology relating to sentencing is difficult to conceive
     of. The legislature in its wisdom has conferred discretion
     on the Judge who is guided by certain rational
     parameters, regard been had to the factual scenario of
     the case. In certain spheres the legislature has not
     conferred that discretion and in such circumstances, the
     discretion is conditional. In respect of certain offences,
     sentence can be reduced by giving adequate special
     reasons. The special reasons have to rest on real special
     circumstances. Hence, the duty of Court in such
     situations becomes a complex one. The same has to be
     performed with due reverence for Rule of the collective
     conscience on one hand and the doctrine of
     proportionality, principle of reformation and other
     concomitant factors on the other. The task may be
     onerous but the same has to be done with total empirical
     rationality sans any kind of personal philosophy or
     individual experience or any a-priori notion.”
10.  Considering the above and keeping in mind the facts of the
present case, the nature of the crime, subsequent conduct of the

                                                                   14
appellants, the nature of weapon used and all other attending
circumstances     and   the   relevant  facts   including   that  no
subsequent untoward incident has been reported against the
appellants and the mitigating circumstances, we are inclined to
modify the sentence period in the following terms:-
   a)  The sentence period awarded to appellant nos. 2 and 4 for
      offences   punishable     under   Sections    147    and   334
      respectively of IPC will stand reduced to period already
      undergone without disturbing the fine amount specified by
      the Trial Court and affirmed by the High Court.
   b) The sentence period awarded to appellant nos. 1, 3 and 5
      for offences punishable under Sections 304 part (2) r/w 149
      and 304 part (2) of IPC respectively will stand reduced to
      five years each without disturbing the fine amount awarded
      by the Trial Court and affirmed by the High Court.
11.   In other words, this appeal partly succeeds to the extent of
modification of quantum of sentence period as noted above.
12.   Accordingly,   the    appeal   is  partly    allowed   in  the
aforementioned terms. Appellant nos. 1, 3 and 5, are already in
custody. They shall undergo the remaining sentence period in

                                                             15
terms of this order after providing them set-off. Bail bonds of
appellant nos. 2 and 4 stand discharged.
                                    ………………………………….J.
                                    (Dipak Misra)
                                    ………………………………….J.
                                    (A.M. Khanwilkar)
New Delhi,
Dated: August 14, 2017


