                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2713 of 2019
                                   (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No.3307 of 2018)
                       M/S ICOMM TELE LTD.                            …APPELLANT
                                                      VERSUS
                       PUNJAB STATE WATER SUPPLY
                       & SEWERAGE BOARD & ANR.                        …RESPONDENTS
                                                   JUDGMENT
                       R.F. NARIMAN, J.
                       1.    Leave granted.
                       2.    In 2008, the Punjab State Water Supply & Sewerage Board,
                       Bhatinda    issued   notice   inviting tender   for  extension    and
                       augmentation of water supply, sewerage scheme, pumping station
                       and sewerage treatment plant for various towns mentioned therein
                       on a turnkey basis. On 25.9.2008, the appellant company, which is
Signature Not Verified
                       involved in civil/electrical works in India, was awarded the said
Digitally signed by
NIDHI AHUJA
Date: 2019.03.11
17:33:59 IST
Reason:
                       tender after having been found to be the best suited for the task. On
                                                                                             1

16.1.2009, a formal contract was entered into between the appellant
and respondent No. 2. It may be mentioned that the notice inviting
tender formed part and parcel of the formal agreement. Contained
in the notice inviting tender is a detailed arbitration clause. In this
matter, we are concerned with clause 25(viii) which is set out as
follows:-
     “viii. It shall be an essential term of this contract that in
     order to avoid frivolous claims the party invoking
     arbitration shall specify the dispute based on facts and
     calculations stating the amount claimed under each
     claim and shall furnish a “deposit-at-call” for ten percent
     of the amount claimed, on a schedule bank in the name
     of the Arbitrator by his official designation who shall keep
     the amount in deposit till the announcement of the
     award. In the event of an award in favour of the
     claimant, the deposit shall be refunded to him in
     proportion to the amount awarded w.r.t the amount
     claimed and the balance, if any, shall be forfeited and
     paid to the other party.”
3.    The appellant had entered into similar contracts with
respondent No. 2 which contained the same arbitration clause. It
had therefore addressed letters to respondent No. 2 with regard to
appointment of arbitrator in those matters and sought for waiving the
10% deposit fee. After having received no response, the appellant
had filed a writ petition, being Civil Writ Petition No. 18917 of 2016,
                                                                        2

before the High Court of Punjab and Haryana. This writ petition was
dismissed by a judgment dated 14.9.2016 stating that such tender
condition can in no way be said to be arbitrary or unreasonable.
4.     On 8.3.2017, the appellant approached the High Court of
Punjab and Haryana challenging the validity of this part of the
arbitration clause by filing Civil Writ Petition No. 4882 of 2017. The
High Court in the impugned judgment merely followed its earlier
judgment and dismissed this writ petition as well.
5.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant has
argued that the arbitration clause contained in the tender condition
amounts to a contract of adhesion, and since there is unfair
bargaining strength between respondent No. 2 and the appellant,
this clause ought to be struck down following the judgment in
Central Inland Water Transport Corpn. v. Brojo Nath Ganguly,
(1986) 3 SCC 156. He has also argued that arbitration being an
alternative dispute resolution process, a 10% deposit would amount
to a clog on entering the aforesaid process. Further, claims may
ultimately be found to be untenable but need not be frivolous. Also,
frivolous claims can be compensated by heavy costs. Further, even
                                                                       3

in the event that the award is in favour of the claimant, what can be
refunded to him is only in proportion to the amount awarded and the
rest is to be forfeited. This would also be a further arbitrary and
highhanded action on the part of respondent No. 2.
6.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has
argued that there is no infraction of Article 14 in the present case. It
is clear that clause 25(viii) would apply to both the parties equally,
and as this is so, the said sub-clause cannot be struck down as
being discriminatory.    Further, the principle contained in Central
Inland Water Transport Corpn. (supra) cannot possibly be applied
to commercial contracts. Also, in similar cases, this Court has not
entertained this kind of a challenge.
7.     Having heard learned counsel for both parties, it will be seen
that the 10% “deposit-at-call” before a party can successfully invoke
the arbitration clause is on the basis that this is in order to avoid
frivolous claims.    Clause 25(xv) is also material and is set out
hereinbelow:
      “xv. No question relating to this contract shall be brought
      before any civil court without first invoking and
      completing the arbitration proceedings, if the issue is
                                                                         4

     covered by the scope of arbitration under this contract.
     The pending arbitration proceedings shall not disentitle
     the Engineer-in-charge to terminate the contract and to
     make alternate arrangements for completion of the
     works.”
8.     From this clause, it also becomes clear that arbitration is
considered to be an alternative dispute resolution process and entry
to the civil court is sought to be taken away if the disputes between
the parties are covered by the arbitration clause.
9.     It is well settled that the terms of an invitation to tender are not
open to judicial scrutiny, as they are in the realm of contract, unless
they are arbitrary, discriminatory, or actuated by malice. Thus, in
Directorate of Education v. Educomp Datamatics Ltd., (2004) 4
SCC 19, this Court held:
     “9. It is well settled now that the courts can scrutinise the
     award of the contracts by the Government or its
     agencies in exercise of their powers of judicial review to
     prevent arbitrariness or favouritism. However, there are
     inherent limitations in the exercise of the power of judicial
     review in such matters. The point as to the extent of
     judicial review permissible in contractual matters while
     inviting bids by issuing tenders has been examined in
     depth by this Court in Tata Cellular v. Union of India
     [(1994) 6 SCC 651]. After examining the entire case-law
     the following principles have been deduced:
                                                                            5

   “94. The principles deducible from the above are:
        (1) The modern trend points to judicial restraint in
        administrative action.
        (2) The court does not sit as a court of appeal but
        merely reviews the manner in which the decision
        was made.
        (3) The court does not have the expertise to
        correct the administrative decision. If a review of
        the administrative decision is permitted it will be
        substituting its own decision, without the
        necessary expertise which itself may be fallible.
        (4) The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be
        open to judicial scrutiny because the invitation to
        tender is in the realm of contract. Normally
        speaking, the decision to accept the tender or
        award the contract is reached by process of
        negotiations through several tiers. More often
        than not, such decisions are made qualitatively by
        experts.
        (5) The Government must have freedom of
        contract. In other words, a fair play in the joints is
        a necessary concomitant for an administrative
        body functioning in an administrative sphere or
        quasi-administrative sphere. However, the
        decision must not only be tested by the
        application    of    Wednesbury       principle     of
        reasonableness (including its other facts pointed
        out above) but must be free from arbitrariness not
        affected by bias or actuated by mala fides.
        (6) Quashing decisions may impose heavy
        administrative burden on the administration and
        lead to increased and unbudgeted expenditure.””
                                      (emphasis in original)
“12. It has clearly been held in these decisions that the
terms of the invitation to tender are not open to judicial
scrutiny, the same being in the realm of contract. That
the Government must have a free hand in setting the
                                                               6

    terms of the tender. It must have reasonable play in its
    joints as a necessary concomitant for an administrative
    body in an administrative sphere. The courts would
    interfere with the administrative policy decision only if it is
    arbitrary, discriminatory, mala fide or actuated by bias. It
    is entitled to pragmatic adjustments which may be called
    for by the particular circumstances. The courts cannot
    strike down the terms of the tender prescribed by the
    Government because it feels that some other terms in
    the tender would have been fair, wiser or logical. The
    courts can interfere only if the policy decision is arbitrary,
    discriminatory or mala fide.”
10.   To similar effect is the decision in Global Energy Ltd. v.
Adani Exports Ltd., (2005) 4 SCC 435, where this Court held:
    “10. The principle is, therefore, well settled that the terms
    of the invitation to tender are not open to judicial scrutiny
    and the courts cannot whittle down the terms of the
    tender as they are in the realm of contract unless they
    are wholly arbitrary, discriminatory or actuated by malice.
    This being the position of law, settled by a catena of
    decisions of this Court, it is rather surprising that the
    learned Single Judge passed an interim direction on the
    very first day of admission hearing of the writ petition and
    allowed the appellants to deposit the earnest money by
    furnishing a bank guarantee or a bankers' cheque till
    three days after the actual date of opening of the tender.
    The order of the learned Single Judge being wholly
    illegal, was, therefore, rightly set aside by the Division
    Bench.”
11.   As has correctly been argued by learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the respondents, this court’s judgment in Central Inland
Water Transport Corpn. (supra), which lays down that contracts of
                                                                    7

adhesion, i.e., contracts in which there is unequal bargaining power,
between private persons and the State are liable to be set aside on
the ground that they are unconscionable, does not apply where both
parties are businessmen and the contract is a commercial
transaction (see paragraph 89 of the said judgment). In this view of
the matter, the argument of the appellant based on this judgment
must fail.
12.   In S.K. Jain v. State of Haryana, (2009) 4 SCC 357, this
Court dealt with an arbitration clause in an agreement which read as
follows:-
     “11. Sub-clause (7) of Clause 25-A of the agreement
     reads as follows:
       “25-A. (7) It is also a term of this contract agreement
       that where the party invoking arbitration is the
       contractor, no reference for arbitration shall be
       maintainable unless the contractor furnishes to the
       satisfaction of the Executive Engineer in charge of the
       work, a security deposit of a sum determined
       according to details given below and the sum so
       deposited shall, on the termination of the arbitration
       proceedings be adjusted against the costs, if any,
       awarded by the arbitrator against the claimant party
       and the balance remaining after such adjustment in
       the absence of any such costs being awarded, the
       whole of the sum will be refunded to him within one
       month from the date of the award—
                                                                      8

                  Amount of claim                      Rate of
                                                  security deposit
              1For claims below Rs                  2% of amount
           .   10,000                            claimed
              2For claims of Rs 10,000              5% of amount
           .   and above and below Rs            claimed
               1,00,000 and
              3For claims of Rs 1,00,000            7% of amount
           .   and above                         claimed.”
13.    In upholding such a clause, this Court referred to the judgment
in   Central    Inland   Water    Transport       Corpn.     (supra) and
distinguished this judgment, stating that the concept of unequal
bargaining power has no application in the case of commercial
contracts. It then went on to hold:-
     “14. It has been submitted by learned counsel for the
     appellant that there should be a cap in the quantum
     payable in terms of sub-clause (7) of Clause 25-A. This
     plea is clearly without substance. It is to be noted that it
     is structured on the basis of the quantum involved.
     Higher the claim, the higher is the amount of fee
     chargeable. There is a logic in it. It is the balancing factor
     to prevent frivolous and inflated claims. If the appellants'
     plea is accepted that there should be a cap in the figure,
     a claimant who is making higher claim stands on a better
     pedestal than one who makes a claim of a lesser
     amount.”
                                                                        9

14.    It will be noticed that in this judgment there was no plea that
the aforesaid condition contained in an arbitration clause was
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India as such clause is
arbitrary. The only pleas taken were that the ratio of Central Inland
Water Transport Corpn. (supra) would apply and that there should
be a cap in the quantum payable by way of security deposit, both of
which pleas were turned down by this court.          Also, the security
deposit made would, on the termination of the arbitration
proceedings, first be adjusted against costs if any awarded by the
arbitrator against the claimant party, and the balance remaining after
such adjustment then be refunded to the party making the deposit.
This clause is materially different from clause 25(viii), which, as we
have seen, makes it clear that in all cases the deposit is to be 10%
of the amount claimed and that refund can only be in proportion to
the amount awarded with respect to the amount claimed, the
balance being forfeited and paid to the other party, even though that
other party may have lost the case. This being so, this judgment is
wholly distinguishable and does not apply at all to the facts of the
present case.
                                                                      10

15.   In ABL International Ltd. v. Export Credit Guarantee
Corpn. of India Ltd., (2004) 3 SCC 553, this Court has held that
even within the contractual sphere, the requirement of Article 14 to
act fairly, justly and reasonably by persons who are “state”
authorities or instrumentalities continues. Thus, this Court held:
    “23. It is clear from the above observations of this Court,
    once the State or an instrumentality of the State is a
    party of the contract, it has an obligation in law to act
    fairly, justly and reasonably which is the requirement of
    Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, if by the
    impugned repudiation of the claim of the appellants the
    first respondent as an instrumentality of the State has
    acted in contravention of the abovesaid requirement of
    Article 14, then we have no hesitation in holding that a
    writ court can issue suitable directions to set right the
    arbitrary actions of the first respondent…
    xxx xxx xxx
    27. From the above discussion of ours, the following
    legal principles emerge as to the maintainability of a writ
    petition:
        (a) In an appropriate case, a writ petition as against a
        State or an instrumentality of a State arising out of a
        contractual obligation is maintainable.
    xxx xxx xxx
    53. From the above, it is clear that when an
    instrumentality of the State acts contrary to public good
    and public interest, unfairly, unjustly and unreasonably, in
    its contractual, constitutional or statutory obligations, it
    really acts contrary to the constitutional guarantee found
    in Article 14 of the Constitution…”
                                                                   11

16.    Thus, it must be seen as to whether the aforesaid clause
25(viii) can be said to be arbitrary or discriminatory and violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
17.    We agree with the learned counsel for the respondents that
the aforesaid clause cannot be said to be discriminatory in that it
applies equally to both respondent No. 2 and the appellant.
However, arbitrariness is a separate and distinct facet of Article 14.
In A.L. Kalra v. The Project & Equipment Corporation of India
Limited, [1984] 3 S.C.R. 646, this Court turned down a submission
that arbitrariness is only a facet of discrimination. The contention of
Shri Lal Narain Sinha was recorded thus (at page 661):-
     “It was urged that in the absence of any specific pleading
     pointing out whether any one else was either similarly
     situated as the appellant or dissimilarly treated the
     charge of discrimination cannot be entertained and no
     relief can be claimed on the allegation of contravention of
     Art. 14 or Art. 16 of the Constitution. It was submitted
     that the expression discrimination imports the concept of
     comparison between equals and if the resultant
     inequality is pointed out in the treatment so meted out
     the charge of discrimination can be entertained and one
     can say that equal protection of law has been denied.
     Expanding the submission, it was urged that the use of
     the expression 'equality' in Art. 14 imports duality and
     comparison which is predicated upon more than one
     person of situation and in the absence of available
                                                                      12

     material for comparison, the plea of discrimination must
     fail. As a corollary, it was urged that in the absence of
     material for comparative evaluation not only the charge
     of discrimination cannot be sustained but the executive
     action cannot be struck down on the ground that the
     action is per se arbitrary.”
18.    This contention was negatived stating (at pages 662-663):-
     “It thus appears well settled that Art. 14 strikes at
     arbitrariness in executive/administrative action because
     any action that is arbitrary must necessarily involve the
     negation of equality. One need not confine the denial of
     equality to a comparative evaluation between two
     persons to arrive at a conclusion of discriminatory
     treatment. An action per se arbitrary itself denies equal of
     protection by law. The Constitution Bench pertinently
     observed in Ajay Hasia's case [[1981] 2 S.C.R. 79] and
     put the matter beyond controversy when it said 'wherever
     therefore, there is arbitrariness in State action whether it
     be of the legislature or of the executive or of an
     "authority" under Article 12, Article 14 immediately
     springs into action and strikes down such State action.’
     This view was further elaborated and affirmed in D.S.
     Nakara v. Union of India [[1983] 1 SCC 305]. In Maneka
     Gandhi v. Union of India [[1978] 2 S.C.R. 621] it was
     observed that Art. 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State
     action and ensure fairness and equality of treatment. It is
     thus too late in the day to contend that an executive
     action shown to be arbitrary is not either judicially
     reviewable or within the reach of Article 14.”
19.    We have thus to see whether clause 25(viii) can be said to be
arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
                                                                    13

20.    The first important thing to notice is that the 10% “deposit-at-
call” of the amount claimed is in order to avoid frivolous claims by
the party invoking arbitration. It is well settled that a frivolous claim
can be dismissed with exemplary costs. Thus, in Dnyandeo Sabaji
Naik v. Pradnya Prakash Khadekar, (2017) 5 SCC 496, this Court
held:
     “14. Courts across the legal system—this Court not
     being an exception—are choked with litigation. Frivolous
     and groundless filings constitute a serious menace to the
     administration of justice. They consume time and clog
     the infrastructure. Productive resources which should be
     deployed in the handling of genuine causes are
     dissipated in attending to cases filed only to benefit from
     delay, by prolonging dead issues and pursuing worthless
     causes. No litigant can have a vested interest in delay.
     Unfortunately, as the present case exemplifies, the
     process of dispensing justice is misused by the
     unscrupulous to the detriment of the legitimate. The
     present case is an illustration of how a simple issue has
     occupied the time of the courts and of how successive
     applications have been filed to prolong the inevitable.
     The person in whose favour the balance of justice lies
     has in the process been left in the lurch by repeated
     attempts to revive a stale issue. This tendency can be
     curbed only if courts across the system adopt an
     institutional approach which penalises such behaviour.
     Liberal access to justice does not mean access to chaos
     and indiscipline. A strong message must be conveyed
     that courts of justice will not be allowed to be disrupted
     by litigative strategies designed to profit from the delays
     of the law. Unless remedial action is taken by all courts
     here and now our society will breed a legal culture based
                                                                        14

      on evasion instead of abidance. It is the duty of every
      court to firmly deal with such situations. The imposition of
      exemplary costs is a necessary instrument which has to
      be deployed to weed out, as well as to prevent the filing
      of frivolous cases. It is only then that the courts can set
      apart time to resolve genuine causes and answer the
      concerns of those who are in need of justice. Imposition
      of real time costs is also necessary to ensure that access
      to courts is available to citizens with genuine grievances.
      Otherwise, the doors would be shut to legitimate causes
      simply by the weight of undeserving cases which flood
      the system. Such a situation cannot be allowed to come
      to pass. Hence it is not merely a matter of discretion but
      a duty and obligation cast upon all courts to ensure that
      the legal system is not exploited by those who use the
      forms of the law to defeat or delay justice. We commend
      all courts to deal with frivolous filings in the same
      manner.”
                                              (Emphasis supplied)
21.     It is therefore always open to the party who has succeeded
before the arbitrator to invoke this principle and it is open to the
arbitrator to dismiss a claim as frivolous on imposition of exemplary
costs.
22.     We may also notice this Court’s judgment in General Motors
(I) (P) Ltd. v. Ashok Ramnik Lal Tolat, (2015) 1 SCC 429, that
punitive damages follow when a court is approached with a frivolous
litigation. This court held:-
                                                                    15

      “16. We proceed to deal with the issue of correctness of
      finding recorded by the National Commission for
      awarding punitive damages. Before doing so, we may
      notice that the respondent complainant appearing in
      person, in his written submissions has raised various
      questions, including the question that the appellant
      should be asked to account for the proceeds of the
      vehicles sold by it. Admittedly, the vehicle in question has
      been ordered to be handed back to the appellant against
      which the respondent complainant has no claim. Thus,
      the plea raised is without any merit. The other issue
      raised for further punitive damages of Rs. 100 crores and
      also damages for dragging him in this Court, merits no
      consideration being beyond the claim of the complainant
      in the complaint filed by him. Moreover, no litigant can be
      punished by way of punitive damages for merely
      approaching this Court, unless its case is found to be
      frivolous.”
23.     The important principle established by this case is that unless
it is first found that the litigation that has been embarked upon is
frivolous, exemplary costs or punitive damages do not follow.
Clearly, therefore, a “deposit-at-call” of 10% of the amount claimed,
which can amount to large sums of money, is obviously without any
direct nexus to the filing of frivolous claims, as it applies to all claims
(frivolous or otherwise) made at the very threshold. A 10% deposit
has to be made before any determination that a claim made by the
party invoking arbitration is frivolous. This is also one important
aspect of the matter to be kept in mind in deciding that such a
                                                                          16

clause would be arbitrary in the sense of being something which
would be unfair and unjust and which no reasonable man would
agree to.    Indeed, a claim may be dismissed but need not be
frivolous, as is obvious from the fact that where three arbitrators are
appointed, there have been known to be majority and minority
awards, making it clear that there may be two possible or even
plausible views which would indicate that the claim is dismissed or
allowed on merits and not because it is frivolous. Further, even
where a claim is found to be justified and correct, the amount that is
deposited need not be refunded to the successful claimant. Take for
example a claim based on a termination of a contract being illegal
and consequent damages thereto. If the claim succeeds and the
termination is set aside as being illegal and a damages claim of one
crore is finally granted by the learned arbitrator at only ten lakhs,
only one tenth of the deposit made will be liable to be returned to the
successful party.     The party who has lost in the arbitration
proceedings will be entitled to forfeit nine tenths of the deposit made
despite the fact that the aforesaid party has an award against it.
This would render the entire clause wholly arbitrary, being not only
                                                                      17

excessive or disproportionate but leading to the wholly unjust result
of a party who has lost an arbitration being entitled to forfeit such
part of the deposit as falls proportionately short of the amount
awarded as compared to what is claimed.
24.   Further, it is also settled law that arbitration is an important
alternative dispute resolution process which is to be encouraged
because of high pendency of cases in courts and cost of litigation.
Any requirement as to deposit would certainly amount to a clog on
this process. Also, it is easy to visualize that often a deposit of 10%
of a huge claim would be even greater than court fees that may be
charged for filing a suit in a civil court. This Court in State of J&K v.
Dev Dutt Pandit, (1999) 7 SCC 339, has held:-
     “23. Arbitration is considered to be an important
     alternative disputes redressal process which is to be
     encouraged because of high pendency of cases in the
     courts and cost of litigation. Arbitration has to be looked
     up to with all earnestness so that the litigant public has
     faith in the speedy process of resolving their disputes by
     this process. What happened in the present case is
     certainly a paradoxical situation which should be
     avoided. Total contract is for Rs. 12,23,500. When the
     contractor has done less than 50% of the work the
     contract is terminated. He has been paid Rs 5,71,900. In
     a Section 20 petition he makes a claim of Rs. 39,47,000
     and before the arbitrator the claim is inflated to Rs.
                                                                        18

    63,61,000. He gets away with Rs. 20,08,000 with interest
    at the rate of 10% per annum and penal interest at the
    rate of 18% per annum. Such type of arbitration
    becomes subject of witticism and do not help the
    institution of arbitration. Rather it brings a bad name to
    the arbitration process as a whole. When claims are
    inflated out of all proportions not only that heavy cost
    should be awarded to the other party but the party
    making such inflated claims should be deprived of the
    cost. We, therefore, set aside the award of cost of Rs.
    7500 given in favour of the contractor and against the
    State of Jammu and Kashmir.”
                                            (Emphasis supplied)
25.   Several judgments of this Court have also reiterated that the
primary object of arbitration is to reach a final disposal of disputes in
a speedy, effective, inexpensive and expeditious manner. Thus, in
Centrotrade Minerals & Metal Inc. v. Hindustan Copper Ltd.,
(2017) 2 SCC 228, this court held:
    “39. In Union of India v. U.P. State Bridge Corpn.
    Ltd. [(2015) 2 SCC 52] this Court accepted the view [O.P.
    Malhotra on the Law and Practice of Arbitration and
    Conciliation (3rd Edn. revised by Ms Indu Malhotra,
    Senior Advocate)] that the A&C Act has four foundational
    pillars and then observed in para 16 of the Report [sic]
    that:
       “16. First and paramount principle of the first pillar is
       ‘fair, speedy and inexpensive trial by an Arbitral
       Tribunal’. Unnecessary delay or expense would
       frustrate    the     very     purpose     of    arbitration.
       Interestingly, the second principle which is recognised
       in the Act is the party autonomy in the choice of
       procedure. This means that if a particular procedure is
                                                                        19

       prescribed in the arbitration agreement which the
       parties have agreed to, that has to be generally
       resorted to.””
                                          (Emphasis in original)
26.   Similarly, in Union of India v. Varindera Constructions Ltd.,
(2018) 7 SCC 794, this Court held:-
    “12. The primary object of the arbitration is to reach a
    final disposition in a speedy, effective, inexpensive and
    expeditious manner. In order to regulate the law
    regarding arbitration, legislature came up with legislation
    which is known as Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
    In order to make arbitration process more effective, the
    legislature restricted the role of courts in case where
    matter is subject to the arbitration. Section 5 of the Act
    specifically restricted the interference of the courts to
    some extent. In other words, it is only in exceptional
    circumstances, as provided by this Act, the court is
    entitled to intervene in the dispute which is the subject-
    matter of arbitration. Such intervention may be before, at
    or after the arbitration proceeding, as the case may be.
    In short, court shall not intervene with the subject-matter
    of arbitration unless injustice is caused to either of the
    parties.”
27.   Deterring a party to an arbitration from invoking this alternative
dispute resolution process by a pre-deposit of 10% would
discourage arbitration, contrary to the object of de-clogging the
Court system, and would render the arbitral process ineffective and
expensive.
                                                                       20

28.   For all these reasons, we strike down clause 25(viii) of the
notice inviting tender. This clause being severable from the rest of
clause 25 will not affect the remaining parts of clause 25.     The
judgment of the High Court is set aside and the appeal allowed.
                                   ………..……………… J.
                                   (R. F. Nariman)
                                   …..…………………… J.
                                   (Vineet Saran)
New Delhi.
March 11, 2019.
                                                                   21


