                                1
                                                NON-REPORTABLE
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
              CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 959 OF 2018
           (Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 3509 of 2016
The State of Rajasthan                              ..Appellant
                             Versus
Mohan Lal & Another                              ..Respondents
                          JUDGMENT
MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
     Leave granted.
  2. Judgment dated 25.05.2015 passed by the High Court of
     Judicature at Rajasthan, Jaipur Bench in Appeal No.215 of
     1992 is questioned in this appeal by the State with the
     prayer for enhancement of sentence. By the impugned
     judgment, the High Court has confirmed the judgment and
     order   of   conviction passed    by  the  Sessions    Court,
     Sambharlake in Sessions Case No.14/1992 for the offences

                              2
   under Sections 325 and 323 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC),
   but has reduced the sentence from 3 years’ rigorous
   imprisonment and fine of Rs.1000/- for the offences under
   Section 325, IPC and 6 months’ rigorous imprisonment and
   fine of Rs. 250/- under Section 323, IPC to the period
   already undergone.
3. The accused (respondent herein) was charged with and tried
   for the offences punishable under Sections 307, 326, 447,
   323 and 341, IPC. The learned Additional Sessions Judge,
   Sambharlake,    by  the  judgment    dated  19.05.1992    in
   Sessions Case No. 14/1992 convicted the accused for the
   offences punishable under Sections 325 and 323, IPC. The
   Sessions Court imposed a sentence of 3 years’ rigorous
   imprisonment and fine of Rs.1000/- for the offences under
   Section 325, IPC; and 6 months’ rigorous imprisonment and
   fine of Rs. 250/- was imposed for the offence under Section
   323, IPC. On appeal by the convicted accused, the High
   Court of Judicature at Rajasthan, Jaipur Bench confirmed
   the judgment of conviction but reduced the sentence to the
   period of imprisonment already undergone by the accused.
   By then, the accused had undergone 6 days’ imprisonment

                               3
   only. Being aggrieved by the meagre sentence, the State is
   before us as an appellant praying for enhancement of
   sentence.
4. The case of the prosecution in brief is that due to old enmity
   relating to a land dispute, one Kapurchand was assaulted
   by the accused; one Phoolchand who intervened in the fight
   also sustained an injury because of the assault by the
   accused. As mentioned supra, the accused was tried for the
   offences under Sections 307 and 326, IPC apart from other
   offences, but was convicted for the offences under Sections
   325 and 323, IPC.
5. During the course of the trial, the informant (PW1), the
   injured   Kapurchand     (PW2)   and    the   second   injured
   Phoolchand    (PW5)   were    examined,    apart  from   other
   witnesses, including the doctor who treated the injured. The
   trial court has found the evidence of PWs 1, 2 and 5
   consistent, cogent, reliable and trustworthy and proceeded
   to convict the accused. The doctor fully supported the case
   of the prosecution. The medical records, including the
   evidence of the Doctor, conclusively prove that injury no.1
   sustained by PW2-Kapurchand was a grievous injury, in as

                              4
   much as Kapurchand sustained a fracture of the right
   parietal bone.
6. It is clear from the judgment of the High Court that though
   the accused had filed an appeal questioning his conviction
   and sentence before the High Court, during the course of
   arguments he did not press the appeal filed against the
   judgment of conviction, praying only for reduction of
   sentence. The High Court decided the Criminal Appeal
   accepting such request, and reduced the sentence to the
   period already undergone. However, as a matter of fact, as
   mentioned supra, the accused had, by then, been in
   confinement only for 6 days.
7. Since the accused has not filed further appeal and as this
   appeal has been filed by the State praying for enhancement
   of sentence, we have decided this appeal confining ourselves
   to the sentence to be imposed.
8. The Medical Officer of the authorized Primary Health
   Centre,     Kishangarh   Renwal,   examined    the  injuries
   sustained by      the  two injured,  viz. Kapurchand    and
   Phoolchand. While Phoolchand had sustained only one
   injury of a simple nature, which was inflicted by a blunt
   object, Kapurchand had sustained two injuries, out of

                                5
    which one was simple and the other was serious. Therefore,
    Kapurchand was advised to undergo an X-ray. The X-ray
    report (Exhibit-P4) revealed that his right parietal bone was
    fractured. The medical report (Exhibit-P1) discloses the
    injury no.1 as grievous in nature. The Medical Officer has
    given his opinion in Exhibit-P5 that the injury no.1 was
    life-threatening.
9.  The High Court simply brushed aside the aforementioned
    material facts and sentenced the accused to the period
    already undergone by him, which is only 6 days in this case.
    In our view, the Trial Court and the High Court have taken
    a lenient view by convicting the accused for offences under
    Sections 325 and 323, IPC. Absolutely no reasons, much
    less valid reasons, are assigned by the High Court to impose
    the meagre sentence of 6 days. Such imposition of sentence
    by the High Court shocks the judicial conscience of this
    Court.
10. Currently,   India does not have structured sentencing
    guidelines that have been issued either by the legislature or
    the judiciary.    However, the Courts have framed certain
    guidelines in the matter of imposition of sentence. A Judge

                                6
    has wide discretion in awarding the sentence within the
    statutory limits. Since in many offences only the maximum
    punishment is prescribed and for some offences the
    minimum punishment is prescribed, each Judge exercises
    his discretion accordingly. There cannot, therefore, be any
    uniformity.   However, this Court has repeatedly held that
    the Courts will have to take into account certain principles
    while exercising their discretion in sentencing, such as
    proportionality,  deterrence   and    rehabilitation.  In  a
    proportionality analysis, it is necessary to assess the
    seriousness of an offence in order to determine the
    commensurate      punishment     for   the  offender.    The
    seriousness of an offence depends, apart from other things,
    also upon its harmfulness.
11. This  Court in the case of Soman Vs. State of Kerala
    [(2013) 11 SCC 382] observed thus:
        “27.1. Courts ought to base sentencing
        decisions on various different rationales – most
        prominent     amongst      which     would      be
        proportionality and deterrence.
        27.2. The question of consequences of criminal
        action can be relevant from both a
        proportionality and deterrence standpoint.
        27.3. Insofar as proportionality is concerned,
        the sentence must be commensurate with the
        seriousness or gravity of the offence.

                                7
        27.4. One of the factors relevant for judging
        seriousness of the offence is the consequences
        resulting from it.
        27.5. Unintended consequences/harm may
        still be properly attributed to the offender if
        they were reasonably foreseeable. In case of
        illicit and underground manufacture of liquor,
        the chances of toxicity are so high that not only
        its manufacturer but the distributor and the
        retail vendor would know its likely risks to the
        consumer. Hence, even though any harm to
        the consumer might not be directly intended,
        some aggravated culpability must attach if the
        consumer suffers some grievous hurt or dies as
        result of consuming the spurious liquor.”
12. The  same is the verdict of this Court in Alister Anthony
    Pareira Vs. State of Maharashtra [(2012) 2 SCC 648]
    wherein it is observed thus:
        “84. Sentencing is an important task in the
        matters of crime. One of the prime objectives of
        the criminal law is imposition of appropriate,
        adequate, just and proportionate sentence
        commensurate with the nature and gravity of
        crime and the manner in which the crime is
        done. There is no straitjacket formula for
        sentencing an accused on proof of crime. The
        courts have evolved certain principles: the twin
        objective of the sentencing policy is deterrence
        and correction. What sentence would meet the
        ends of justice depends on the facts and
        circumstances of each case and the court must
        keep in mind the gravity of the crime, motive
        for the crime, nature of the offence and all
        other attendant circumstances.”
13. From    the aforementioned observations, it is clear that the
    principle governing the imposition of punishment will

                               8
    depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case.
    However, the sentence should be appropriate, adequate,
    just, proportionate and commensurate with the nature and
    gravity of the crime and the manner in which the crime is
    committed. The gravity of the crime, motive for the crime,
    nature of the crime and all other attending circumstances
    have to be borne in mind while imposing the sentence. The
    Court cannot afford to be casual while imposing the
    sentence, inasmuch as both the crime and the criminal are
    equally important in the sentencing process.    The Courts
    must see that the public does not lose confidence in the
    judicial system. Imposing inadequate sentences will do more
    harm to the justice system and may lead to a state where
    the victim loses confidence in the judicial system and
    resorts to private vengeance.
14. In  the matter at hand, it is proved that the victim has
    sustained a grievous injury on a vital portion of the body,
    i.e. the head, which was fractured. The doctor has opined
    that the injury was life threatening.       Hence, in our
    considered opinion, the High Court was too lenient in

                                9
    imposing the sentence of six days only which was the period
    already undergone by the accused in confinement.
15. Having regard to the totality of the facts and circumstances,
    and as it is brought to our notice that the parties have
    forgotten their differences and are living peacefully since 25
    years, we impose a sentence of 6 months’ rigorous
    imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees Twenty
    Five Thousand) against the accused. While doing so, we
    have taken into consideration the aggravating as well as
    mitigating factors under the facts of this case.
16. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The accused (respondent
    herein) is imposed with a sentence of 6 months’ rigorous
    imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees Twenty
    Five Thousand) for the offences under Section 325, IPC. In
    case of default of payment of fine, the accused shall undergo
    further rigorous imprisonment for 3 months. In case the
    fine is deposited by the convicted accused, the same shall
    be disbursed in favour of the injured PW2, viz. Kapurchand
    as compensation. The accused/respondent be taken into
    custody forthwith to serve out the sentence. However, he is
    entitled to the benefit of set-off of the period already

                               10
    undergone in confinement by him. The judgment of the High
    Court is modified accordingly.
                            .................................................J.
                                                        (N. V. RAMANA)
                            .................................................J.
                              (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)
New Delhi;
August 01, 2018.


