                              1
                                                  Reportable
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                CIVIL  APPELLATE JURISDICTION
              CIVIL APPEAL NOs.9-11 OF 2014
SALEM MUNICIPALITY                         Appellant(s)
                               Versus
P.KUMAR   & ORS.                         Respondent(s)
                            WITH
                CIVIL APPEAL Nos.12-14 OF 2014
                         O R D E R
    The Salem Municipality and State of Tamil Nadu
and  others   are   in   appeals   aggrieved    by  the
judgment and decree passed by the High Court of
Judicature at Madras on 8.12.2010 thereby deciding
three Second Appeals by the common judgment and
order reversing the judgment and decree passed by
the  First  Appellate   Court   of  dismissal   of  the
suits and restoring that of the Trial Court.
    It   was    claimed    by   the   plaintiff    that
initially, the lease was granted in favour of S.
Vijayaranga    Mudaliar    on    19.11.1940    by   the
erstwhile Zamindar – Ms.Gnanambal.        It was from
the month of November 1940 to the month of June

                                2
1941.
     Similar leases had been granted on 19.11.1942
in  1943   and   1946.  In   the   lease   deed   area  was
described as “Chinneri Tank Bund Side -Waste dry”
and “Chinneri Tank Bund Upper-dry”.
     It is significant that each of lease had been
granted for eight months, each year continued from
November to June next year, to expire before the
commencement of rains in July as the land used to
be submerged as it was situated in Chinneri Bund
side.
     It   was  claimed   by   the   plaintiff    that   his
predecessor in title, continued in possession of
the   land   when   the  Act   called    the  Tamil    Nadu
Estates (Abolition and Conversion into Ryotwari)
Act, 1948 (in short “the Act of 1948”) came into
force.    The   Act   was   published     on    19.4.1949.
Sections 1,2,4,5,7,8 58-A,62,67 68 came into force
on 19.4.1949, as provided under Section 1(4) of
the Act of 1948. The State Government enforced the
other    Sections    on   the     appointed    date    i.e.
19.12.1950.     Thereafter,    the    entire    Pallapatti
village vested in the State as notified under the

                                 3
Act of 1948.      Pursuant thereto, the possession of
the    entire    village    was     taken    over   by   the
Government, which included the disputed land also,
vide possession receipt dated 12.1.1951.
     The original plaintiff –late P.C. Pachiappan
purchased 4.91 acres of land from S. Vijayaranga
Mudaliar.      The  suits   are    with   respect   to  said
land.
     It transpires that late Vijayaranga Mudaliar
had applied for a grant of Ryotwari Patta under
section 11 of the Act of 1948.              The prayer was
rejected on the ground that land was not ryoti
land    and   it  was   recorded      as   community   land.
Thereafter, settlement in the area was undertaken
and   was   finally   notified     in   the  Gazette   dated
21.12.1963.     Thereafter,    P.C.    Pachiappan    applied
under section 11 of the Act of 1948 for grant of
Ryotwari    patta   of  the   newly     carved  out   Survey
No.163    corresponding     to    old    survey   No.   779.
Prayer for grant of Ryotwari patta of the disputed
land was rejected vide order 5.11.1968 passed in
DOS 739/68 (F-2) by Assistant Settlement Officers
KDIS No. 737/1968. As recorded in the survey land

                             4
register, Exhibit B-2, prepared in the survey and
settlement in 1959, the total area of the land 163
= 779 was 24.62 acres, recorded as Achuvan Eri
(lake).   Hence, it could not have been allotted.
     A second application for ryotwari patta moved
by Pachiappan was rejected as per government Order
dated 11.5.1971. Review application was filed by
Pachiappan. It was also rejected vide order dated
7.5.1973 on the ground that records of rights made
it  apparent   that  disputed  land   formed   part  of
‘Achuvaneri' which is IV class irrigation source
with wet ayacut registered under it and that it is
retained as the tank in the interest of ayacutdars
under it. It was also observed that the entire
area   comes  into   submergence   and   the   land  in
question forms part of the irrigation tank.
     Unfettered   by  the  previous  two    rejections,
Pachiappan again for the third time applied for
issuance of patta on 21.6.1982. That application
was ultimately rejected vide Ex. P-5 on 9.5.1984.
     On   23.2.1984,   by   virtue   of    the   Office
Memorandum 255, the Transport Department of the
State    Government   handed   over    Survey    No.163

                              5
admeasuring 24.62 acres to Salem Municipality for
construction of a new bus stand.
     Pachiappan    had   filed   a   civil   suit   on
20.12.1984 registered as O.S.34 of 1985 in the
Court of District Munsiff of Salem against the
State   of  Tamil   Nadu   and  M/s.   Anna  Transport
Corporation for declaration of title and permanent
injunction in respect of 4.91 acres of the land,
out of survey No.163.
     Yet another civil suit came to be filed by the
same plaintiff as against Salem Municipality alone
for declaration and injunction on 22.12.1989.
     Thereafter, the fourth application was filed
for   obtaining   ryotwari  patta  by   Pachiappan  on
26.3.1992. He had filed yet another writ petition
No.3932/1992 for restraining the respondents from
disturbing   peaceful   possession  and  enjoyment  of
the property.
     In Writ Petition No.5642/1992 he prayed that
respondent    may   be   directed   to   consider   an
application for grant of ryotwari patta. However,
both    the  writ    petitions   were   dismissed   as
withdrawn.    Earlier writ petition filed in 1984

                              6
was also dismissed with liberty to file a civil
suit.
     Third      suit     O.S.No.342/1996        (348/95)
(renumbered as 2066/96) was filed as against Salem
Municipality, Anna Transport Corporation and State
of Tamil Nadu. He has prayed for the same relief
in the third civil suit.
     By virtue of the various leases granted to
S.Vijayaranga    Mudaliar,   he  became    entitled   to
obtain ryotwari patta under Section 11 of the Act
of 1948. Plaintiff entered into an agreement to
purchase    the   suit    property    in   1951    which
culminated into a sale on 29.9.1952.           The suit
property never formed part of the communal land of
Achuvan Eri or its tank bund.      Further, the extent
of the Achuvan Eri as per the records is only
15.00 acres.    The Plaintiff had remained in actual
possession and enjoyment of suit property.        In the
year 1982, Forest Department attempted to commit a
trespass   in   the  suit   property   and   put   up  a
nursery.    The plaintiff objected and obtained the
stay   orders  from  the   Government   of  Tamil   Nadu
against trespass. The Forest Department withdrew

                              7
and   was  restrained     from   further   work.   The
plaintiff  also  filed   applications   for  grant  of
ryotwari patta in his favour and his predecessor
in interest since 1940 onwards had prescribed his
title by virtue of adverse possession also.
    Earlier suit No. OS.34/1985 was dismissed in
default, in the absence of both the parties. The
application No.I.A. 583/94 for its restoration was
pending. The cause of action arose in the year
1940, thereafter in 1952, when the sale deed was
executed  and  again  in   the  year  1984.    Besides
declaration and injunction, prayer was also made
for demarcation of the property in question.
    After the restoration of the suit of 1985,
three suits were decided vide common judgment and
decree dated 27.4.2000 passed by the Trial Court,
Additional District Munsif of Salem. The suit was
decreed on 27.4.2000. The appeals were allowed by
the First Appellate Court i.e., First Additional
District  Court,  Salem    vide  judgment  and  decree
dated 30.1.2004. Aggrieved thereby, three-second
appeals, which were preferred have been allowed by
the impugned judgment and decree thereby restoring

                                8
that of the Trial Court.
    The   High   Court   has   given   the   finding  that
there  is   nothing    to   doubt   the   various   leases
granted to S.Vijayaranga Mudaliar.         Sale deed has
also been relied upon, the documents A-1 to A-4
have been relied upon by the High Court. The High
Court  has   drawn   adverse    inferences    against  the
appellants for not producing record pertaining to
the aforesaid documents A-1 to A-4. High Court has
disbelieved documents B-9 of taking possession on
12.1.1951.    Finding of possession has been arrived
at in favour of the plaintiff.        The High Court has
also doubted the action of Salem Municipality of
handing   over    only    19.64   acres    area   to   the
Transport Corporation for bus stand, whereas the
entire  land   24.62   acres   has   been   given  to  the
Salem Municipality by the Tamil Nadu Government.
High Court has further stated that there is no
estoppel created against the plaintiff by virtue
of the facts mentioned in lease deeds.             It has
also not been explained by the defendants that how
the area of 15 acres of water tank increased to 24
acres.  Consequently, the High Court has set aside

                              9
the judgment and decree of the First Appellate
Court and restored the judgment and decree passed
by the Trial Court.
     Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, Shri R.Venkataramani and
Shri   Gurukrishna  Kumar,   learned   senior    counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellants urged that
High   Court  has  failed  to   consider   the   various
provisions of the Act of 1908 as well as the Act
of 1948. No right could have been created in the
water tanks by virtue of the provisions contained
in  the   said  Acts.  They    have  relied   upon   the
definition of Ryot and Ryoti land in Section 3(15)
and 3 (16) of the Act of 1908.
     The ryoti land as defined in section 3(16) of
the said Act specifically excludes beds and bunds
of tanks. It was also urged that High Court has
also failed to consider the impact of dismissal of
the proceedings for obtaining ‘Ryot Patta’ under
Section 11 of the Act, filed by the Predecessor in
interest    S.Vijayaranga   Mudaliar     and    by   the
original plaintiff.     The prayer of S. Vijayranga
Mudaliar   for  grant  of  ryotwari   patta    has  been
rejected vide order dated 20.7.1953.         Other four

                               10
prayers made by Pachiappan also stood rejected in
the  years   1968,1971,    1984   and   1994.       In  the
absence  of   a  grant   of   ryotwari    patta   and  even
otherwise, the land remained vested in the State
Government.    The  finding     as    to    possession   of
plaintiff   recorded    by   the   High    Court   is  also
perverse and is contrary to the revenue entries,
the documents of settlement and other record of
rights w.e.f. 1948 till 1995. The revenue records
have been placed on record and in none of them,
there is an entry of possession of Pachiappan.           On
the strength of sale deed executed in 1952, the
name of Pachiappan had never been mutated. Since
Predecessor S. Vijayaranga Mudaliar had no title,
late Pachiappan could not have derived any right,
title  or  interest    from   him.     Having    failed  to
prove the title of S. Vijayaranga Mudaliar and
also his own title, the plaintiff was not entitled
to obtain the decree in his favour.             Apart from
that, it was also urged that though such a suit
was barred under the provisions of 1948 Act. Even
if it is held to be maintainable for establishing
of the rights of Ryot, plaintiff has miserably

                               11
failed to prove right, title or interest so as to
seek declaration and injunction prayed for.             The
suits    were   rightly    dismissed      by   the    First
Appellate    court.      Learned    counsel     have   also
referred to the decision in State of Tamil Nadu
Vs. Ramalinga Samigal Madam (1985) 4 SCC 10.           Even
if  the   documents   A-1   to   A-4   are   taken   to  be
proved, plaintiff did not derive any sustenance
from them for proving of right, title or interest
over   the  land.     The  High    Court   has   proceeded
merely on the basis of adverse inference so as to
confer a title in favour of the plaintiff whereas
the plaintiff has miserably failed to prove his
own case. They have also relied on Section 14A of
the 1948 Act.
     Shri  Rajiv   Dutta   and    Shri   V.Giri,    learned
senior    counsel   appearing      on   behalf     of   the
plaintiff contended that once documents A-1 to A-4
are found to be proved, right, title and interest
stands   proved   not   only   of   the   predecessor-in-
interest    but   that    of    the    plaintiffs     also.
Finding of fact as to possession of plaintiff has
been   rightly  recorded    by   the   Trial   Court.   The

                             12
decision of the First Appellate Court has been
rightly   reversed    by   the     High   Court.   The
entitlement  to   obtain  ryotwari    patta  has  been
proved.  The claim for conferral of ryotwari patta
has not been properly adjudicated by the concerned
authorities.    Civil suits were maintainable and
have been rightly decreed.
    It was also contended on behalf of plaintiff
that difference in the area of the tank has not
been properly explained and the area in question
is not part of the tank, it was at the periphery
of the tank.   Thus, there was no bar under the Act
of 1908 to give the same on lease to S.Vijayaranga
Mudaliar and, as right, title and interest for
obtaining of ryotwari patta had accrued to him, he
could  have  alienated   the   property  in  the  year
1952.    Finding   as  to  possession    is  also  the
question of fact and has been rightly arrived at
by the Trial Court which has rightly been restored
by the High Court. No case for interference is
made out.   For maintainability of the civil suit,
they have relied upon the decision in Dokiseela
Ramulu  vs.  Sri   Sangameswara   Swamy  Varu  &  Ors.

                            13
(2017) 2 SCC 69.    Lastly, they contended that the
adverse inference has rightly been drawn by the
High Court.
    First,   we   take  up   the   determination  of
question  as  to  the  nature  of  the  land  as the
accrual of right, title and interest depends on
that under both the Acts of 1908 and 1948. It is
apparent from the lease deed placed on record by
the plaintiff (Exh. A-2) dated 15.11.1940 that the
land formed part of the Chinneri Tank Bund Side
-Waste dry Chinneri Tank Bed Upper-dry Chinneri
Tank Bund Side -Waste dry         Chinneri Tank Bed
Upper-dry and the lease was granted in Fasli 1350
corresponding to Gregorian calendar year of 1940
w.e.f. the month of November 1940 to June 1941.
Similar other leases collectively marked A-2 are
dated 19.11.1942, 1943 and 1946 w.e.f. the month
of November to June.     The leases were granted in
the exercise of the powers under Section 51 of the
Act of 1908.    It is apparent from the leases that
area in question is specifically depicted in the
aforesaid lease deeds to form part of the tank.
    Besides that, there are a plethora of revenue

                                14
entries   placed   on    record    indicating    that   the
entire area 24.62 acres had been recorded as tank
continuously right from 1950 till 1995.
    The lease had been granted for eight months in
the  year   1940.      The    grant   of  lease   for   the
aforesaid period excluding rainy season from July
to  October      and   evidence     indicates   that   land
formed  part    of   the    tank.     Thus,   we  have   no
hesitation    in  rejecting     the   submission    to  the
contrary   raised     on   behalf    of   the   plaintiff-
respondent to the effect that land did not form
part of the tank.
      Now,   we  come    to   the  question   whether   any
right can be acquired on such a land.              When we
consider the relevant provisions contained in the
Act of 1908 and definition as defined Ryot under
Section 3(15) and Ryoti Land under 3(16).               The
same is extracted hereunder:
         “Section 3 (15) - “Ryot” means a
         person who holds for the purpose of
         agriculture ryoti land in an an
         estate on condition of paying to the
         landholder the rent which is legally
         due upon it.”
         Explanation:

                              15
         A person who has occupied ryoti land
         for a continuous period of twelve
         years shall be deemed to be a ryot
         for all the purposes of this Act.
         Section 3 (16)- “Ryoti land” means
         cultivable land in an estate other
         than    private   land     but   does   not
         include;
         (a) beds and bunds of tanks and of
         supply,      drainage,       surplus     or
         irrigation channels:
         (b) threshing floor, cattle-stands,
         village-sites      and      other     lands
         situated in any estate which are set
         apart for the common use of the
         villagers.
         (c) lands granted on service tenure
         either free of rent or on favourable
         rates or rent if granted before the
         passing this act or free of rent if
         granted after that date, so longs as
         the service tenure subsists.”
    It is apparent from the definition of ‘ryot’
as defined under Section 3(15), means a person who
holds the land for the purpose of agriculture. It
is  necessary   for  such  a   ‘ryot’   to  hold  ‘ryoti
Land’ in an estate.      Ryoti land has been defined
in Section 3(16) as cultivable land in an estate
other than private land but does not include beds
and  bunds   of   tanks   and    of  supply,   drainage,
surplus or irrigation channels. Thus, as the area

                               16
in question formed part of the tank was clearly
not  ryoti   land   as   per  the   said  definition   in
Section  3(16).       As   such,   the   predecessor   in
interest -      S.Vijayaranga Mudaliar or plaintiff
could not be said to be ‘ryot’ holding ‘ryoti’
land.
    The provisions contained in the 1948 Act have
been enacted to bring about agrarian reforms and
to  abolish    the   intermediaries,     zamindars,   and
Jagirdars etc.      As a matter of fact, a lot of
agrarian reforms have taken place by the enactment
of Abolition Act, as mandated by Article 39 (b)
and (c) of the Constitution.          By virtue of the
provisions contained in Section 3 of the Act, on
issuance   of  notifications     with  effect   from  the
notified     date    certain      consequences     ensues
automatically. It is provided in Section 3(b) that
entire estate including with all communal lands;
porambokes,   other    then  ryoti   lands;  rivers   and
streams;   tanks   and   ooranies    (including   private
tanks  and   ooranies    and  irrigation   works]   etc.,
shall stand transferred to the Government and vest
in them, free of all encumbrances.

                      17
Section 3 is extracted hereunder:
     “Section 3: With effect on and
from the notified date and save as
otherwise expressly provided in this
Act:
(a) the    Tamil     Nadu    Estates   Land
     (Reduction of Rent) Act, 1947
     Tamil Nadu Act XXX of 1947 [in so
     far as it relates to] matters
     other than the reduction rents
     and the collection of arrears of
     rent and the Tamil Nadu Permanent
     Settlement Regulation, 1802 Tamil
     Nadu Regulation XXV of 1802, the
     Tamil Nadu Estates Land Act, 1908
     Tamil Nadu Act 1 of 1908, and all
     other enactments applicable to
     the estate as such shall be
     deemed to have been repealed in
     their application to the estate]
(b) the entire estate including all
     communal lands; porambokes; other
     nonryoti       lands;      wastelands;
     pasture     lands;     Lanka    lands;
     forests;     mines    and    minerals;
     quarries;     rivers    and   streams;
     tanks   and     ooranies    (including
     private tanks and ooranies and
     irrigation works] fisheries and
     ferries, shall stand transferred
     to the Government and vest in
     them, free of all encumbrances
     and   the     Tamil     Nadu   Revenue
     Recovery Act, 1864, the Tamil
     Nadu Irrigation Cess Act, 1965,
     and     all       other     enactments
     applicable      to   ryotwari    areas
     shall apply to the estate;
(c) all rights and interests created
     in or over the estate before the
     notified date by the principal or
     any other landholder, shall as
     against the Government cease and
     determine;

                     18
(d) the      Government      may,     after
     removing any obstruction that may
     be     offered     forthwith      take
     possession of the estate, and all
     accounts,      registers,       pattas
     muchilikas, maps, plans and other
     documents relating to the estate
     which the Government may require
     for the administration thereof;
Provided that the Government shall
not dispossess any person of any land
in the estate in respect of which
they consider that he is prima facie
entitled to a ryotwari patta-
(i)     if such person is a ryot,
        pending the decision of the
        Settlement     Officer     as    to
        whether he is actually entitled
        to such patta;
(ii)    if such person is a landholder
        pending the decision of the
        Settlement    Officer     and   the
        Tribunal on appeal, if any, to
        it,   as   to    whether    he   is
        actually    entitled     to    such
        patta;
(e) the     principal     or   any    other
     landholder and any other person,
     whose rights stand transferred
     under clause (b) or cease and
     determine under clause (c), shall
     be entitled only to such rights
     and privileges as are recognized
     or conferred on him by or under
     this Act]
(f) the relationship of landholder
     and ryot, shall, as between them,
     be extinguished;
(g) any rights and privileges which
     may have accrued in the estate to
     any person before the notified
     date, against the principal or

                              19
               any   other   landholder    thereof,
               shall cease and determine, and
               shall not be enforceable against
               the Government or such landholder
               and every such person shall be
               entitled only to such rights and
               privileges as are recognized or
               conferred on him by or under this
               Act.]”
     It is also provided in Section 3(c) that all
rights and interests created in or over the estate
before the notified date by the principal or any
other   landholder,    shall  against   the  Government
cease and determine.
     It is apparent that under Section 3 of the Act
of  1948   vesting   is  automatic   by  virtue  of  the
statutory provisions and government is empowered to
take possession as provided under Section 3 (a)
only saving in the proviso to section 3(d) is that
in  case   any   person  is  prima   facie  entitled  to
ryotwari    patta    and   during    pendency   of   his
application,    for  the  settlement,   was  not  to  be
dispossessed.     In the case of the landholder, it is
provided that if the decision is pending before the
Settlement Officer and the Tribunal on appeal, the
State before taking possession has to prima facie
consider   whether   landholder   is  entitled  to  ryot

                           20
patta.   Another consequence of vesting as clearly
provided in Section 3(f) of Act of 1948 is that the
relationship between the landholder and Ryot shall
stand extinguished.
    Section 3(g) of the Act of 1948 specifically
provides that right which may have accrued in the
estate to any person before the notified date shall
not be enforceable against the government and such
person shall be entitled only to such rights and
privileges as are recognised or conferred on him as
provided under the Act of 1948.
    Section 11 deals with rights of a ryot in an
estate to apply for a ryotwari patta in respect of
ryoti land which was properly included or ought to
have been properly included in his holding.
    Section 11 is extracted hereunder:
        “Lands in which ryot in entitled to
        ryotwari patta:
        “11. Every ryot in an estate shall,
        with effect on and from the notified
        date, be entitled to a ryotwari patta
        in respect of ;
         (a)      all   ryoti   lands   which,
        immediately before the notified date,
        were properly included or ought to
        have been properly included in his

                              21
        holding and which are not either
        Lanka lands or lands in respect of
        which a landholder or some other
        person is entitled to a ryotwari
        patta under any other provision of
        this act; and
        (b) all Lanka lands in his occupation
        immediately before the notified date,
        such    land    having     been   in    his
        occupation    or     in    that   of    his
        predecessors-in-title         continuously
        from the 1st day of July 1939.
        Provided that no person who has been
        admitted into possession of any land
        by as landholder on or after the 1st
        day of July 1945 shall, except where
        the Government, after an examination
        of all the circumstances otherwise
        direct, be entitled to a ryotwari
        patta in respect of such land.
        Explanation:     No lessee of any Lanka
        land and no person to whom a right to
        collect the rent of any land has been
        leased before the notified date,
        including an ijaradar or a farmer of
        rent, shall be entitled to a ryotwari
        patta in respect of such land under
        this section.”
    Section  12   deals   with   the  right  of   the
landholder in zamindari estate and Section 13
deals with the landholder of Inam estate with
which we are not concerned in the present case.
Plaintiff  has   claimed   the   right,   title   and
interest as ryot, not as landholder.

                           22
    Section 14-A was inserted by amendment Act
49 of 1974. The provisions contained in Section
14-A is extracted hereunder;
        “Ryotwari patta not to be granted in
        respect of private tank or oorani:
        14-A.(1)    Notwithstanding     anything
        contained in this Act, no ryotwari
        patta shall be granted in respect of
        any private tank or oorani.
        (2)    Any ryotwari patta granted in
        respect of any private tank or oorani
        under this Act before the date of the
        publication of the Tamil Nadu Estates
        (Abolition    and     Conversion    into
        Ryotwari) Amendment Act, 1974, in the
        Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, shall
        stand cancelled, and for purposes of
        compensation   under    this   Act   the
        private tank or oorani shall be
        deemed to be land in respect of which
        neither the landholder nor any other
        person is entitled to ryotwari patta
        under this Act.”
    Section   14-A(1)   makes    it   clear   that
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
no ryotwari patta shall be granted in respect of
any private tank or ooranies. Even if any patta
has been granted the same shall stand cancelled
and the land of the private tank or oorani shall
be deemed to be land of neither the landholder
nor any other person is entitled to ryotwari
patta under the Act.

                             23
     It is apparent from the conjoint reading of
the provisions contained in Sections 3(15) and 3
(16)  of   the  Act of  1908    and the  provisions
contained in Section 3, 11 and 14-A of the Act
of 1948 that the land of the tank is not ‘ryoti
land’ as such no rights of ‘ryot’ could accrue
in the person by holding the land on temporary
arrangement of lease granted for 8 months in a
year when water was not there in the tanks.
Such   bodies  are  protected    by virtue  of  the
aforesaid provisions carved out under the Acts
of 1908 and 1948. The amendment made in 1974 in
Section 14-A makes it clear that even if any
ryot patta has been granted to any incumbent
even with respect to private tank or ooranies
that shall be inoperative and stand cancelled.
     In the instant case, it is apparent that
not only S.Vijayaranga Mudaliar the vendor of
plaintiff had applied for a grant of patta under
the provisions of Section 11 of the Act of 1948,
but the same very prayer had been unsuccessfully
made four times by the original plaintiff.      All
such prayers made in 1953, 1968, 1971, 1982 and

                              24
1994 had been rejected.       It is not in dispute
that ryotwari patta had not been granted.           In
the order passed rejecting review in 1973, there
is categorical finding that land is comprised in
the tank and area was liable for submergence and
formed part of the irrigation tank.          Once the
claim  of    the   original    plaintiff    had   been
rejected, it was incumbent upon him to file a
suit for establishing his rights, if any.           He
could not have waited till 1984, after initial
rejection of the prayer in 1953. Again, could
not have waited till December 1984 after the
rejection order was passed in 1968 and again on
11.5.1971   and   review   had   been  dismissed    on
7.5.1973.    In the absence of grant of ryotwari
patta and even otherwise in view of the fact
that  land   formed   part  of   tank   reserved   for
common use, no right accrued to the plaintiff to
claim ryotwari patta as his predecessor was not
‘ryot’  and   the  disputed   land   was  not   ‘ryoti
Land’.  Apart from that, vendor of the plaintiff
did not hold land for 12 continuous years, as
such no right, title or interest accrued to the

                            25
vendor of the plaintiff or to the plaintiff.
The Trial Court, as well as the High Court, have
committed  patent   illegality   in  ignoring  the
aforesaid    prohibition    contained    in    the
provisions of the Act of 1908 as well as of the
Act of 1948.
    Coming to the question of possession, the
High Court has discarded B-9 proceedings taking
possession  on  12.1.1951.     Though,  there  was
absolutely  nothing  to  doubt  factum  of  taking
over the possession.    It is also apparent that
the land formed part of tank which used to go in
submergence during the rains from the month of
July to October, it was not capable of being
possessed continuously.   No patta was granted to
the vendor of the plaintiff for a complete year
at any point of time, it was from November to
June.   The four lease deeds for the period of
four years are for 32 months i.e. 8 months each
year, have been placed on record of 1940, 1942,
1943 and 1946, no other lease has been produced
indicating that he was holding land for 12 years
or any lease of the land as on the date when the

                                26
Act of 1948 came into force or on the appointed
day. Even the vendor was not in possession of
the land as the entire estate of the village
stood   vested     in    the   state,     as  per   the
notification issued on 12.1.1951, possession had
been taken.    Thus, there was absolutely nothing
to  hold   that    possession     continued   with  the
vendor of the plaintiff.       After the purchase was
made by Pachiappan in 1952 there is not even
single revenue entry placed on record indicating
that he ever remained in possession at any point
of time or cultivated the land.           On the other
hand,  various    documents    to    the contrary  have
been placed on record by the appellant.
    Firstly,    there    are   copies    of  settlement
register indicating the land comprised in new
survey No. 163 corresponds to 779 old and same
is  recorded    as   Poramboke      (common  land)  for
common use.      Entire area 24.62 acre had been
recorded as Poramboke.         There is yet another
settlement   entry    of   1959    which  records  that
Survey No.163 had been carved out of 779 in an
area 24.62 acre and area has been recorded as

                                27
Achuveri i.e., lake and also Porampoke i.e., for
the common use.      The document records the fact
that   Pachiappan’s    application      for   grant  of
ryotwari patta has been rejected on 5.11.1968.
Survey Map of the village also records that the
old survey number 779 has vested in the State.
When we consider Exh B-13, Fasli 1379 = 1969
year (Gregorian) the land has been recorded as
Chinneri (small lake).        In the remarks column
possession of several persons is recorded as a
trespasser,    but  not   that   of   the  plaintiff  -
Pachiappan.      Similar   is   the   position   in the
entry of various Fasli 1380 = 1970, 1381 = 1971,
1382 = 1972, 1383 = 1973, 1384 = 1974, 1386 =
1976, 1390 = 1980, 1391 = 1981 till 1405 = 1995.
The   entries   in  remarks    column    shows  neither
ownership nor tenancy as observed by this Court
in Beohar Rajendra Singh v. State of M.P. and
others,1970 RN 16 (Supreme Court).
     Other documents are also placed on record
indicating    that   area   is    Chinneri   (lake)  of
common   use.     Thus,   there    was   absolutely  no
material or ground available to the High Court

                             28
to set aside the finding of possession recorded
by the First Appellate Court and for discarding
the B-9 of taking possession in 1951 as that was
supported by corresponding revenue entries and
statutory presumption of correctness is attached
to  such   entries   though   such   presumption     is
rebuttable.     However,  there   is   absolutely    no
evidence adduced on record by the plaintiff to
rebut the statutory presumption of correctness
of document of record of rights.         Thus, trial
court, as well as the High Court, has acted in a
perverse manner in discarding the overwhelming
evidence merely on the ground that document A-1
to A-4 stands proved.     The High Court could not
have inferred in favour of the plaintiff, as no
right   accrued   to  the   plaintiff    or   to    his
predecessor-in-interest    on   the   basis    of   the
aforesaid document A-1 to A-4.        The High Court
has unnecessarily drawn adverse inference just
in order to give a finding of the genuineness of
the   document   A-1  to   A-4.      We   take    these
documents as proved and proceed to deal with the
case on that basis.

                                29
     When we consider the documents A1 to A-4,
taken as proved, not only they fail to advance
the cause espoused by the plaintiff but rather
negates it.     Ex.A-2 are the 4 pattas placed on
record by the plaintiff granted in favour of
S.Vijayaranga Mudaliar as predecessor interest
of 1940, 1942, 1943 and 1946.          The lease deed
itself records that land was comprised in the
tank and formed part of the tank. Thus, no right
or title or interest could have accrued to the
plaintiff over the said land.
     Apart from that, when we consider sale deed
A-1,   executed     by   S.Vijayaranga    Mudaliar  in
favour   of   original     plaintiff   Pachiappa,  the
recital in the sale deed is that though patta
was   granted    in    his   name  he   could  neither
cultivate nor able to look after the same, as
such,   he  has   decided    to  sell  the  land.   In
Exh.A-3 rent register of Fasli 1369 = 1959. It
only records the rent not the factum of lease or
possession    or     cultivation    by   S.Vijayaranga
Mudaliar. A-4 is document of the year 1949 that
records the name of S.Vijayaranga Mudaliar but

                             30
in   that,    no   cultivation    is   recorded   of
S.Vijayaranga Mudaliar. It records only how much
was the cess of land.      No case is made out in
favour of vendor of the plaintiff on the basis
of the entry of amount of land cess or land
revenue of the year 1949.     Merely recording the
cess   or  revenue   in  the   year  1949   or  even
assuming it was paid by the vendor in 1949, is
not going to confer title in favour of vendor,
particularly when the area was comprised in the
tank.    In case any lease had been granted for
the period of 1947 to 1949 ought to have been
placed on record but no such lease deeds except
for   four  years   have been   placed   on  record.
Thus, the finding recorded by the High Court as
to possession is clearly perverse and contrary
to   the    revenue   records    and   the   Gazette
notification of vesting of land in State issued
in 1951.
     It is no doubt true that under Section 114
of the Evidence Act, there is a presumption of
continuance of a state of affairs once shown to
have prevailed.     It is open to the court under

                                 31
Section 114 to presume the continuity of any
fact   once    shown   to    have    prevailed.      Such
presumption of continuity can be drawn not only
forward   but   backward    also.    Court   can  presume
that such state of affairs might have existed in
past also unless discontinuity is proved.              In
the  instant     case,   it    is   not   shown   by  any
affirmative evidence on record in the form of
revenue record that the plaintiff’s vendor was
in  possession     on   the   date    of   abolition  and
thereafter plaintiff remained in possession at
any point of time.        This Court has observed in
Sir Bhimeshwara Swami Varu Temple v. Pedapudi
Krishna Murthi and Ors., AIR 1973 SC 1299 that
by stray entry no such presumption arises.             On
the  other    hand,   the   successive     five  attempts
made by the plaintiff and his vendor failed to
obtain ryotwari patta as no right in such land
existed neither accrued.          The plaintiff due to
failure    to   obtain    ryotwari     patta    and  even
otherwise as land formed part of tank has failed
to prove entitlement to be treated as Ryot. No
right,   title   or   interest     has   accrued  to  the

                               32
plaintiff to obtain any ryotwari patta or for
obtaining decree in the suit.
    It was urged before us on behalf of the
appellant that suit was barred by limitation by
virtue of provisions contained in Article 58 of
the Limitation Act 1963.       The suit was required
to be filed within three years.        We need not go
into the question.     We have found on merits that
absolutely no case is made out in favour of the
plaintiff.      Thus, he was not at all entitled
for any relief.
    The   High    Court    has    considered   another
aspect of the difference in area, it has opined
that earlier it appeared that land was 15.00
acres only later on how the area was increased
to 24.62 acres has not been explained by the
defendants. The aforesaid reasoning recorded by
the  High   Court    is   totally    based   upon   the
ignorance of the material aspects and evidence,
as a matter of fact earlier dispute land was
comprised    in    survey    no.     779   and    which
corresponding to new s.no. 163 in 24.67 acres,
said area has been continuously recorded in the

                            33
revenue papers and register of settlement, right
from the beginning.    After 1948 till 1995, no
cogent document indicating the disparity in the
area has been filed by the plaintiff.         Even
assuming that the finding recorded by the High
Court is correct, it passes comprehension how
that helps the case of the plaintiff.    Plaintiff
has to succeed only on the strength of his case
and when temporary leases had been granted to
his vendor within the area of tank as mentioned
in the lease deeds which was reserved for the
common use, no right could have accrued.       The
High  Court  has  ignored   and  overlooked   this
material  aspect.     In   case,   the   area  has
increased from 15 acres to 24.62 acres and has
not been explained how the plaintiff can claim
any right in the land which formed part of water
body is not understandable as the case of the
plaintiff is not at all or buttressed by the
aforesaid   discrepancy   even   if   it   exists.
Moreover, the entire area of 24.63 acres has
been recorded as Chinneri (tank) and poramboke
i.e., for common use.

                              34
    Now,   we  deal  with   last   ground   raised   by
learned   senior    counsel    on    behalf    of   the
plaintiff   based   on   provisions     contained    in
section 64 of the Act of 1948. Section 64 deals
with the right of the owner, occupier not to be
affected                 by                  temporary
dispossession/discontinuance         of   possession.
Section 64 is extracted hereunder:
         “Rights of owner or occupier not to
         be       effected        by      temporary
         discontinuance      of     possession     or
         occupation:
         64.   Where a person-
         (a) is entitled to the ownership of
         to the possession or occupation of
         any land or building immediately
         before the notified date, but has
         transferred     his      right    to     the
         possession or occupation thereof or
         has been temporarily dispossessed or
         deprived    or    his     right    to    the
         occupation thereof; and
              (b) has not on that date lost his
         right to recover the possession or
         occupation of such land or building;
         He shall, for the purposes of this
         Act, and subject to the provisions
         thereof be deemed to be the owner, or
         to be in possession or occupation, of
         such land or building;
         Provided   that  any    lawful  transferee

                              35
          of the right to the title to such
          land of building shall be entitled to
          all the rights this Act of his
          transferor.
    Section 64 pre-supposes that a person is
entitled to ownership or possession or occupancy
of  any   land   immediately   before  the  notified
date.   In  case   of  temporary   dispossession  or
deprivation of his right to occupation hereafter
and he has not lost the right to recover the
possession of such a land or building shall for
the purpose of the Act be deemed to be the owner
or to be in possession or occupation of such
land or building.
    There cannot be any dispute with respect to
legal provisions in Section 64 of the Act of
1948.   It is settled proposition of law that in
case of wrongful dispossession or discontinuance
of possession of owner, possession of person who
has wrongfully taken it is deemed to be that of
the true owner, but in the instant case, the
provisions of Section 64 render no help to the
plaintiff    for  the   singular   reason  that  his
vendor is not proved to be the owner of the land

                                 36
nor has proved his occupation on the date of
abolition or that it had been discontinued in
illegal    manner,    no  such    right     of   vendor  to
remain    in   possession      has    been    established.
Plaintiff’s     vendor   was   not   having     any  right,
title or interest after the lapse of temporary
leases.     Consequently, he did not possess any
transferable      right    in    the     land.       Hence,
Pachiappan did not derive any right, title or
interest from his predecessor in the land as he
had   none.      Plaintiff    was    required     to  prove
derivative     title   in   which     he    has   miserably
failed.    It was mentioned in recital in the sale
deed   by  his   vendor   that    he   was    not  able  to
possess      land     nor     could       cultivate     it.
Apparently, the vendor of the plaintiff was not
in occupation of land.        Moreover, possession had
been taken in 1951 of entire estate by the State
Government      as   apparent       from     the    Gazette
notification,     the   land   of   the    entire   village
stood vested in the State.
     The State Government has handed over the
land to Salem Municipality and a major part of

                               37
it  has   been   given    to    the  Anna   Transport
Corporation for the purpose of the bus stand.
The High Court has observed why entire land was
not   given    to    Transport      Corporation    by
Municipality and consequently inferred in favour
of the plaintiff, only part of the land has been
given could not have been made the basis by the
High Court to derive a conclusion in favour of
the plaintiff so as to buttress the title.        The
High Court has gravely erred in recording such
an inferential finding. There was no scope to
arrive at the same.      The approach employed by
the   High   Court    is     wholly   impermissible,
unsustainable, perverse and illegal.
    Thus,   we  have   no   hesitation    in  setting
aside the judgment and decree passed by the High
Court and restoring that of the First Appellate
Court. All the three suits stand dismissed.        As
there was multiplication of various proceedings
and three suits were filed, we impose cost of
Rupees One Lakh upon the plaintiff/respondent to
be deposited with the Welfare Fund of Supreme
Court Advocate-on-Record Association within two

                           38
months and receipt be filed in the Registry.
     The appeals are allowed.
                      .........................J.
                      (ARUN MISHRA)
                      .........................J.
                      (VINEET SARAN)
NEW DELHI,
15th NOVEMBER, 2018


