                                                          1
                                                                                      REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1820 OF 2018
                            [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NOS. 9820 OF 2016]
                       R K ARORA GENERAL MANAGER & ANR.                        Appellant(s)
                                                        VERSUS
                       M/S ACE ENTERPRISES                                      Respondent(s)
                                                 J U D G M E N T
                        KURIAN, J.
                        1.  Leave granted.
                        2.  On   22.06.2011,       the   Court     of    Small   Causes,
                        Srinagar,   passed     an   order     of   injunction    in  the
                        following terms :-
                              “The   application      in    hand   will   not   be
                              allowed, there are chances that the suit
                              of the applicant will become infructuous.
                              So   in    the    interests      of   justice    the
                              application in hand is allowed and the
                              proceedings before the arbitration with
                              regard      to    matter       titled     M/s    ACE
                              Enterprises Vs. Union of India and ors is
                              stayed till the objections from the other
                              side   is    filed.      Put    up  this   file   on
                              26-07-11.”
Signature Not Verified  3.  Alleging     violation      of    the    above   order,   an
Digitally signed by
JAYANT KUMAR ARORA
Date: 2018.02.13
17:13:04 IST
Reason:
                        application    was     filed     for     initiating     contempt
                        proceedings.    The prayer reads as follows :-

                                 2
       “It is therefore prayed that the contempt
       proceedings    may   please    be   intiated   and
       the contemnors be punished according to
       law and the order of revival passed by
       the Arbitrator may please be stayed.”
4.  The Court of Small Causes treated the application
filed   by   the    respondent     as    an   application    for
contempt   without    mentioning    any    provision.     It  is
also significant to note that even the applicant had
not mentioned any provision for initiating contempt.
The   Court   passed     an  order     dated    06.11.2013    by
entering a finding that there is no contempt and that
there is no violation of the order dated 22.06.2011.
The operative portion of the order, to the extent
relevant, reads as follows :-
       “The    proceedings     of     the    arbitration
       continued by the Arbitrator, is based on
       the understanding of the Arbitrator and
       the learned counsel for the defendants as
       to the correct import of the order dated
       22-06-2011.         The    said     understanding
       arrived at, though is borne out from the
       facts and circumstances pertaining to the
       controversy,      cannot     be    construed    as
       willful    and   deliberate     attempt    on  the
       part of counsel for parties involved, to
       flout    the    order   of    the    court   dated
       22-06-2011.      The arbitration proceedings
       is an independent and statutory remedy
       available under the provisions of Jammu
       and Kashmir Arbitration Act, 2002.             The

                            3
provisions of said Act have overriding
effect over the general laws.              Exercise
of statutory remedy and proceedings under
the special act, cannot be scuttled in
ordinary course of events.             Only if the
statute   provides      for    such    exercise   of
power by the civil court, the civil court
can   enter    into      the    domain     of   such
jurisdiction, that too in limited sphere.
   The   exercise     of    jurisdiction     by  the
Arbitrator,         available         under      the
provisions       of     Jammu       and     Kashmir
Arbitration Act, advise rendered by the
learned      counsel         representing        the
defendant    in    the    court   or    before   the
Arbitrator, and proceedings initiated by
any party in exercise of statutory right,
cannot be construed as flouting of the
order of the civil court or willful or
deliberate violation of the order, unless
the   violation      is    clear,    emphatic    and
apparently willful and deliberate, aimed
at  defeating      the    order   passed     by  the
court.     From     the   nature    of   the   order
passed by the court of Sub-Judge/Judge
Small   Causes     Court,     Srinagar,    and   the
facts and circumstances pertaining to the
case, I find no flouting or violation of
the   order     dated      22.06.2011,      by   the
persons      named        in      the      contempt
application.            No     justifiable       and
sufficient ground exists for proceedings
against    the     said     named     persons    for
contempt    of    court.        Accordingly,     the
contempt proceedings are dropped against

                                4
      the said named persons.           Application is
      dismissed.     Record of application be made
      part of suit file on completion.”
5.    That   order   was   challenged     by   the   respondent
before the High Court.      The High Court has considered
the matter in extenso.       At paragraphs 11, 13 and 17,
the High Court has entered its findings as follows :-
       “11. Admittedly, the impugned order has
       been passed by the learned Sub-Judge in
       a   contempt     petition      filed     by    the
       petitioner.        The   Jammu      and   Kashmir
       Contempt of Courts Act, 1997 (Act No.
       XXV  of   1997)   (for    short,     Contempt   of
       Courts Act) was enacted to define and
       limit   the   power   of   certain     courts   in
       punishing    contempt     of    courts    and   to
       regulate    their    procedure      in   relation
       thereto.    There is no provision in this
       Act to empower a subordinate court to
       punish   contempt     of   itself.       However,
       Section 10 of the Contempt of Courts Act
       vests with the High Court the power to
       punish contempts of subordinate courts.
       It says that the High Court shall have
       and   exercise     the    same     jurisdiction,
       powers and authority in accordance with
       the   same    procedure     and   practice,     in
       respect      of     contempts        of    courts
       subordinate     to    it    as    it    has    and
       exercises    in   respect    of    contempts    of
       itself;   provided     that    the    High  Court
       shall not take congnizance of a contempt
       alleged    to    have    been     committed     in

                          5
respect    of  a    court   subordinate     to  it
where    such     contempt    is     an    offence
punishable under the Ranbir Penal Code,
1989.     Thus, the law provides that if
there     is     contempt     of      any    court
subordinate to the High Court, it is the
High Court alone which has the power to
punish for such contempt.           Essentially,
therefore,    a   court   subordinate      to  the
High   Court   cannot    take    cognizance    and
initiate     proceedings      to     punish    for
contempt    of    itself,    the    question    of
conducting trial of an application for
contempt and taking a decision thereon
is far remote.
13. Since the subordinate courts do not
have the jurisdiction to take cognizance
of   contempt      of   itself,     or    initiate
proceedings     on   a  contempt     petition   or
try it, it cannot proceed to decide it
finally.       In    the   instant     case,   the
learned    Sub-Judge     has   not    only   taken
cognizance       but     has     proceeded      to
initiate,     and     conducted,      proceedings
thereon and finally decided it.            Thereby
the   learned     Sub-Judge     has    assumed   a
jurisdiction,      not   vested    in   it   under
law.
17. During the course of arguments of
this case, the learned counsel for the
petitioner brought it to the notice of
the Court that the Arbitrator appointed
in violation of the ad-interim orders of

                                 6
       the trial court has ultimately concluded
       the   proceedings     and    passed    the   final
       award   against      the    interests     of   the
       petitioner.        Pending    decision     in  the
       contempt petition in terms of applicable
       laws,   there     shall    be   stay    of   final
       award.    It hardly needs a mention here
       that in the event it is found that there
       has   been   a   violation     of   the    interim
       order     of     the     trial      court,     the
       appointment    of    the  Arbitrator     and   the
       proceedings    conducted      by   him   together
       with any award passed by him would be
       rendered non-est in the eyes of law.”
6.  When the matter came up before this Court, the
following order was passed on 18.04.2016 :-
       “Though we do not have any quarrel with
       the settled position of law, as held by
       the High Court that the trial court does
       not  have    any   jurisdiction      to  initiate
       proceedings under the Jammu and Kashmir
       Contempt of Courts Act, 1997, we find
       that the High Court has omitted to take
       note   of  the    fact   that    there   are   two
       separate     proceedings      under     different
       contracts.
       In   that    view    of   the    matter,     issue
       notice.
       In the meantime, there shall be stay of
       further    proceedings       pursuant     to   the
       impugned order.”

                                 7
7.   Having heard Mr. Tushar Mehta, learned Additional
Solicitor General, and Mr. Abdul Rehman, representing
the  respondent     on  permission,    we   do  not  feel  it
necessary    to   refer  to   any  other   factual   details.
Though an application for contempt was filed before
the trial court, it was, in fact, a petition for
taking action under Order XXXIX Rule 2A of Jammu and
Kashmir Code of Civil Procedure Act, 1977.          It is not
a case for initiating contempt on the face of it.
These are two different jurisdictions.           That is all
that   has  been    clarified   by  the   High  Court.    The
appeal   is,   hence,   disposed   of   with   the  following
directions :-
i)     The  application    filed   by   the   respondent  for
initiating      contempt    shall    be    treated    as   an
application for taking action under Order XXXIX Rule
2A of the Jammu and Kashmir Code of Civil Procedure.
It shall be renumbered accordingly.
ii)   The trial court shall first see whether there is
any disobedience of the order of injunction and in
case the court enters a finding of disobedience, the
rest under Order XXXIX Rule 2A alone shall follow.
8.   The submission made by the appellants regarding
separate   contracts     and   pending    application   under
Section 8 of the Jammu and Kashmir Arbitration Act
etc. are open to the appellants to canvas before the

                               8
 trial court at the appropriate stage.      It will also
 be  open  to   the  respondent  to  take  all  available
 contentions before the trial court.      Being a matter
 pending since long, we direct the trial court to take
 a    decision     accordingly    on   the    application
 expeditiously and preferably within a period of three
 months from the date of receipt of a copy of this
 Judgment.
      No costs.
                                 .......................J.
                                        [ KURIAN JOSEPH ]
                                 .......................J.
                               [ MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR ]
New Delhi;
February 07, 2018.

                                     9
ITEM NO.4                  COURT NO.5                SECTION XVI -A
                 S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)      No(s).   9820/2016
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 16-12-2015
in OWP No. 377/2014 passed by the High Court Of Jammu&kashmir At
Srinagar)
R K ARORA GENERAL MANAGER & ANR.                        Petitioner(s)
                                    VERSUS
M/S ACE ENTERPRISES                                     Respondent(s)
(IA No.78069/2017-PERMISSION TO FILE ADDITIONAL DOCUMENTS and IA
No.126071/2017-PERMISSION TO APPEAR AND ARGUE IN PERSON)
Date : 07-02-2018 This matter was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :   HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KURIAN JOSEPH
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR
For Petitioner(s)     Mr.  Tushar Mehta, ASG
                      Mr.  Rahul Narayan, AOR
                      Ms.  Mala Narayan, Adv.
                      Mr.  Sushant Goel, Adv.
For Respondent(s)     Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, AOR
                      Respondent-in-person
    UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                                 O R D E R
     Leave granted.
     The   civil   appeal   is  disposed   of in  terms   of  the signed
reportable Judgment.
     Pending Interlocutory Applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(JAYANT KUMAR ARORA)                                  (MADHU NARULA)
   COURT MASTER                                         COURT MASTER
         (Signed reportable Judgment is placed on the file)


