                                                        1
                                                                            REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.(s). 2740     OF 2007
                       STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH THROUGH                        APPELLANT(s)
                       PRINCIPAL SECRETARY & ORS.
                                                         VERSUS
                       ALL U.P. CONSUMER PROTECTION BAR
                       ASSOCIATION                                          RESPONDENT(S)
                                                      WITH
                                    WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 164 OF 2002
                                                J U D G M E N T
                       INDU MALHOTRA, J:
                       (1)  The  issue  which  arises   for  consideration  in  the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
                       present civil appeal and writ petition pertains to the
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.05.18
16:42:01 IST
Reason:                paucity of infrastructure in the Consumer Fora all over
                       the country.
                       (2)  This  Court   vide  order   dated  14th  January,  2016

                                     2
constituted a three-member committee presided over by
Justice   Arijit    Pasayat    [Retired]   to   examine  various
aspects as enumerated in the Order.          The said committee
was   requested    to    forward   its   deliberations   to   the
various State Governments.
(3)   By Order dated 21st November, 2016 this Court issued
directions to the Union Government to frame Model Rules
for  the   purpose    of   ensuring   uniformity  by  the   State
Governments    in  the    exercise  of   the  rule-making   power
under    Sections    10(3)     and   16(2)   of   the   Consumer
Protection    Act,   1986.    The  directions   issued  by   this
Court are reproduced hereunder:
           “(i) The Union Government shall for
           the purpose of ensuring Uniformity in
           the exercise of the rule making power
           under Section 10(3) and Section 16(2)
           of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986
           frame model rules for adoption by the
           State Governments. The model rules
           shall be framed within four months and
           shall be submitted to this Court for
           its approval;
           (ii) The Union Government shall also
           frame within four months model rules
           prescribing       objective     norms    for
           implementing the provisions of Section
           10(1)(b), Section 16(1)(b) and Section
           20(1)(b) in regard to the appointment
           of     members     respectively     of   the
           District fora, State Commissions and
           National Commission;
           (iii) The Union government shall while
           framing the model rules have due

                         3
regard to the formulation of objective
norms for the assessment of the
ability,    knowledge      and    experience
required to be possessed by the
members of the respective fora in the
domain areas referred to in the
statutory provisions mentioned above.
The model rules shall provide for the
payment of salary, allowances and for
the conditions of service of the
members     of    the      consumer      fora
commensurate     with     the    nature    of
adjudicatory duties and the need to
attract    suitable      talent     to    the
adjudicating bodies.           These rules
shall    be     finalized        upon     due
consultation with the President of the
National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission,      within       the      period
stipulated above;
(iv)   Upon the approval of the model
rules   by    this    Court,     the    State
governments shall proceed to adopt the
model rules by framing appropriate
rules in the exercise of the rule
making powers under Section 30 of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986.
(v) The National Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission is requested to
formulate regulations under Section
30A with the previous approval of the
Central Government within a period of
three months form today in order to
effectuate the power of administrative
control    vested     in     the    National
Commission over the State Commissions
under Section 24(B)(1)(iii) and in
respect of the administrative control
of the State Commissions over the
District fora in terms of Section
24(B)(2) as explained in this Judgment
to effectively implement the objects

                                       4
            and     purposes       of     the    Consumer
            Protection Act, 1986.”
(4)   On   4th   March,    2017,    the   three-member    committee
submitted    a detailed report to the Court.
(5)   The    Union    of    India     framed   draft    rules   and
regulations which were placed for consideration before
this Court.      During the course of hearing on 07th March,
2017 a need for certain modifications to the Model Rules
was   expressed     by    the   learned     Counsel   representing
various parties.
(6)   The Union of India filed an affidavit on 22nd March,
2017 wherein the Final Draft Model Rules were framed and
annexed as Annexure-II.
(7)   In compliance with the directions issued by this
Court   on   21   November    2016   and   15  December   2017,  an
affidavit has been filed by the Union of India in April
2018. Paragraphs 9 and 10 of the affidavit are extracted
below :
                “9. It is respectfully submitted
               that there are two possible ways at
               this    juncture      of    the    Central
               Government     in    this    behalf.   One
               method is that the Rules, which have
               been     framed      by     the    Central
               Government      (in     compliance    with
               Direction 18(iv) of the judgment
               dated 21.11.16 that this Court would

                                  5
             approve the rules) and which have
             been filed alongwith the earlier
             affidavit dated 22.3.17, will be
             adopted by the State Governments by
             framing     appropriate     rules    in
             exercise of the rule making power
             under Section 30 of the Consumer
             Protection Act 1986 upon approval by
             this Court.
              10. That the other method would be
             that the Central Government, with
             the approval of this Court awaits
             the completion of the legislative
             exercise    regarding    the   proposed
             consumer bill pending before the
             Parliament and upon its completion,
             frames the rules and notifies the
             same, which would automatically be
             applicable for all State Commissions
             and    District   Forums    under   the
             Consumer     Protection    Laws.    The
             Government is open and willing to
             adopt any of the above mentioned two
             methods which may be approved by
             this Court.”
During the course of the hearing on 27 April 2018, a
consensus   has   emerged   that  the   course  suggested  in
paragraph 9 of the above affidavit should be accepted.
Counsel for the Union of India has no objection since it
is in line with the suggestion contained in paragraph 9.
The State Governments shall complete the exercise within
a period of three months. The Registrar (Judicial) is
directed to forward a copy of this order to the Chief
Secretaries    of  all   the  States/Union   Territories  for
ensuring compliance.

                                  6
Infrastructure: National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission:
(i)  Posts : Out of 204 additional posts required to be
     created according to the norms recommended by the
     Staff Inspection Unit, 51 posts have been created
     leaving a balance of 153 posts.
     We request the Union of India to consider the re-
quirement of the NCDRC for sanctioning additional posts
in the right perspective so that the efficacy of its work
is enhanced. This Court shall be apprised on the next
date of hearing of the action taken by the Union govern-
ment in that regard;
(ii) Space: The affidavit filed on behalf of the NCDRC
     indicates the dire necessity of procuring additional
     space. The filing of cases has gone up by nearly 300
     per cent, be it consumer complaints, first appeals
     or revision petitions. This Court has been apprised
     of the fact that there is no space available for
     storing the files of fresh cases, which are lying in
     the corridors. The record room of NCDRC is packed to
     its  capacity.    An  apprehension   has been  expressed
     that unless the Union Government intervenes in the
     matter   on  a   pro-active   basis,   a stage  will  be
     reached where due to space constraints, it will not
     be possible to trace out files of cases to be heard
     by the Benches. Further, due to the increased fil-
     ing,   there   is   a  need  to   constitute  additional
     Benches. In the existing infrastructure, there is
     little space for Court halls, Chambers and for the
     supporting staff. NCDRC has addressed communications
     on 20 January 2018 and 5 April 2018 to the Secre-

                                 7
     tary, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Government of
     India placing a request for the allotment of addi-
     tional space to the extent of 37,249 sq. ft. We are
     sure that the Union of India will respond to the re-
     quest of the NCDRC in the right perspective and will
     make additional space available. The dearth of space
     is seriously hampering the functioning of the NCDRC.
     We commend to the Secretary in the Ministry of Con-
     sumer Affairs the urgent necessity of taking steps,
     in that regard. We expect that this Court would be
     apprised of the decision of the Union government by
     the next date of hearing;
(iii) Salaries, honorarium and other allowances of the
President and Members of the NCDRC:
NCDRC has proposed an amendment to Rule 11 of the Con-
sumer Protection Rules 1987. The Court has been apprised,
in the affidavit dated 22 March 2017, that in compliance
with the order dated 21 November 2016, draft Consumer
Protection (Amendment) Rules 1987 have been prepared in
consultation with the NCDRC and have been referred to the
Ministry of Finance for its concurrence.
This Court shall be apprised of the status of the matter
by the next date of hearing. A status report indicating
compliance with the above directions shall be filed by
the next date of hearing.
(8)  On 27th April, 2018 this Court heard all the parties,
including the Counsel appearing for all the States. The
said   Model   Rules    were   accepted   by  the  Counsel
representing    all   the    parties   before  the  Court.

                                 8
Therefore,   it  is  directed  that  the  State   Governments
shall   frame   appropriate   rules   in  exercise    of  the
rule-making   power   under  Section   30  of   the  Consumer
protection Act, 1986 in accordance with the Final Draft
Model Rules submitted by the Union of India.
(9)   List on 28 August 2018.
                              ..........................CJI
                                               (DIPAK MISRA)
                                ..........................J
                                     (DR. D.Y. CHANDRACHUD)
                                ..........................J
                                             (INDU MALHOTRA)
New Delhi,
MAY 18, 2018.


