                                                                              NON-REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11337 OF 2017
                             [@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.15250 OF 2013]
                       ALLAHABAD BANK & ORS.                             APPELLANT(S)
                                                      VERSUS
                       ISHWAR SARAN & ORS.                               RESPONDENT(S)
                                                J U D G M E N T
                        KURIAN, J.
                             Leave granted.
                        2.   Heard   Mr.   Dhruv  Mehta,   learned  senior  counsel
                        appearing for the appellants and Mr. Jitendra Sharma,
                        learned      senior     counsel     appearing    for     the
                        respondents/employees.
                        3.   The respondents/employees of Appellant No.1 Bank
                        had approached the High Court praying for a direction
                        for   payment    of  pension  under    the  Allahabad   Bank
                        (Employees) Pension Regulation, 1995 and also family
                        pension in the case of some of the employees.
                        4.   It   is   the   contention   of  the   learned   senior
                        counsel appearing for the appellant(s)/Bank that the
                        Scheme under the 1995 Regulation is not available to
                        the respondents/employees for the main reason that
Signature Not Verified
                        there was no option exercised by them and as per the
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2017.09.16
14:45:03 IST
Reason:
                        option exercised by them under the 2010 Scheme the
                        Bank     has     sanctioned    pension     and    all    the
                                                        1

respondents/employees are in receipt of pension under
the  2010    Scheme.   According    to   the   learned   senior
counsel appearing for the respondents, it is a case
not of no option but a case of belated option and the
respondents/employees       are    receiving    pension    only
under protest.
5.   Be that as it may, we find that the High Court
has not gone into any of these aspects and several
other   contentions     available    to   both   the   parties,
apparently for the reason that the High Court chose
to rely upon two earlier orders of the High Court
dated 5.10.2005 and 18.5.2007.
6.   Having regard to the serious disputed issues in
the case and the contentions raised by the parties,
we  are   of   the  view   that   the   matter    needs  to  be
remitted to the High Court so as to enable the High
Court to consider the matter on merits.
7.   Having regard to the contentions raised by both
the parties, we make it clear that the contentions of
the  appellant     that   the  earlier    judgments    have  no
application to the facts of this case will also be
necessarily looked into by the High Court.            Since it
is an old matter and also being a pension case, we
request    the   High   Court   to    dispose    of  the   writ
petition expeditiously, preferably within six months
from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
8.   We make it clear that we have only referred to
the minimum facts and we have consciously refrained
from referring to other contentions, since this Court
feels that all the contentions available to both the
parties should be left open to be decided by the High
Court.
9.   The appeal is, accordingly, disposed of.
                                 2

 10. Pending   applications,   if  any,   shall   stand
 disposed of.
 11. There shall be no orders as to costs.
                               .......................J.
                                        [KURIAN JOSEPH]
                               .......................J.
                                         [R. BANUMATHI]
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 07, 2017.
                             3


