                                                         REPORTABLE
                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                          CIVIL APPEAL Nos.9118-9119 OF 2010
                       Surat Singh (Dead)                 ….Appellant(s)
                                           VERSUS
                       Siri Bhagwan & Ors.              …Respondent(s)
                                     JUDGMENT
                       Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
                       1.    These appeals are directed against the final
                       judgment and order dated 13.12.2006 passed by
                       the High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh
                       in Civil Regular Second Appeal No.382 of 1992
                       whereby the High Court allowed the appeal filed by
                       respondent No.1 herein, set aside the judgment
                       dated 13.11.1986 of the District Judge, Narnaul in
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2018.05.24
                       Civil Appeal No.83 of 1984 and reversed the
10:33:27 IST
Reason:
                       judgment dated 16.05.1984 of the Trial Court in
                                                                1

Civil Suit No. 315 of 1981.           By order dated
22.01.2007, the High Court also dismissed the
application    (C.M.  No.448-C     of  2007   in  RSA
No.382/1992) filed by the appellant herein for
recalling the judgment dated 13.12.2006.
2.     In order to appreciate the short issue involved
in the appeals, few relevant facts need mention
infra.
3.     One Murti Devi (since dead) and her daughter
Smt. Bholi Devi filed Civil Suit No.315/81 in the
Court of Sub-Judge, IInd Class, Rewari against one
Siri Bhagwan (respondent No.1 herein). The suit
was for a declaration that the decree obtained by
Siri Bhagwan against Murti Devi on 11.11.1980 in
Civil Suit No. 638/1980 in relation to the land
measuring 37 Kanals 14 Marlas situated at Village
Alampur, Tahsil Rewari, District Mahendergarh be
declared null and void and not binding on the
plaintiffs because it was obtained by defendant
No.1-Siri     Bhagwan     by    playing   fraud   and
                                            2

misrepresentation on the plaintiff-Murti Devi by
taking advantage of her illiteracy and poverty. The
defendant No.1-Siri Bhagwan contested the suit.
4.    The Trial Court, by judgment/decree dated
16.05.1984 in C.S. No.315 of 1981 dismissed the
suit. Felt aggrieved, the plaintiff-Murti Devi, filed
first appeal (C.A. No.83 of 1984) before the District
Judge. By Judgment/decree dated 13.11.1986, the
first Appellate Court allowed the appeal, set aside
the judgment/decree of the Trial Court and decreed
the plaintiff's suit.
5.    Felt aggrieved, defendant No. 1- Siri Bhagwan
filed Second Appeal under Section 100 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as
“the Code”) in the High Court of Punjab & Haryana
out of which these appeals arise. During the
pendency of the second appeal, the appellant
herein-Surat Singh purchased the suit land from
Murti    Devi    vide registered  sale  deed   dated
30.07.1988 for Rs.80,000/-.
                                           3

6.    The   appellant-Surat  Singh   then     filed  an
application under Order 1 Rule 10 read with Order
22 Rule 10 of the Code praying therein to become a
party      respondent     along     with        original
plaintiff/respondent No.1 in the second appeal as a
subsequent purchaser of the suit land from the
plaintiff/respondent No.1, pending litigation.
7.      By order dated 04.01.1989, Surat Singh’s
application was allowed and he was allowed to
become a party-respondent in the second appeal. In
the meantime, Murti Devi expired. Since one
daughter of Murti Devi was already on record as
plaintiff No.2 and the other daughter was on record
as proforma defendant No. 2, the Lis involved in the
appeal continued.
8.    By impugned judgment dated 13.12.2006, the
Single Judge of the High Court allowed the second
appeal, set aside the judgment/decree of the first
Appellate Court and restored that of the Trial Court,
which resulted in dismissal of the suit filed by Murti
                                            4

Devi   and    her   daughter.   Since   the impugned
judgment dated 13.12.2006 was passed without
hearing the appellant herein(respondent No.4 in the
High Court), he filed an application under Section
151 read with Order 21 Rule 21 of the Code for
recalling the judgment dated 13.12.2006. By order
dated 22.01.2007, the High Court dismissed the
application. Aggrieved by both the judgment/order
dated 13.12.2006 and 22.01.2007, the appellant
has filed these appeals by way of special leave in
this Court.
9.    Therefore, the short question, which arises for
consideration in these appeals, is whether the High
Court was justified in allowing the second appeal
filed by defendant No. 1-Siri Bhagwan (respondent
No.1 herein) and thereby was justified in dismissing
the plaintiff's suit by restoring the judgment/decree
of the Trial Court.
10.   Having heard the learned counsel for the
parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we
                                            5

are constrained to allow the appeals, set aside the
impugned judgment and remand the case to the
High Court for deciding the second appeal afresh on
merits in accordance with law.
11.  The reasons for remanding the case to the
High   Court   are   more  than   one  as   set out
hereinbelow.
12.  First, we find that the High Court allowed the
second appeal filed by respondent No. 1 herein
without hearing respondent No.4 before it, i.e.,
(appellant herein). In other words, the High Court
allowed   the  second   appeal  after  hearing  the
appellant of second appeal only and not respondent
No.4 of the second appeal, who was absent at the
time of hearing.
13.  When respondent No. 4 (appellant herein) filed
an application under Section 151 read with Order
41 Rule 21 of the Code praying for an opportunity of
hearing, his application was dismissed by the High
Court.
                                          6

14.  In our opinion, the High Court erred in
deciding the second appeal much less allowing it
without hearing the contesting respondent No.4
(appellant herein) and also erred in dismissing his
application filed under Section 151 read with Order
41 Rule 21 of the Code for rehearing of the second
appeal.
15.  Having regard to the nature of controversy
involved in the case and further in the light of the
grounds on which the application for rehearing of
the appeal was founded, the High Court should
have   granted    one  opportunity  of  hearing   to
respondent No. 4 for opposing the second appeal
and for that purpose should have restored the
second appeal for its re-hearing on merits in
accordance with law.
16.  Second and more important, this Court cannot
countenance the manner in which the High Court
decided the second appeal on merits.
                                          7

17.   We find that the judgment of the               first
Appellate Court, which was            impugned in the
second     appeal,   was    delivered   on   13.11.1986
whereas the second appeal was registered in 1992
(S.A. No.382/92) and the impugned judgment was
delivered on 13.12.2006.
18.   The High Court as it seems did not frame any
substantial question of law while admitting the
appeal as per sub-section(4) of Section 100 though
it remained pending for a long time. However, the
High Court proceeded to allow the second appeal
and while doing so framed the substantial question
of law in the concluding para of the impugned
judgment. It reads as under:
            “The substantial question of law would,
      therefore, be whether the finding of the
      learned lower appellate court terming the
      transfer on the basis of a consent decree as a
      gift in the absence of any pleadings was
      perverse or not? The question of law stands
      answered in the foregoing discussion.
            In view of this, the appeal is allowed
      and the judgment of the learned lower
      appellate court dated 13.11.1986 is set
      aside.”
                                              8

19.   In our considered opinion, the manner and the
procedure adopted by the High Court while allowing
the second appeal are against the procedure laid
down in Section 100.
20. Section 100 of the Code reads as under:
    “100. Second appeal.- (1) Save as otherwise
    expressly provided in the body of this Code or
    by any other law for the time being in force, an
    appeal shall lie to the High Court from every
    decree passed in appeal by any Court
    subordinate to the High Court, if the High
    Court is satisfied that the case involves a
    substantial question of law.
    (2) An appeal may lie under this section from
    an appellate decree passed ex parte.
    (3) In an appeal under this section, the
    memorandum of appeal shall precisely state
    the substantial question of law involved in the
    appeal.
    (4) Where the High Court is satisfied that a
    substantial question of law is involved in any
    case, it shall formulate that question.
    (5) The appeal shall be heard on the question
    so formulated and the respondent shall, at the
    hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that
    the case does not involve such question:
    Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall
    be deemed to take away or abridge the power
    of the court to hear, for reasons to be
    recorded, the appeal on any other substantial
    question of law formulated by it, if it is
    satisfied that the case involves such
    question.”
                                               9

21.   Sub-section (1) of Section 100 says that the
second appeal would be entertained by the High
Court only if the High Court is "satisfied" that the
case involves a "substantial question of law". Sub-
section (3) makes it obligatory upon the appellant to
precisely state in memo of appeal the "substantial
question of law" involved in the appeal. Sub-section
(4) provides that where the High Court is satisfied
that any substantial question of law is involved in
the case, it shall formulate that question. In other
words, once the High Court is satisfied after hearing
the appellant or his counsel, as the case may be,
that the appeal involves a substantial question of
law, it has to formulate that question and then
direct issuance of notice to the respondent of the
memo of appeal along with the question of law
framed by the High Court. Sub-section (5) provides
that the appeal shall be heard only on the question
formulated by the High Court under sub-section (4).
In other words, the jurisdiction of the High Court to
                                           10

decide the second appeal is confined only to the
question   framed     by  the   High  Court    under
sub-section(4).   The respondent, however, at the
time of hearing of the appeal is given a right under
sub-section (5) to raise an objection that the
question   framed     by  the   High  Court    under
sub-section (4) does not involve in the appeal. The
reason for giving this right to the respondent for
raising such objection at the time of hearing is
because the High Court frames the question at the
admission stage which is prior to issuance of the
notice of appeal to the respondent. In other words,
the   question  is   framed   behind  the   back  of
respondent and, therefore, sub-section(5) enables
him to raise such objection at the time of hearing
that the question framed does not arise in the
appeal.   The proviso to sub-section (5), however,
also recognizes the power of the High Court to hear
the appeal on any other substantial question of law
which was not initially framed by the High Court
                                           11

under sub-section (4). However, this power can be
exercised by the High Court only after assigning the
reasons for framing such additional question of law
at the time of hearing of the appeal.
22.   Adverting to the facts of this case at hand, we
are at a loss to understand as to how the High
Court    while  passing    a  final judgment   in  its
concluding     para  could    frame   the  substantial
question of law for the first time and simultaneously
answered the said question in appellant’s favour.
Obviously, the learned Judge must have done it by
taking recourse to sub-section (4) of Section 100 of
the Code.
23.   Here is the case where the High Court was
under a legal obligation to frame the substantial
question at the time of admission of the appeal after
hearing the appellant or/and his counsel under
sub-section (4) of Section 100 of the Code, but the
High Court did it while passing the final judgment
in its concluding para.
                                            12

24.  Such novel procedure adopted by the High
Court, in our considered opinion, is wholly contrary
to the scheme of Section 100 of the Code and
renders     the     impugned      judgment    legally
unsustainable.
25.  In our considered opinion, the High Court had
no jurisdiction to frame the substantial question at
the time of writing of its final judgment in the
appeal   except   to  the  extent   permitted  under
sub-section (5). The procedure adopted by the High
Court, apart from it being against the scheme of
Section 100 of the Code, also resulted in causing
prejudice    to   the   respondents    because   the
respondents could not object to the framing of
substantial question of law. Indeed, the respondents
could not come to know on which question of law,
the appeal was admitted for final hearing.
26.  In other words, since the High Court failed to
frame any substantial question of law under
sub-section(4) of Section 100 at the time of
                                           13

admission of the appeal, the respondents could not
come to know on which question of law, the appeal
was admitted for hearing.
27.   It cannot be disputed that sub-section (5) gives
the   respondents    a  right   to know    on   which
substantial   question   of   law, the   appeal   was
admitted for final hearing. Sub-section (5) enables
the respondents to raise an objection at the time of
final hearing that the question of law framed at the
instance of the appellant does not really arise in the
case.
28.   Yet, the other reason is that the respondents
are only required to reply while opposing the second
appeal to the question formulated by the High Court
under sub-section (4) and not beyond that. If the
question of law is not framed under sub-section (4)
at the time of admission or before the final hearing
of the appeal, there remains nothing for the
respondent to oppose the second appeal at the time
of hearing.   In this situation, the High Court will
                                           14

have no jurisdiction to decide such second appeal
finally for want of any substantial question(s) of law.
29.   The scheme of Section 100 is that once the
High Court is satisfied that the appeal involves a
substantial question of law, such question shall
have to be framed under sub-section(4) of Section
100.     It is the framing of the question which
empowers the High Court to finally decide the
appeal in accordance with the procedure prescribed
under sub-section (5).       Both the requirements
prescribed in sub-sections (4) and (5) are, therefore,
mandatory and have to be followed in the manner
prescribed therein. Indeed, as mentioned supra, the
jurisdiction to decide the second appeal finally
arises only after the substantial question of law is
framed under sub-section (4).    There may be a case
and indeed there are cases where even after framing
a substantial question of law, the same can be
answered against the appellant.       It is, however,
                                            15

done only after hearing the respondents under
sub-section (5).
30.   If, however, the High Court is satisfied after
hearing the appellant at the time of admission that
the appeal does not involve any substantial question
of law, then such appeal is liable to be dismissed in
limine without any notice to the respondents after
recording a finding in the dismissal order that the
appeal does not involve any substantial question of
law within the meaning of sub-section (4).       It is
needless to say that for passing such order in
limine, the High Court is required to assign the
reasons in support of its conclusion.
31.   It is, however, of no significance, whether the
respondent has appeared at the time of final hearing
of the appeal or not. The High Court, in any case,
has to proceed in accordance with the procedure
prescribed under Section 100 while disposing of the
appeal, whether in limine or at the final hearing
stage.
                                            16

32.   It is a settled principle of rule of interpretation
that whenever a statute requires a particular act to
be done in a particular manner then such act has to
be done in that manner only and in no other
manner. (See- Interpretation of Statutes by G.P.
Singh, IXth Edition page 347 and Baru Ram vs.
Parsanni (Smt.), AIR 1959 SC 93).
33.   The aforesaid principle applies to the case at
hand because, as discussed above, the High Court
failed to follow the procedure prescribed under
Section 100 of the Code while allowing the second
appeal and thus committed a jurisdictional error
calling   for  interference   by   this  Court    in  the
impugned judgment.
34.   While construing Section 100, this Court in
the case of Santosh Hazari vs. Purushottam
Tiwari (Deceased) by L.Rs., (2001) 3 SCC 179
succinctly explained the scope, the jurisdiction and
what constitutes a substantial questions of law
under Section 100 of the Code.
                                               17

35.   It is, therefore, the duty of the High Court to
always keep in mind the law laid down in Santosh
Hazari (supra) while formulating the question and
deciding the second appeal.
36.   In the light of the foregoing discussion, we
cannot sustain the impugned judgment which, in
our view, does not conform to the requirements of
Section 100 of the Code and hence calls for
interference in this appeal.
37.   The appeals thus deserve to be allowed. They
are accordingly allowed. The impugned judgment is
set aside. The case is remanded to the High Court
for deciding the second appeal afresh on merits. The
High Court will now frame proper substantial
question(s) of law after hearing the appellant and if
it finds that any substantial question(s) of law arises
in the case, it will formulate such question(s) and
accordingly hear the appeal on the question(s)
framed finally in accordance with law.
                                             18

38.  We, however, make it clear that we have not
applied our mind to the merits of the controversy
involved in the appeals, but only formed an opinion
to remand the case due to the infirmity noticed in
the manner in which the second appeal was
decided. The High Court will, therefore, decide the
second    appeal    uninfluenced     by     any      of     our
observations made in this order.
39.  Since the matter is quite old, we request the
High    Court    to    decide   the     second         appeal
expeditiously preferable within six months from the
date of receipt of this judgment.
                       ………...................................J.
                            [R.K. AGRAWAL]
                      …...……..................................J.
                        [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
New Delhi;
February 19, 2018
                                                 19


