                                                              REPORTABLE
                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3149 OF 2019
        [Arising out of Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 10663 of 2016]
 P. Bandopadhya & Ors.                                     …Appellants
                                        Versus
 Union of India & Ors.                                  …Respondents
                                     JUDGMENT
 INDU MALHOTRA, J.
             Leave granted.
 1. The present Civil Appeal arises out of S.L.P. (C) No. 4652 of 2018
           wherein the impugned Judgment and Order dated January 13,
           2016 passed by the Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No. 2704 of
           2005 has been challenged.
 2. The facts relevant for the present Civil Appeal, are briefly set out
Signature Not Verified
           below:
Digitally signed by
INDU MARWAH
Date: 2019.03.16
12:32:38 IST
Reason:
                                           1

2.1. The Appellants were erstwhile employees in the Overseas
     Communications Service [“OCS”], a Department of the
     Government of India. On April 1, 1986 the OCS was converted
     into a Government Company known as the Videsh Sanchar
     Nigam Limited [“VSNL”]. Initially, all employees of the
     erstwhile OCS were transferred en masse to Respondent No. 4
     – VSNL (now known as Tata Communications Limited), where
     they worked on deputation from April 1, 1986 to January 1,
     1990.
2.2. On July 5, 1989 the Department of Pension and Pension
     Welfare   of  the    Government     of    India   issued    Office
     Memorandum      No.    4/18/87­P      &     P.W.    (D)   [“Office
     Memorandum”]      specifying    the    terms    and     conditions
     governing the pensionary benefits of employees who were
     transferred en masse on the conversion of a Government
     Department into a Central Public Sector Undertaking or
     Autonomous Body.
           The relevant extract of the Office Memorandum is set
     out hereinbelow for ready reference:
                               2

          “…The following terms and conditions will be applicable in
          the case of en masse transfer of employees:
          (a) The permanent Government servants shall have an
              option to retain the pensionary benefit available to them
              under the Government rules or be governed by the rules
              of the Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body. This
              option shall also be available to the quasi permanent and
              temporary employees after they have been confirmed in
              the Public Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body.
          (b) The Government servants who opt to be governed by the
              pensionary benefits available under the Government,
              shall at the time of their retirement, be entitled to
              pension, etc., in accordance with the Central Government
              rules in force at that time.
          (c) The permanent Government servants with less than 10
              years’ service, quasi permanent employees and
              temporary employees who opt for the rules of the Public
              Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body shall be entitled to
              an amount equal to Provident Fund contribution for the
              period of their service under the Government up to the
              date of permanent absorption in the PSU/Autonomous
              Body with simple interest at 6% per annum as opening
              balance in their CPF account with the Public Sector
              Undertaking/Autonomous Body…”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
2.3. In pursuance of the Office Memorandum, Notice dated
     December 11, 1989 was issued by Respondent No. 4 – VSNL
     giving the erstwhile employees of OCS the option to either be
     absorbed in the regular service of VSNL; or, be transferred to
     the Surplus Staff Cell of the Central Government for
     employment against possible vacancies available in other
     Government offices.
                                       3

            The Appellants voluntarily exercised the option to be
     absorbed into the regular service of VSNL with effect from
     January 2, 1990.
2.4. Thereafter, a Staff Notice dated February 21, 1990 was issued
     by Respondent No. 4 – VSNL to its employees, who were
     earlier working in OCS. The employees were called upon to
     exercise their option in terms of Clause (a) of the Office
     Memorandum, i.e. either to retain the pensionary benefits
     available under the Government of India at the time of
     retirement as per the applicable Central Government rules in
     force, or opt to be governed by the rules of Respondent No. 4 –
     VSNL.
            The format in which the option was to be indicated was
     enclosed with the Staff Notice, along with a document titled
     “Clarificatory Information to Facilitate Exercise of Option”. As
     per paragraph I (1) (ii) of the clarificatory document, the
     eligibility of employees who chose to retain pensionary
     benefits under the Central Government was conditional on
     putting in a minimum of ten years of qualifying service. The
                                 4

     relevant portion of Paragraph I (1) is reproduced hereinbelow
     for ready reference:
          “I. Exercise of option in favour of retention of pensionary
          benefit under Central Government rules.
          (1) This option is open to every employee whose services
              have been transferred from Overseas Communications
              Service to Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited and who has
              been permanently absorbed in the Videsh Sanchar Nigam
              Ltd., irrespective of service rendered in the Overseas
              Communications Service. Your eligibility for benefits under
              the Pension Rules will however be conditional to :­…
             … (ii) Putting in a minimum of ten years of qualifying
                service. (9 years 9 months and above will be reckoned
                as 10 years)…”
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
2.5. The Appellants opted to retain pensionary benefits under the
     rules of the Central Government by exercising their option in
     pursuance of the Staff Notice dated February 21, 2009.
2.6. Respondent No. 4 – VSNL vide Letters dated May 22, 2003
     and June 29, 2004, sought a clarification from Respondent
     No. 3 – Ministry of Communications and Information
     Technology, Department of Telecommunications [“DOT”] as to
     whether the Appellants – P. Bandhopadhya, I.P. Singh and G.
     Palaniappan could retain the pensionary benefits in spite of
     having less than 10 years of service as on January 2, 1990.
                                     5

2.7. In response, the DOT vide Letter dated October 13, 2004
      requested VSNL to settle the cases of the Appellants in
      accordance with Clause (b) of the Office Memorandum.
2.8. Accordingly, by Letter dated November 30, 2004, Respondent
      No. 4 – VSNL informed Respondent No. 2 – Department of
      Pension and Pension Welfare, Government of India to settle
      the cases of the Appellants in accordance with Clause (b) of
      the Office Memorandum.
2.9. In supersession of the Letter dated October 13, 2004, the
      Department of Pension and Pension Welfare, Government of
      India, vide Letter dated March 24, 2005 informed Respondent
      No. 4 – VSNL that the payment of Pension to the Appellants
      would be settled in terms of the Office Memorandum. This
      was re­confirmed by Respondent No. 3 – DOT vide Letter
      dated May 30, 2005.
2.10. Accordingly, Respondent No. 2 – Department of Pension and
      Pension Welfare, Government of India informed the Appellants
      that their pension would be settled in terms of the Office
      Memorandum.
                                6

2.11. On    June   27,   2005   the   Appellants   were informed    by
      Respondent No. 4 – VSNL that they would not be eligible to
      receive Government Pension. They would, however, be eligible
      to receive benefits under Clause (c) of the Office Memorandum
      i.e. an amount equal to the Provident Fund contribution for
      the period of their service under the Government up to the
      date   of   permanent     absorption   in   the   Public  Sector
      Undertaking/Autonomous Body with 6% Simple Interest as
      opening balance in their CPF account with the Public Sector
      Undertaking/Autonomous Body.
2.12. Aggrieved    by   this   decision,  the   Appellants    made   a
      representation    before   the   Respondents     seeking  for  a
      declaration that their cases be governed by Clause (b), and
      not Clause (c) of the Office Memorandum.
2.13. The Appellants thereafter filed Writ Petition No. 2704 of 2005
      before the Bombay High Court seeking the following prayers:
           setting aside of Communication/Orders passed by the
            Respondents on March 24, 2005, May 30, 2005 and
            June 27, 2005;
                                  7

          directions to treat the cases of the Appellants as being
            governed by Clause (b), and not Clause (c) of the Office
            Memorandum.
             In effect, the Appellants were seeking directions that
      their cases be considered eligible for grant of pension by the
      Government of India.
2.14. A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court dismissed Writ
      Petition No. 2704 of 2005 on April 26, 2006 after holding that
      the case of the Appellants was covered by an earlier decision
      of a Division Bench in S.V. Vasaikar & Ors. v. Union of India &
      Ors. [2003 (2) Mh.L.J. 691 : 2003 (4) Bom CR 79]. The
      Judgment dated April 26, 2006 passed by the Division Bench
      was challenged by the Appellants before this Court by way of
      S.L.P. (C) No. 15862 of 2006, which was later renumbered as
      Civil Appeal No. 3059 of 2007. This Court vide Order dated
      July 14, 2011 set aside the Judgment dated April 26, 2006
      passed by the Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in
      view of the submission by the Appellants that the decision in
      S.V. Vasaikar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. [2003 (2) Mh.L.J.
      691 : 2003 (4) Bom CR 79] was not applicable to the facts of
                                 8

      their case. The matter was remanded to the High Court for
      fresh consideration on merits.
2.15. After remand, the Bombay High Court re­heard the matter,
      and passed a detailed judgment dismissing Writ Petition No.
      2704 of 2005, and held that the Appellants were not eligible
      to avail pensionary benefits under the Government of India,
      since they had served for less than 10 years on the date of
      their absorption into VSNL.
             The High Court held that on a cumulative reading of
      Clauses (a), (b), and (c) of the Office Memorandum makes it
      clear that only permanent Government servants who have
      served for more than 10 years would have the option of
      getting pensionary benefits after their absorption in Public
      Sector Undertakings.
             The case of the Appellants would be governed by Clause
      (c) of the Office Memorandum which clearly carved out the
      category of employees who had not completed 10 years of
      service. It was held that a new category which is either
      contrary to Clause (c), or renders the import of Clauses (a)
                                 9

         and (b) nugatory, cannot be created by way of judicial
         interpretation.
               The High Court held that the matter was squarely
         covered by the earlier decision of a Division Bench of the
         Bombay High Court in S.V. Vasaikar & Ors. v. Union of India
         & Ors. [2003 (2) Mh. L.J. 691 : 2003 (4) Bom CR 79].
3. Aggrieved by the Judgment and Order dated January 13, 2016
   passed by the Division Bench, the Appellants filed the present
   Special Leave Petition. Applications for Impleadment have been filed
   by 48 persons who claim to be similarly situated as the Appellants.
4. Mr. Sanjay Kumar Mishra, Advocate appeared on behalf of the
   Appellants, and sought the setting aside of the impugned Judgment
   and Order dated January 13, 2016 passed by the Division Bench.
         Mr. Vikramjit Banerjee, learned Additional Solicitor General,
   appeared on behalf of Respondent Nos. 1 – 3, and Mr. Maninder
   Singh, learned Senior Advocate, appeared on behalf of Respondent
   No. 4 – VSNL.
5. We have perused the record with the able assistance of the counsel
   for the parties. The issue which arises for our consideration in the
                                    10

   present Civil Appeal is whether the Bombay High Court was
   justified in holding that the case of the Appellants was covered by
   the earlier decision in S.V. Vasaikar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
   [2003 (2) Mh. L.J. 691 : 2003 (4) Bom CR 79], and whether they are
   entitled   to   receive  pensionary   benefits  under    the   Central
   Government.
6. SUBMISSIONS   OF  PETITIONERS
   6.1. Mr. Sanjay Kumar Mishra, Advocate, submitted that the
          Division Bench of the Bombay High Court had committed an
          error by denying pensionary benefits to the Appellants.
   6.2. It was submitted that Clause (b) of the Office Memorandum
          would govern the case of the Appellants, since they had opted
          to avail the pensionary benefits available under the Central
          Government at the time of their retirement under Clause (a) of
          the Office Memorandum.
   6.3. It was further submitted that the Office Memorandum should
          be interpreted in isolation on the basis of its plain text, and
          the Form attached with the Staff Notice dated February 21,
          1990 should not condition the said interpretation.
                                    11

   6.4. The Division Bench had erroneously interpreted the Office
        Memorandum, since Clause (a) is the controlling provision,
        and Clause (c) in no way dilutes what is provided by Clause
        (a).
              The Appellants challenged the interpretation of the
        Office Memorandum given by a co­ordinate bench in S.V.
        Vasaikar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. [2003 (2) Mh. L.J.
        691 : 2003 (4) Bom CR 79].
              According to Mr. Mishra, Clauses (c) and (d) of the Office
        Memorandum provides only the mode of payment of retiral
        benefits with respect to two different categories of employees –
        viz. employees with less than 10 years of qualifying service,
        and employees with more than 10 years of qualifying service.
7. SUBMISSIONS OF RESPONDENTS
   7.1. The counsel for the Respondents inter alia submitted that the
        issue in the present case was squarely covered by the earlier
        judgment of the Bombay High Court in S.V. Vasaikar & Ors. v.
        Union of India & Ors. [2003 (2) Mh. L.J. 691 : 2003 (4) Bom
        CR 79]. The Appellants through their Federation had
                                   12

     appeared in this case, and had not challenged this judgment
     before this Court. As a consequence, this judgment attained
     finality. It was therefore not open to the Appellants to re­
     litigate the same issue in the present Writ Petition. The
     Division Bench rightly followed the said decision while
     dismissing Writ Petition No. 2704 of 2005 by way of the
     impugned Judgment and Order dated January 13, 2016.
7.2. It was submitted on behalf of VSNL that the Office
     Memorandum categorises employees into two classes – first,
     those who have completed 10 years of qualifying service; and
     second, those who do not have 10 years of qualifying service.
     Under the Office Memorandum, while the first class of
     employees is entitled to pension under the Government of
     India, the second class is entitled to a certain sum of
     Provident Fund contribution.
7.3. The Appellants admittedly had less than 10 years of
     qualifying service. They had voluntarily exercised their option
     of getting absorbed in the regular service of VSNL. As a
     consequence, this resulted in the severance of their previous
     service with the Central Government, and they were deemed
                               13

     to have retired from Government service on January 2, 1990
     i.e. the date of their absorption with VSNL in accordance with
     Rule 37(1) of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972
     [“CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972].
            The Appellants having taken a conscious decision to opt
     for absorption in VSNL, knowing fully well that they had not
     completed 10 years of qualifying service with the Central
     Government, were not entitled to receive pensionary benefits
     as per Rule 49 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.
7.4. It was submitted that the Office Memorandum was virtually in
     conformity with Rule 49 r.w. Rule 37 of the CCS (Pension)
     Rules, 1972. In any case, the Office Memorandum cannot be
     interpreted   in   isolation,  and  has  to  be  construed  in
     consonance with the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.
            The requirement of having completed a minimum
     qualifying service of 10 years for entitlement to pensionary
     benefits under Rule 49 of the CCS (Service) Rules, 1972
     would apply to Clause (a) of the Office Memorandum.
                                 14

               The Appellants had admittedly less than the minimum
        qualifying service of 10 years, and were deemed to have
        retired from Government service, and were not entitled to
        pensionary benefits under the Central Government. On
        absorption with VSNL, they would not be entitled to pension.
8. DISCUSSION AND    ANALYSIS
   8.1. Rule 37 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 provides that a
        Government servant who is absorbed in a Corporation or
        Government Company is deemed to have retired from
        government service on the date of his/her absorption.
               The relevant extract of Rule 37 of the CCS (Pension)
        Rules, 1972 is reproduced hereinbelow:
             “37. Pension on absorption in or under a corporation,
             company or body
             (1) A Government servant who has been permitted to be
                 absorbed in a service or post in or under a Corporation or
                 Company wholly or substantially owned or controlled by
                 the Central Government or a State Government or in or
                 under a Body controlled or financed by the Central
                 Government or a State Government, shall be deemed to
                 have retired from service from the date of such absorption
                 and subject to sub­rule (3) he shall be eligible to receive
                 retirement benefits if any, from such date as may be
                 determined, in accordance with the orders of the Central
                 Government applicable to him.
             (2) …
                                       15

          (3) Where there is pension scheme in a body controlled or
              financed by the Central Government in which a
              Government servant is absorbed, he shall be entitled to
              exercise option either to count the service rendered under
              the Central Government in that body for pension or to
              receive pro rata retirement benefits for the service
              rendered under the Central Government in accordance
              with the orders issued by the Central Government.
         EXPLANATION.– Body means Autonomous Body or Statutory
         Body.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)
            The Appellants having voluntarily exercised the option
     to get absorbed in the regular service of VSNL, were deemed
     to have retired from the service of the Central Government on
     the date of their absorption i.e. January 2, 1990 as per Rule
     37(1) of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.
8.2. It is the admitted position that the Appellants had not
     completed 10 years of service on the date of their absorption
     into VSNL, i.e. when they were deemed to have retired from
     the service of the Central Government.
            To receive pensionary benefits from the Government, a
     Government servant is required to put in a minimum
     ‘qualifying service’ as defined by Rule 3(q) of the CCS
     (Pension) Rules, 1972. According to Rule 3(q), ‘qualifying
     service’ means the service rendered while on duty or
                                     16

         otherwise which shall be taken into account for the purpose
         of Pensions and Gratuities admissible under the CCS
         (Pension) Rules, 1972.
   8.3. Rule 49(2) of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 provides that a
         Government         servant    is   entitled  to   receive    pension  on
         retirement only after the completion of the qualifying service
         of 10 years.1 On the other hand, a Government servant who
         retires before completing the qualifying service of 10 years is
         entitled to service gratuity under Rule 49(1) of the CCS
         (Pension) Rules, 1972.
                 The relevant extract of Rule 49 of the CCS (Pension)
         Rules, 1972 is reproduced hereunder for ready reference:
               “49. Amount of Pension
               (1) In the case of a Government servant retiring in accordance
                   with the provisions of these rules before completing
                   qualifying service of ten years, the amount of service
                   gratuity shall be calculated at the rate of half month’s
                   emoluments for every completed six monthly period of
                   qualifying service.
               (2) (a) In the case of a Government servant retiring in
                   accordance with the provisions of these rules after
                   completing qualifying service of not less than thirty­three
                   years, the amount of pension shall be calculated at fifty
                   per cent of average emoluments, subject to a maximum of
                   four thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem.;
1 Union of India & Anr. v. Bashirbhai R. Khiliji, (2007) 6 SCC 16 : AIR 2007 SC
 1935.
                                          17

       (b) In the case of a Government servant retiring in
       accordance with the provisions of these rules before
       completing qualifying service of thirty­three years, but
       after completing qualifying service of ten years, the
       amount of pension admissible under Clause (a) and in no
       case the amount of pension shall be less than Rupees
       three hundred and seventy­five per mensem;…”
                                            (emphasis supplied)
      A conjoint reading of the statutory rules, i.e. Rule 37
with Rule 49 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, would make it
abundantly clear that the Appellants were not entitled to
pensionary benefits since admittedly they did not have the
minimum qualifying service of 10 years, to make their service
pensionable with the Central Government. On absorption in
VSNL on January 2, 1990 there was a severance of their
service with the Central Government. The Appellants would
be entitled to the retiral benefits under VSNL.
      After exercising the option to be absorbed in VSNL, the
Appellants are now estopped from seeking pensionary benefits
from the Central Government.
                            18

8.4. The Office Memorandum dated July 5, 1989 was issued by
     the Department of Pension and Pension Welfare, Government
     of India to settle the pensionary terms and conditions
     applicable in cases of en masse transfer of employees on the
     conversion of a Government Department into a Central Public
     Sector Undertaking/Autonomous Body.
     (A) Clause (a) of the Office Memorandum provided an option
         to Government servants (permanent, quasi­permanent
         and temporary) to either retain the pensionary benefits
         available to them under the Government rules or be
         governed     by     the    rules   of  the   Public  Sector
         Undertaking/Autonomous           Body.  Under  Clause   (b),
         Government servants who opt to retain pensionary
         benefits were entitled to receive pension at the time of
         their retirement “in accordance with Central Government
         rules in force at that time”.
     (B) A conjoint reading of Clauses (a) and (b) would indicate
         that the option of retaining pensionary benefits was
         available only to those Government servants who were, in
         the first place, entitled to receive pension at the time of
                                  19

    their retirement. This is evident from Clause (a) which
    provides    the   option    to  “retain”  pensionary benefits
    available under the relevant Government rules. Clauses
    (a) and (b) pre­suppose that the Government servants who
    opt to retain pensionary benefits, should be entitled to
    receive pensionary benefits under the Central Government
    rules, in the first place.
(C) Rule 37 read with Rule 49 of the CCS (Pension) Rules,
    1972 indicates that the Appellants were not entitled to
    receive Pension under the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972,
    since they had not completed 10 years of qualifying
    service.   There    was,    therefore,   no question  of the
    Appellants availing of the option of ‘retaining’ the benefits
    under Clause (a).
(D) The Division Bench has rightly held that Clause (b) of the
    Office Memorandum cannot be read in isolation, and is
    required to be read in conjunction with Clause (a). The
    entitlement to Pension under Clause (b) is qualified by the
    phrase “in accordance with the Central Government rules
    in force at that time”.
                             20

     (E) Further, Paragraph I (1) (ii) of the document titled
         “Clarificatory Information to Facilitate Exercise of Option”
         clearly stated that the eligibility to retain pensionary
         benefits under the Central Government was subject to the
         condition of putting in a minimum of 10 years as
         qualifying service.
                The Appellants were specifically informed of this
         clarification at the time of exercising their option that
         their eligibility for pensionary benefits under the CCS
         (Pension) Rules, 1972 was dependant on their fulfilling the
         minimum eligibility requirement of 10 years qualifying
         service on the day their retirement.
8.5. We find great force in the submissions made by Mr. Maninder
     Singh, Senior Advocate appearing for VSNL, and the learned
     Additional Solicitor General, that the case is squarely covered
     by the earlier decision of a Division Bench of the Bombay
     High Court in S.V. Vasaikar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
     [2003 (2) Mh. L.J. 691 : 2003 (4) Bom CR 79].
8.6. It has been rightly contended that the earlier Writ Petition No.
     5374 of 2002 was filed in a representative capacity. Petitioner
                                21

No. 3 in the said Writ Petition was the Federation of the VSNL
Employees Union, a collective body of VSNL employees. The
Federation was espousing the collective interest of the
Appellants, and other similarly situated persons before the
Division Bench. The prayers in Writ Petition No. 5374 of
2002, was recorded by the High Court in the following words:
     “3. In the second petition, i.e., Writ Petition No. 5374 of 2002,
     a prayer is made for declaring that the action of the
     respondents in not giving the petitioners and similarly
     situated employees, who had not completed ten years of
     service with the Government of India, the right to exercise
     option for retaining Government pensionary benefits on their
     absorption with VSNL is arbitrary, discriminatory and
     violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. It was,
     therefore, prayed that appropriate direction be issued to the
     Government of India that the Petitioners and similarly
     situated employees, who had not completed ten years of
     service on their date of absorption in VSNL, are entitled to
     exercise option for retaining Government pensionary benefits
     by counting their service in Government of India along with
     their service with VSNL for such benefits.”
                                                   (emphasis supplied)
      The Division Bench dismissed the Writ Petitions, and
held as follows:
     “26. Regarding the contention that employees, who had not
     completed ten years, were not allowed to exercise the option
     with regard to pensionary benefits, it may be stated that
     even when they were in the Government service, when VSNL
     was a Government Company, they were not entitled to such
     benefits. Reading the memorandum also, it becomes
     abundantly clear that the persons, who had not completed
     ten years of service with the Government, were not entitled to
                               22

                pensionary benefits. The option, which was allowed by the
                Government, and to be exercised by the employees, was in
                respect of those employees who had completed ten years or
                more of service and quasi­permanent employees and
                temporary employees, who would be entitled to such benefits
                after they would be confirmed in the Public Sector or
                Autonomous Bodies. Since the petitioners and similarly
                situated persons, who had not completed ten years of
                service, were not entitled to such benefits even under the
                Government, they cannot make grievance for pensionary
                benefits.”
                                                           (emphasis supplied)
                 The afore­said findings of the Division Bench squarely
          cover the present case of the Appellants.
    8.7. The decision in S.V. Vasaikar & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.
          [2003 (2) Mh. L.J. 691 : 2003 (4) Bom CR 79] was not
          challenged before the Supreme Court, and has since attained
          finality. Therefore, the relief sought by the Appellants before
          the High Court was barred by the principle of res judicata.
                 Reference      can    be     made    to   the    decision   of the
          Constitution Bench in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering
          Officers’ Association v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.2 wherein
          Sharma, J., on behalf of the five­judge bench, held:
                “35…It is well established that the principles of res judicata
                are applicable to writ petitions. The relief prayed for on
                behalf of the petitioner in the present case is the same as he
2 (1990) 2 SCC 715 : AIR 1990 SC 1607.
                                           23

               would have, in the event of his success, obtained in the
               earlier writ petition before the High Court. The petitioner in
               reply contended that since the special leave petition before
               this Court was dismissed in limine without giving any
               reason, the order cannot be relied upon for a plea of res
               judicata. The answer is that it is not the order of this Court
               dismissing the special leave petition which is being relied
               upon; the plea of res judicata has been pressed on the basis
               of the High Court’s judgment which became final after the
               dismissal of the special leave petition. In similar situation a
               Constitution Bench of this Court in Daryao v. State of UP 3
               held that where the High Court dismisses a writ petition
               under Article 226 of the Constitution after hearing the matter
               on the merits, a subsequent petition in the Supreme Court
               under Article 32 on the same facts and for the same reliefs
               filed by the same parties will be barred by the general
               principle of res judicata. The binding character of judgments
               of courts of competent jurisdiction is in essence a part of the
               rule of law on which the administration of justice, so much
               emphasised by the Constitution, is founded and a judgment
               of the High Court under Article 226 passed after a hearing on
               the merits must bind the parties till set aside in appeal as
               provided by the Constitution and cannot be permitted to be
               circumvented by a petition under Article 32…”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
                 Albeit the decision of the Constitution Bench was in the
          context of a Writ Petition filed under Article 32, it would apply
          with greater force to bar a Writ Petition filed under Article
          226, like the one filed by the present Appellants, by the
          operation of the principle of res judicata.
3 (1962) 1 SCR 574 : AIR 1961 SC 1457.
                                          24

   8.8. The Appellants were not entitled to receive pensionary
         benefits either under the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 or under
         Clauses (a) and (b) of the Office Memorandum.
                The case of the Appellants being Government servants
         prior to their absorption in VSNL, with less than 10 years of
         qualifying service, would be squarely covered by Clause (c) of
         the Office Memorandum. Under Clause (c), they would be
         entitled to receive an amount equal to the Provident Fund
         contribution for the period of their service under the
         Government, upto the date of their permanent absorption
         along with Simple Interest at 6% per annum as the opening
         balance in their CPF account with the Public Sector
         Undertaking/Autonomous Body.
9. In view of the aforesaid findings, the present Civil Appeal is
   dismissed. The impugned Judgment and Order dated January 13,
   2016 passed by the Bombay High Court in Writ Petition No. 2704 of
   2005 is affirmed.
10.   The Applications for Impleadment filed in the Appeal are disposed
   of in terms of the present judgment. Any other pending I.A.s are
   disposed of.
                                    25

       Ordered accordingly.
                               …..……...........................J.
                                    (UDAY UMESH LALIT)
                               ..….……..........................J.
                                       (INDU MALHOTRA)
New Delhi
March 15, 2019.
                            26


