                                                                                               REPORTABLE
                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO(S). 961 OF 2018
                                   [ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRL.) NO. 3712 OF 2018]
                       DR. SR. TESSY JOSE AND OTHERS                                   .....APPELLANT(S)
                                                    VERSUS
                       STATE OF KERALA                                             .....RESPONDENT(S)
                                                       JUDGMENT
                       A.K.SIKRI, J.
                                     After hearing this matter on 1st August, 2018, following order
                       was passed:
                                             “Leave granted.
                                             We have heard the arguments.
                                             We are informed that the trial is in progress today
                                     before the trial court. Since, there is not enough time to
                                     dictate the judgment, we are allowing this appeal so that
                                     the decision is conveyed to the trial court.             Reasons to
                                     follow.
                                             A copy of this order may be provided to the counsel
Signature Not Verified
                                     for the parties.”
Digitally signed by
SUSHIL KUMAR
RAKHEJA
Date: 2018.08.07
16:59:57 IST
Reason:
                       Criminal Appeal No. 961 of 2018 [@SLP(Crl.) No. 3712 of 2018]                Page 1 of 8

2.     We are now stating our reasons which led us to allow the appeal
       of the appellants.
3.     First Information Report under the provisions of Protection of
       Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (For short, POCSO Act)
       has been registered in which charge sheet has been filed and the
       case registered as Sessions Case No. 460 of 2017 is pending
       before the Special Judge, Ernakulam. The appellants herein are
       arrayed as accused nos. 3, 4 and 5. Insofar as the appellants are
       concerned, allegations against them are under Sections 201 read
       with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code (for short, ‘IPC’),
       Section 19(1) read with Section 21(1) of POCSO Act and Section
       75 of the Juvenile Justice Act.
4.     The case of the prosecution, in brief, is that accused no. 1 had
       raped the victim when she was a minor in the year 2016. As a
       result, she became pregnant. As per victim’s mother, when the
       victim started complaining about pain in her stomach, thinking it
       to be some problem related to stomach, she brought her to the
       hospital where the appellants were working, on 7 th February,
       2017.     It was found that the victim was in advance stage of
       pregnancy. In fact, soon after she was brought to the hospital,
       she went into labour. She delivered the child. Insofar as the
Criminal Appeal No. 961 of 2018 [@SLP(Crl.) No. 3712 of 2018]  Page 2 of 8

       appellants are concerned, their role is that they attended to the
       victim.     Appellant no. 1 is a 66 years’ old lady who is a
       Gynecologist and had conducted the delivery. Appellant no. 2 is
       a Paediatrician who had attended to the baby of the victim after
       the delivery.        Appellant no. 3, is a 69 years’ old Hospital
       Administrative. She is roped-in in that capacity though she did
       not attend to the victim or the baby.
5.     It is not the case of the prosecution that these appellants had any
       knowledge about the alleged rape of the victim allegedly
       committed by accused No. 1 at any time earlier. In fact, they did
       not come into picture before 7 th February, 2017 when the victim
       was brought to the hospital. However, the charge against these
       appellants is primarily on account of purported commission of an
       act under Sections 19(1) of POCSO Act. This Section reads as
       under:
              “Section 19 (I) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
              Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, any person (including
              the child), who has apprehension that an offence under this
              Act is likely to be committed or has knowledge that such an
              offence has been committed, he shall provide such
              information to—
                      (a) the Special Juvenile Police Unit; or
                      (b) the local police.
              (2) Every report given under sub-section(I) shall be--
                      (a) ascribed an entry number and recorded in writing;
                      (b) be read over to the informant;
Criminal Appeal No. 961 of 2018 [@SLP(Crl.) No. 3712 of 2018]          Page 3 of 8

                      (c) shall be entered in a book to be kept by the
                          Police Unit.
              (3) Where the report under sub-section (I) is given by a
              child, the same shall be recorded under Section (2) in a
              simple language so that the child understands contents
              being recorded.
              (4) In case contents are being recorded in the language not
              understood by the child or wherever it is deemed
              necessary, a translator or an interpreter, having such
              qualifications, experience and on payment of such fees as
              may be prescribed, shall be provided to the child if he fails
              to understand the same.
              (5) Where the Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police is
              satisfied that the child against whom an offence has been
              committed is in need of care and protection. then, it shall,
              after recording the reasons in writing make immediate
              arrangement to give him such care and protection
              (including admitting the child into shelter home or to the
              nearest hospital) within twenty-four hours of the report, as
              may be prescribed.
              (6) The Special Juvenile Police Unit or local police shall,
              without unnecessary delay but within a period of twenty-
              four hours, report the matter to the Child Welfare
              Committee and the Special Court or where no Special
              Court has been designated, to the Court of Session,
              including need of the child for care and protection and
              steps taken in this regard.
              (7) No person shall incur any liability, whether civil or
              criminal, for giving the information in good faith for the
              purpose of sub-section (1).”
6.     As is clear from the aforesaid provision, a person who had an
       apprehension that an offence under the said Act is likely to be
       committed or has knowledge that such an offence had been
       committed would be required to provide such information to the
       relevant authorities.
Criminal Appeal No. 961 of 2018 [@SLP(Crl.) No. 3712 of 2018]          Page 4 of 8

7.     Thus, what is alleged against the appellants is that they had the
       knowledge that an offence under the Act had been committed
       and, therefore, they were required to provide this information to
       the relevant authorities which they failed to do.
8.     After going through the record and hearing the counsel for the
       parties, we are of the opinion that no such case is made out even
       as per the material collected by the prosecution and filed in the
       Court. The statement of the mother of the victim was recorded by
       the police. The statement of the victim was also recorded. They
       have not stated at all that when the victim was brought to the
       hospital, her mother informed the appellants that she had been
       raped by the accused no. 1 when she was a minor. Admittedly,
       the victim was pregnant and immediately went into labour. In
       these circumstances, it was even the professional duty of
       Appellant No. 1 to attend to her and conduct the delivery, which
       she did. Likewise, after the baby was born, the Appellant No. 2
       as a Paediatrician performed her professional duty.
9.     The entire case set up against the appellants is on the basis that
       when the victim was brought to the hospital her age was recorded
       as 18 years. On that basis appellants could have gathered that at
       the time of conception she was less than 18 years and was, thus,
Criminal Appeal No. 961 of 2018 [@SLP(Crl.) No. 3712 of 2018]   Page 5 of 8

       a minor and, therefore, the appellants should have taken due
       care in finding as to how the victim became pregnant. Fastening
       the criminal liability on the basis of the aforesaid allegation is too
       far fetched. The provisions of Section 19(1), reproduced above,
       put a legal obligation on a person to inform the relevant
       authorities, inter alia, when he/she has knowledge that an offence
       under the Act had been committed.                   The expression used is
       “knowledge” which means that some information received by
       such a person gives him/her knowledge about the commission of
       the crime. There is no obligation on this person to investigate
       and gather knowledge. If at all, the appellants were not careful
       enough to find the cause of pregnancy as the victim was only 18
       years of age at the time of delivery.                  But that would not be
       translated into criminality.
10.    The term “knowledge”has been interpreted by this Court in AS
       Krishnan and Others v. State of Kerala 1 to mean an awareness
       on the part of the person concerned indicating his state of mind.
       Further, a person can be supposed to know only where there is a
       direct appeal to his senses. We have gone through the medical
       records of the victim which were referred by Mr. Basant R., Senior
       Advocate for the appellants. The medical records, which are
1  (2004) 11 SCC 576
Criminal Appeal No. 961 of 2018 [@SLP(Crl.) No. 3712 of 2018]               Page 6 of 8

       relied upon by the prosecution, only show that the victim was
       admitted in the hospital at 9.15 am and she immediately went into
       labour and at 9.25 am she gave birth to a baby.          Therefore,
       appellant no. 1 attended to the victim for the first time between
       9.15 am and 9.25 am on 7th February, 2017. The medical records
       of the victim state that she was 18 years’ old as on 7 th February,
       2017. Appellant no. 1 did not know that the victim was a minor
       when she had sexual intercourse.
11.    Appellant no. 2 had not even examined the victim and was not in
       contact with the victim. As per the medical records relied upon by
       the prosecution, the baby was attended to by appellant no. 2 at
       5.30 pm on 7th February, 2017. He advised that the baby be
       given to the mother. Therefore, appellant no. 2 had no occasion
       to examine/treat the victim.
12.    Appellant no. 3 had not come in contact with the victim or the
       baby at all. Being the administrator of the hospital it was not
       possible for her to be aware of the details of each patient.
       Considering that the victim was brought to the said hospital for
       the first time on 7th February, 2017, it would not be possible for
       appellant no. 3 to be aware of the circumstances surrounding the
       admission of the victim.
Criminal Appeal No. 961 of 2018 [@SLP(Crl.) No. 3712 of 2018]     Page 7 of 8

13.    The knowledge requirement foisted on the appellants cannot be
       that they ought to have deduced from circumstances that an
       offence has been committed.
14.    Accordingly, we are of the view that there is no evidence to
       implicate the appellants. Evidence should be such which should
       at least indicate grave suspicion. Mere likelihood of suspicion
       cannot be the reason to charge a person for an offence.
       Accordingly, these appeals are allowed and the proceedings
       against the appellants in the aforesaid Sessions Case No. 460 of
       2017 are hereby quashed.
                                                     .............................................J.
                                                                                 (A.K. SIKRI)
                                                     .............................................J.
                                                                   (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 01, 2018.
Criminal Appeal No. 961 of 2018 [@SLP(Crl.) No. 3712 of 2018]                          Page 8 of 8


