                              1
                                         NON-REPORTABLE
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1018 OF 2010
STATE OF RAJASTHAN                         … APPELLANT
                          VERSUS
Mst. GANWARA                               … RESPONDENT
                        JUDGMENT
N.V. RAMANA, J.
         This appeal by special leave is directed against the
impugned judgment dated 3rd November, 2009 passed by the
High Court of Rajasthan at Jodhpur in D.B. Criminal Appeal
No. 186/1985 whereby the High Court allowed the appeal
filed by the respondent herein and set aside the order of
conviction and sentence passed by the learned Sessions
Judge, Bikaner against the respondent for the offence
punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code
(“IPC” for short).

                                2
2.        The facts of the case in a nutshell are that upon
receiving a telephonic call from P.B.M. Hospital on 5 th
September, 1982 at about 1.45 p.m. PW14 — Jagdishlal,
D.S.P. (Probationary) of P.S. Nava Shehar, Bikaner visited
the hospital where he found Shanti alias Nylon in a
completely burnt condition. In her statement to PW14, she
alleged    that   her  mother-in-law—Ganwara       (respondent
herein) had cruel intention against her for not satisfying her
with undue demands of dowry. For this reason, with an evil
intention to get rid of her, Ganwara had burnt her alive on
pouring kerosene and lighting a match stick. On raising
screams, the neighbouring people rushed to the spot,
extinguished the flames and admitted her in the hospital.
Having recorded her statement, PW14 has registered the
criminal case under Section 307, IPC against the respondent
and    visited   the  place  of   occurrence,   prepared   spot
panchnama (Ext. P26) and site map (Ext. P2). Pieces of
burnt clothes (Ext. P5) and a lantern were recovered from
the spot (Ext.P3). Meanwhile, learned Magistrate has
recorded dying declaration (Ext. P11) of the injured. As the
victim   has    succumbed    to  the  burnt   injuries  on   7 th

                                3
September, 1982, charge under Section 302, IPC was also
added to the case and the case was committed to the
sessions. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be
tried.
3.       In its effort to prove the case against the accused,
prosecution has examined as many as 16 witnesses,
whereas the accused—respondent produced three witnesses
in her defence. The learned trial Judge in the end formed the
opinion   that   the   accused was    guilty of   intentionally
murdering the victim. Accordingly, she was convicted for the
offence punishable under Section 302, IPC for which a
sentence of life imprisonment with payment of fine of Rs.50,
was awarded by the trial Court.
4.       The aggrieved accused Ganwara carried the matter
in appeal before the High Court. On reappreciation of
evidence   on   record,   the   High  Court   disbelieved  the
prosecution story and came to the conclusion that under the
circumstances of the case, it would be unsafe to confirm the
guilt against the accused basing on the dying declaration.

                                 4
The High Court, accordingly, allowed the appeal and
acquitted the accused of the charge. The State of Rajasthan
is, therefore, before this Court in appeal challenging the
judgment of the High Court.
5.       It is vehemently assailed by the learned State
counsel that the High Court judgment is arbitrary and
against the settled principles of law. The deceased in her
dying declaration categorically mentioned the way in which
the accused indulged in the criminal act and burnt her alive
with a clear intention to kill, owing to her undue demands of
dowry. The statement of the deceased was duly corroborated
with the testimonies of mother, brother and sister of the
deceased. The learned trial Court has passed a reasoned
judgment convicting the accused for the offence, but the
High Court in an arbitrary manner set aside the order of
conviction and sentence passed by the trial Court and
prayed for interference by this Court.
6.       Having given our anxious consideration to the facts
and circumstances of the case in the light of material on

                               5
record, we find that multiple statements (dying declarations)
were given by the deceased at different times under varying
circumstances. When the Investigating Officer, PW14—
Jagdish Lal visited the deceased at the hospital and recorded
her statement (Ext. P24) at 1.45 p.m. on 5.9.1982, she told
the I.O. that she was burnt by her mother in law
(respondent) for not meeting her demands of dowry. It was
the neighbouring public who upon hearing her hue and cry,
took her to the hospital. The said statement was given by the
deceased in the presence of one advocate namely Mr.
Purushottam Vyas, her sisters and other relatives in the
hospital. PW14 has also recorded the statement of the
deceased under Section 161, Cr.P.C. (Ext. P29). It is
admitted by PW14—I.O. in the cross examination that before
recording the statements of the deceased (Ext. P24 and P29),
he had not verified from the Doctor, the fitness or otherwise
of the deceased to make statement.
7.       However, the record clearly shows that after two
hours of recording Ext. P24 by PW14, learned Magistrate
has also recorded a dying declaration of the deceased, duly

                               6
obtaining fitness certificate from the Doctor. Whereas, in
that statement given to the learned Magistrate (Ext. P11) at
3.40 p.m. on the date of incident, the deceased did not
mention about the demand of dowry by her mother in law
but specifically told that it was her mother-in-law who
admitted her in the hospital.
8.       It is well settled and needs no reiteration at our
hands that dying declaration can form the sole basis for
conviction. At the same time, it is not the plurality of the
dying declarations that adds weight to the prosecution case,
but their qualitative worth is what matters. The settled legal
principle is that dying declaration should be free from
slightest of doubt and shall be of such nature as to inspire
full confidence of the Court in its truthfulness and
correctness. The Court must exercise great caution while
considering the weight to be given to a dying declaration,
particularly when there are more than one dying declaration.
9.       The accused—respondent in her statement under
Section 313, Cr.P.C. deposed that at the time of incident,

                               7
she was not present at the home as she has gone to Gopalji
temple as per her daily routine and while returning from
temple,   somebody     informed   her  about    the  incident.
Immediately, she rushed to home, called her brother
Lalchand for help and took her daughter-in-law to hospital
in a tempo and admitted her in the hospital. When she was
sitting aside the victim in the hospital, the family members
of the deceased along with advocate Mr. Purushottam
arrived there and asked her to go and sit in verandah. While
she was outside the room of the deceased, the advocate and
family members instigated and tutored the deceased to
depose against the accused.
10.            The intrinsic worth and reliability of dying
declaration can generally be judged from its tenor and
contents themselves. Here in the case on hand, the so called
dying declarations recorded at the behest of the deceased
create huge doubt on their veracity inasmuch as there was
contradictory variance as to the facts of presence of the
accused at the scene of offence at the time of incident,
bringing the victim to the hospital and impact of the

                                8
presence and provocation of relatives and advocate at the
time of recording of statement of the deceased. It is also
evident from the record that when PW14 made enquiries in
the vicinity, no one supported the case of prosecution that
the accused had put the deceased on fire. The I.O. (PW14)
categorically deposed that during his enquiry, he found that
at the time of incident, the accused was away from home as
she went to Gopalji temple and it was the accused who first
of all took the deceased to the hospital. It was also made
clear   by   PW14,   that   he    came   to   know   from   the
neighbourhood that the deceased did not want to live at her
matrimonial home and always wanted to live at her parental
home. According to him, the deceased Shanti was well built
woman with strong physique and the accused Ganwara was
weak in comparison to the body structure of deceased
Shanti. Most of the other prosecution witnesses are either
relatives  of  the   deceased    or  hearsay    witnesses  and
investigating witnesses and none of them was present at the
time of offence. In the light of foregoing, it can be said that
the allegations levelled against the respondent in the dying

                                  9
  declarations have not been corroborated by the material
  witnesses.
  11.            Taking stock of the facts and circumstances of
  the case, in our view, the High Court has rightly felt that the
  dying declaration in the case on hand did not inspire
  confidence so as to award conviction to the accused. In this
  state of things, the Court has to give benefit of doubt to the
  accused as it is not safe to sustain the conviction as implicit
  reliance cannot be placed on the dying declaration under the
  peculiar circumstances of the case.
  12.            For all the aforesaid reasons, we uphold the
  impugned order passed by the High Court. The appeal is
  accordingly dismissed being devoid of merit.
                                     ................................................J.
                                                                 (N.V. RAMANA)
                                     ................................................J.
                                      (MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR)
New Delhi,
August 28, 2018.


