                                                    1
                                                                           REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.3792 OF 2010
                       THE KERALA ASSISTANT PUBLIC PROSECUTORS
                       ASSOCIATION                                   …..Appellant(s)
                                                 :Versus:
                       THE STATE OF KERALA AND ORS.                 ....Respondent(s)
                                              JUDGMENT
                       A.M. Khanwilkar, J.
                       1.    The appellant Association has assailed the judgment and
                       order dated 7th March, 2008 passed by the Division Bench of
                       the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulam in Writ Appeal No.514
                       of 2008, whereby the High Court rejected the claim for grant of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
                       parity to Assistant Public Prosecutors, in the matter of
DEEPAK GUGLANI
Date: 2018.05.17
15:43:57 IST
Reason:
                       retirement age, with Public Prosecutors in the State.

                             2
2.    According to the appellant, Assistant Public Prosecutors
are appointed to the Magistrate Court to conduct prosecutions
as per Section 25 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short
“the Code”).   The Public Prosecutors are also appointed to
conduct prosecutions in the Sessions Court under Section 24
of the Code. The nature of duties, functions and powers of
both Assistant Public Prosecutors and Public Prosecutors are
similar.  The   maximum     age   for   appointment   of  Public
Prosecutors, for a term of 3 years, is 60 years; whereas the age
of retirement of Assistant Public Prosecutors appointed prior
to 31st March, 2013 is 56 years. It is stated that even the age
of superannuation of judicial officers in the State of Kerala is
60 years. The Public Prosecutors as well as the Assistant
Public Prosecutors act as officers of the Court when appearing
in Court and both have an important role in the criminal
justice system. On these assertions, the appellant claims that
Assistant Public Prosecutors are also entitled to be treated at
par with Public Prosecutors and other officers whose age of
superannuation is specified at 60 years.

                              3
3.   It is stated that there are 61 Assistant Public Prosecutors
appointed     on   or after  1st  April,  2013    whose   age  of
superannuation is 60 years; whereas there are 90 Assistant
Public Prosecutors appointed prior to 31st March, 2013 whose
age of superannuation is 56 years. Thus, considering the
nature of the duties and responsibilities of Assistant Public
Prosecutors and the fact that they discharge similar duties
and functions as that of Public Prosecutors and more
particularly, the existing cadre strength of 150 Assistant
Public Prosecutors and 61 District Public Prosecutors, and
also the officers mentioned in Rule 60 (b) to (d) of the Kerala
Service Rules, whose age of superannuation has been fixed at
60 years, the age of superannuation of Assistant Public
Prosecutors appointed prior to 31st March, 2013 ought to be
brought at par to 60 years. It is alternatively contended that as
the age of superannuation of Assistant Public Prosecutors who
joined service on or after 1st April, 2013 is 60 years, the
members      of  the  appellant   Association   who   have  been
appointed prior to 31st March, 2013 and are still serving as

                              4
Assistant Public Prosecutors are willing to forego the pension
for the extra period of service which will accrue from the age of
56 years till 60 years without any demur.
4.    Per contra, the respondent State asserts that the mode of
appointment and conditions of service of Assistant Public
Prosecutors and Public Prosecutors are entirely different.
Assistant Public Prosecutors are selected as per the advice
given by the Kerala Public Service Commission according to
their merit and rules for reservation, after conducting a
competitive examination and preparation of rank list in
accordance with the rules. The Assistant Public Prosecutors
so appointed are entitled to all service benefits which are
enjoyed by any other government employee and their service
has no distinctive feature from that of other government
employees. Public Prosecutors are, however, appointed by the
Government under the Kerala Government Law Officers
(Appointment and Conditions of Service) and Conduct of
Cases Rules, 1978, from a panel of advocates furnished by
the Advocate General. The term of appointment of Public

                            5
Prosecutors is for a period of 3 years and they can be re-
appointed by the Government for a further period, subject to
eligibility. The Government is free to terminate the service of
Public Prosecutor at any time before the expiry of his normal
term of appointment without assigning any reason. Notably,
Public Prosecutors are not entitled to any service benefits
since they are not government employees. As regards the
Assistant Public Prosecutors appointed on or after 1st April,
2013, the age of superannuation is at par with the other
government employees and consequent to the introduction of
the new Contributory Pension Scheme, it is made applicable to
all appointees after the cut-off date. The Assistant Public
Prosecutors appointed on or before 31st March, 2013 are,
however, entitled to the benefit of statutory pension as in the
case     of  other  government    employees,   whose   age   of
superannuation has been fixed at 56 years. In the event, the
claim of the Assistant Public Prosecutors appointed on or
before 31st March, 2013, is to be accepted, it will create an
anomaly and also discrimination and hardship to the rest of

                             6
the government employees appointed prior to 1st April, 2013,
as they would retire at the age of 56 years.
5.    According to    the  respondents, Writ    Petition (Civil)
No.12703 of 2005, filed by the appellant was justly rejected by
the learned Single Judge on 8th June, 2006 and the Division
Bench vide impugned judgment affirmed that decision in Writ
Appeal No.514 of 2008 on 7th March, 2008. The learned Single
Judge as well as the Division Bench have noted that Public
Prosecutors are not judicial officers and more particularly, the
terms and conditions of service of Assistant Public Prosecutors
and Public Prosecutors are distinct. Further, Assistant Public
Prosecutors are governed by the service conditions as per the
Kerala Service Rules in force, which are uniformly applicable
to all government employees. The respondent State submits
that there is no infirmity in the view taken by the learned
Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court and for
which reason this appeal is devoid of merits.
6.    We have cogitated over the rival submissions and after
examining the records, we find no infirmity in the conclusion

                              7
arrived at by the High Court in rejecting the claim of the
appellant to accord parity in respect of age of superannuation
at 60 years to the Assistant Public Prosecutors appointed on
or before 31st March, 2013.      The High Court rightly opined
that the method of appointment and conditions of service of
Assistant Public Prosecutors and Public Prosecutors are
qualitatively   different. Assistant  Public   Prosecutors   are
appointed through a competitive selection process conducted
by the Kerala Public Service Commission as per the rules in
vogue. After appointment, Assistant Public Prosecutors are
entitled to all service benefits as are enjoyed by the other
government      employees    without   any   exception.    Public
Prosecutors, however, are appointed from a panel of advocates
furnished    by   the   Advocate  General   and   the   term   of
appointment of Public Prosecutors is for a period of 3 years
only. They are not considered as government employees and
do not derive any service benefits as in the case of government
employees. They can even be terminated by the Government at
any time before the expiry of normal term of appointment,
without assigning any reason. The Government is also free to

                              8
re-appoint any person appointed as Public Prosecutor for a
further period subject to eligibility. The fact that the nature of
duties and functions of Assistant Public Prosecutors and
Public Prosecutors are similar, per se, cannot be the basis to
claim parity with Public Prosecutors in respect of age of
superannuation.
7.    Reliance placed by the appellant on the factum of officers
in Kerala Judicial Service and other officers referred to in Rule
60 (b) to (d) regarding their age of superannuation at 60 years,
is also of no avail to the appellant.     The fact that Assistant
Public Prosecutors are considered as officers of the Court as in
the case of Public Prosecutors, can be no basis to equate them
with the judicial officers whose method of appointment and
conditions of service are distinct. The issue on hand cannot
be decided merely on the basis of comparison of the nature of
duties and functions of Public Prosecutors and Assistant
Public Prosecutors.
8.    As regards the disparity in the age of superannuation of
the Assistant Public Prosecutors appointed on or before 31st

                             9
March, 2013 and those who joined on or after 1st April, 2013,
the said contention is also devoid of merits inasmuch as the
conditions of service of the concerned set of Assistant Public
Prosecutors is distinct. In that, those appointed on or before
31st March, 2013 are governed by the statutory pension
scheme under the Service Rules as in the case of other
government employees; and those appointed on or after 1st
April, 2013 are governed by the new Contributory Pension
Scheme made applicable to all the government employees and
not limited to Assistant Public Prosecutors. Assistant Public
Prosecutors are only a small section of the genre of State
Government employees – be it appointed prior to 31st March,
2013 or on or after 1st April, 2013, either governed by
statutory Pension Scheme or the new Contributory Pension
Scheme, as the case may be. Be it noted, the cut-off date of 1st
April, 2013 for introducing the new Contributory Pension
Scheme by the State Government is not the subject matter of
challenge in the present case.

                             10
9.     Realising this position, an alternative plea has been
taken by the appellant Association that the members of the
appellant Association appointed on or before 31st March, 2013
and who are still serving as Assistant Public Prosecutors, if
continued till 60 years, are willing to forego their pension,
without any demur, for the extra period of service which will
accrue from the age of 56 years till 60 years. The argument,
though attractive, cannot be the basis to issue such direction
to the State Government. We agree with the respondent State
that accepting this offer would create anomaly, discrimination
and hardship to the rest of the government employees
appointed prior to 1st April, 2013 as they all will retire at the
age of 56 years. In any case, this is a policy matter. It is best
left to the State Government. It will be a different matter if the
Government accepts the offer given by the appellant on behalf
of its members. We express no opinion in that behalf.         It is
open to the appellant to make a representation to the
concerned State authority who will be free to take an
appropriate decision as may be advised and permissible in
law. We say no more.

                           11
10. This appeal, in our opinion, is devoid of merits and hence
the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
                                      .………………………….CJI.
                                     (Dipak Misra)
                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (A.M. Khanwilkar)
                                     …………………………..….J.
                                     (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
New Delhi;
May 17, 2018.


