                                                                              1
                                                                    REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.4582 OF 2019
                         (ARISING OUT OF SLP(CIVIL) NO. 30365 OF 2018)
           GANESAN REP BY ITS POWER
           AGENT G. RUKMANI GANESAN                           … APPELLANT(S)
                                             VERSUS
           THE COMMISSIONER, THE TAMIL NADU
           HINDU RELIGIOUS AND CHARITABLE
           ENDOWMENTS BOARD & ORS.                          … RESPONDENT(S)
                                        J U D G M E N T
           ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.
                       This appeal has been filed against the judgment dated
           04.12.2017          of   Madurai  Bench   of   Madras   High   Court
           dismissing the writ appeal filed by the Appellant. The
           appellant had filed the writ appeal against the judgment
           of          learned  single   Judge  dated   22.08.2014   by   which
           judgment writ petition filed by the appellant challenging
           the
Signature Not Verified
                        judgment   and   order   dated   31.07.2013    of   the
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
           Commissioner Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious Endowment Board
Date: 2019.10.26
12:23:04 IST
Reason:
           has been dismissed.

                                                                2
2.   Brief facts of the case necessary to be noticed for
deciding the appeal are: ­
      2.1 The appellant filed an application under Section
          63 of Hindu Religious endowment charitable Act,
          1959   (hereinafter     referred   to   as  Act   1959)
          claiming     his     Ambalam     right.    The    Joint
          Commissioner    of   Hindu   Religious   &  charitable
          endowment Board after holding an inquiry passed
          an order dated 21.12.2010 holding that appellant
          to be entitled for Ambalam Right and to receive
          first   respect   as   an  Ambalam   in  the   village,
          Tirupathartalu, Shiv Gangi District, Tamil Nadu.
      2.2 Two writ petitions were filed in the High Court
          challenging    the   order   dated   31.12.2010   being
          W.P.M.D.   No.   14382    of   2011   filed  by   Radha
          Krishnan   and   W.P.    No.185   of   2012  filed   by
          Madhavan. Both the writ petitions were dismissed
          by   the  High   Court    vide   its   judgment   dated
          10.01.2012. A W.P.M.D. No. 379 of 2012 was filed
          by one Laxmanan in which initially an interim

                                                          3
    order  dated    12.01.2012    was  passed.   The  third
    respondent     P.R.   Ramanathan    filed   an   appeal
    No.2007    OF    2012    against   the    order   dated
    31.12.2010    passed    by  Joint   Commissioner.   The
    appeal   filed    by   third   respondent    was  under
    Section 69 of Act, 1959. W.P.M.D. No.3379 of
    2013   was    filed    by   P.R.   Ramanathan,    third
    respondent, seeking a direction to decide his
    statutory appeal filed under Section 69 of Act
    1959. The High Court vide its judgment and order
    dated  07.03.2013     directed   the  commissioner   to
    dispose of the appeal expeditiously and in any
    case within a period of four months to the date
    of the copy of the order.
2.3 A delay condonation application dated 30.04.2013
    was filed by third respondent in his appeal no.
    2007 of 2012 praying for condonation of delay of
    266 days. The cause for delay shown was that
    third respondent was ill for 7­8 months and was
    unable  to    travel   to  Chennai   to  instruct   his
    counsel. A counter affidavit was filed by the
    appellant objecting the application filed by the

                                                            4
    third respondent for condonation of delay. In
    his counter affidavit appellant took a plea that
    Section   5   of    the    Limitation     Act   is    not
    applicable.
2.4 Learned   commissioner      passed    an   order    dated
    31.07.2013 condoning the delay of 266 days in
    filing   the   appeal.    Against    the   order    dated
    31.07.2013,    writ   petition     was   filed   by   the
    appellant   being    W.P.M.D.    No.   13804   of   2013.
    Learned   single     Judge    referring     to   certain
    provision   of    the  Act    1959   as   well   as   few
    decisions of this Court and Madras High Court
    held   that  in    appeal    proceedings    before    the
    Commissioner Section 5 of the Limitation Act is
    fully applicable and there is sufficient cause
    and the delay has rightly been condoned by the
    Commissioner. Aggrieved against the judgment of
    learned single Judge, writ appeal has been filed
    by the appellant which has been dismissed by the
    impugned judgment.
2.5 The  Division    Bench   of   the   Madras   High   Court

                                                                5
          placed  reliance   on   several   judgments   of   this
          Court and after referring to various provisions
          of the Act, 1959, held that Act 1959 does not
          exclude the applicability of the Limitation Act,
          1963. The appellant aggrieved by the Division
          Bench judgment dated 04.12.2017 has come up in
          this appeal.
3.   We have heard Shri M. Ajmal Khan, senior Advocate for
the   appellant   and   Shri   S.Nagvathu,    senior   Advocate
appearing for the third respondent, as well as learned
counsel appearing for the State.
4.   Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the
commissioner has no jurisdiction to consider application
filed under Section 5 of Limitation Act. It is submitted
that  the  commissioner   who   is   empowered  to  decide    the
appeal under Section 69 of Act 1959 is not a court. He
submits   that   Section   6(6)    defines   the   commissioner
whereas Section 6(7)     defines    the  Court, which    clearly
indicate   that  commissioner    is   not  the   court.   It   is
submitted   that   Section   5  of    the  Limitation    Act   is

                                                            6
applicable only in application filed before a Court. The
commissioner    being   not   a    Court,   there    was   no
applicability    of   Section     5    of   the    Limitation
Act.
5.   He further submits that by virtue of Section 115 of
Act 1959, the only provision of the Limitation Act which
has been made applicable is that the time requisite for
obtaining  certified  copy  of   order  or  decree  shall  be
excluded.    He   submits   that     specifically    applying
provisions of Section 12(2) of Limitation Act, indicates
that other provisions have not been made applicable to
the Act 1959. He submits that in event the limitation Act
was to be applicable to the proceeding of appeal under
1959 Act, there was no occasion of Section 115 of Act
1959. Limitation Act has been applied only to the extent
as mentioned in Section 115, other provisions are not
applicable.
6.   Learned  counsel  for   the   respondent   refuting  the
submissions of learned counsel for the appellant submits
that although Commissioner is not a Court as defined in
Act 1959, but it is a court for the purposes of Section 5

                                                                7
of the Limitation Act. Relying on Section 110, he submits
that   procedure   provided    for  hearing  of  appeal   is   as
nearly as may be in accordance with the procedure under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to the trial of suits
or the hearing of the appeals as the case may be. The
Commissioner has thus all powers of the Court for hearing
the appeal. The authorities under Act 1959 had trappings
of   the   court.   Commissioner    decide  the   appeal   in   a
judicial manner. The scheme of Act 1959 does not indicate
that   it   never  intended    to  exclude  Section  5   of   the
Limitation Act. Reliance has been placed on Section 29(2)
of the Limitation Act and it is submitted that there
being no express exclusion of Section 5 of the Limitation
Act, Section 5 of the Limitation Act is fully attracted
in hearing of an appeal by the commissioner.
7.    Learned   counsel   for  both  the  parties  have   placed
reliance on various judgments of this court which shall
be  referred to     while   considering  their  submissions    in
detail.
8.    After hearing learned counsel for both the parties
and perusal of the record, following are the questions

                                                             8
which arises for consideration in this appeal:­
    1)  Whether the Commissioner while hearing the appeal
       under Section 69 of Act, 1959, is a Court?
    2) Whether   applicability     of    Section    29(2)   of
       Limitation   Act   is   with    regard   to   different
       limitation  prescribed    for   any  suit,   appeal  or
       application to be filed only in a Court or Section
       29(2) can be pressed in service with regard to
       filing of a suit, appeal or application before
       statutory  authorities   and   tribunals   provided  in
       Special or Local Laws?
    3) Whether the Commissioner while hearing the appeal
       under  Section   69  of  Act    1959  is  entitled   to
       condone a delay in filing an appeal applying the
       provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation Act,
       1963?
    4) Whether the statutory scheme of Act 1959 indicate
       that Section 5 of Limitation Act is applicable to
       proceedings before its authorities?

                                                         9
Question No.1
9.   The above question has to be answered in reference to
the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments
Act, 1959. Both the “Commissioner” and “Court” has been
defined under the Act, 1959. The Commissioner is defined
under Section 6(6) which is to the following effect:
      “Section    6(6)    “Commissioner"    means   the
      Commissioner appointed under section 9;”
10. The Court is defined in Section 6(7) in the following
manner:
      “Section 6(7) “Court" means­ (i) in relation to
      a math or temple situated in the Presidency
      town, the Chennai City Civil Court;
      (ii) in relation to a math or temple situated
      elsewhere, the Subordinate Judge's Court having
      jurisdiction over the area in which the math or
      temple is situated, or if there is no such
      Court,   the    District    Court   having   such
      jurisdiction;
      (iii) in relation to a specific endowment
      attached to a math or temple, the Court which
      would   have   jurisdiction    as  aforesaid   in
      relation to the math or temple;
      (iv) in relation to a specific endowment
      attached to two or more maths or temples, any
      Court   which    would   have   jurisdiction   as

                                                          10
     aforesaid in relation to either or any of such
     maths or temples;”
11. Section 8 of the Act, 1959 enumerates the authorities
under the Act. Section 8 is as follows:­
     “Section 8.Authorities under the Act.­ There
     shall be the following classes of authorities
     under this Act, namely.­
         (a) The Commissioner;
         (aa)Additional Commissioner;
         (b) Joint Commissioner;
         (c) Deputy Commissioners; and
         (d) Assistant Commissioners.”
12. Section   9(1)  provides  that  the   Government   shall
appoint the Commissioner as it may think fit. Section
9(2) provides various modes of appointment to the post of
Commissioner.
13. The definition of the Court refers to the Civil Court
constituted    by   Legislature    in    the    State    for
administration of justice. The conventional definition of
the Court as mentioned in Advanced Law Lexicon by P.
Ramanatha Aiyer, Third Edition is:
     “A Court is defined in Coke on Littleton as a
     place     wherein    justice     is    judicially
     administered.    “In every Court, there must be
     at least three constituent parts­ the actor,

                                                            11
     reus and judex: the actor, or plaintiff, who
     complains or an injury done; the reus, or
     defendant,   who   is   called    upon   to   make
     satisfaction for it; and the judex, or judicial
     power, which is to examine the truth of the
     fact, and to determine the law arising upon
     that fact, and if any injury appears to have
     been done, to ascertain, and b its officers to
     apply, the remedy,” (3 Steph. Comm. 6th Ed.,
     pp.383, 385). See also 30 M. 326: 2 MLT 267,
     Court is a body in the government to which the
     public administration of justice is delegated;
     an organised body, with defined powers, meeting
     at certain times, and places, for the hearing
     and decision of causes and other matters
     brought before it, and aided in this, its
     proper business, by its proper officers, viz.,
     attorneys and counsels, to present and manage
     the business, clerks to record and attest its
     acts and decisions, and ministerial officers to
     execute its commands and secure order in its
     proceedings.”
14. The constitution of Court in this country has been
by legislative enactments. For constituting Civil Courts,
the Bengal, Agra and Assam Civil Courts Act, 1887 was
enacted  which  provided   classes  of   civil   courts   and
provided for constitution of courts of District Judges,
Sub­ordinate  Judges  and  Munsifs.  Similarly    for   civil
courts in the town of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, the
Presidency Small Causes Act, 1882 was enacted.
15. The definition of Court as contained in Section 6(7)
as noted above, thus, clearly indicates that what Act,

                                                                12
1959 refers to a Court is a civil court created in the
State.   The  scheme   of   the  Act  clearly    indicates   that
Commissioner is an authority under the Act who is to be
appointed    by   the    Government.    The    Commissioner    is
entrusted with various functions under the Act and one of
the functions entrusted to the Commissioner is hearing of
the appeal under Section 69 of the Act, 1959. In the
present case we are concerned with Section 69 which is to
the following effect:
          “Section 69.Appeal to the Commissioner.­(1)
     Any person aggrieved by any order passed by
     1
       [the   Joint     Commissioner     or    the    Deputy
     Commissioner, as the case may be], under any of
     the foregoing sections of this chapter, may
     within sixty days from the date of the
     publication of the order or of the receipt
     thereof by him as the case may be, appeal to
     the Commissioner and the Commissioner may pass
     such order thereon as he thinks fit.
                                             1
     (2)     Any    order     passed   by     [the     Joint
     Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner, as the
     case may be], in respect of which no appeal has
     been preferred within the period specified in
     sub­section      (1)    may   be   revised     by   the
     Commissioner suo motu and the Commissioner may
     call for and examine the records of the
     proceedings as to satisfy himself as to the
     regularity      of    such    proceedings     or    the
     correctness, legality or propriety of any
     decision or order passed by 1[the Joint
     Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner, as the
     case may be]. Any such order passed by the
     Commissioner in respect of an order passed by
     1
       [the   Joint     Commissioner     or    the    Deputy
     Commissioner, as the case may be], shall be

                                                        13
     deemed to have been passed by the Commissioner
     on an appeal preferred to him under sub­section
     (1).
     (3) Any order passed by the Commissioner on
     such appeal against which no suit lies to the
     Court under the next succeeding section or in
     which no suit has been instituted in the Court
     within the time specified in sub­section (1) of
     section 70 may be modified or cancelled by the
     Commissioner if the order has settled or
     modified a scheme for the administration of a
     religious institution or relates to any of the
     matters specified in section 66.”
16. Section 70 of the Act further provides that any
party aggrieved by an order of the Commissioner under
sub­section (1) or sub­section (2) of Section 69 can file
a suit in the Court against such order. Section 70 is as
follows:
         “Section 70. Suits and appeals.­ (1) Any
     party aggrieved by an order passed by the
     Commissioner"­
     (i) under sub­section (1) or sub­section (2) of
     section 69 and relating to any of the matters
     specified in section 63, section 64 or section
     67; or
     (ii) under section 63, section 64 or section 67
     read with sub­section (1)(a), 2 or (4)(a) of
     section 22 or under section 65 may, within
     ninety days from the date of the receipt of
     such order by him, institute a suit in the
     Court against such order, and the Court may
     modify or cancel such order, but it shall have
     no power to stay of order of the Commissioner
     pending the disposal of the suit.

                                                             14
      (2) Any party aggrieved by a decree of the
      Court under sub­section (1), may, within ninety
      days from the date of the decree, appeal to the
      High Court.”
17. When an appeal is provided against the order of the
Commissioner    under  Section  69  to  the   Court  which  is
defined   under   Section  6(7),  there  is   no  question  of
treating the Commissioner as a Court under the statutory
scheme of Act, 1959. We, thus, conclude that Commissioner
is not a Court within the meaning of Act, 1959.
18.  We may, however, notice a judgment of this Court in
P. Sarathy vs. State of Bank of India, (2000) 5 SCC 355.
In the above case Deputy Commissioner of Labour(Appeals)
was an authority constituted under Section 41(2) of Tamil
Nadu  Shops   and   Establishments  Act,  1947   to  hear  and
decide appeal. The appellant, an official of the State
Bank of India was removed by an order dated 11.01.1983
after   holding    regular  departmental    proceedings.   The
appellant had filed an appeal under Section 41(2) of the
Tamil  Nadu   Shops   and  Establishments   Act,   1947  which
appeal was dismissed holding that provisions of Tamil

                                                        15
Nadu   Shops  and   Establishments  Act,   1947  are  not
applicable to nationalized Banks. After the dismissal of
the said appeal the orders of Deputy Commissioner of
Labour(Appeals) dated 01.09.1987 was challenged in this
Court which too are rejected. It was thereafter appellant
instituted a regular suit in the City Civil Court where
the    question   came    for   consideration   regarding
applicability of Section 14 of Limitation Act. In the
above case in paragraph 3 the issue was noted to the
following effect:
     “3. In order to bring a suit within the period
     of limitation, the appellant claimed benefit of
     Section 14 of the Limitation Act on the ground
     that he had represented to the Local Board and,
     thereafter, filed an appeal under Section 41(2)
     of the Tamil Nadu Shops and Establishments Act,
     1947 and was, therefore, prosecuting “civil
     proceedings” in a court with due diligence. It
     is claimed that the entire period during which
     those proceedings were pending has to be
     excluded and if this is done, the suit will be
     well within limitation.”
19. In the above context, this Court in paragraphs 12 to
15 laid down following:
      “12. It will be noticed that Section 14 of the
      Limitation Act does not speak of a “civil
      court” but speaks only of a “court”. It is not
      necessary that the court spoken of in Section
      14 should be a “civil court”. Any authority or
      tribunal having the trappings of a court would

                                                           16
      be a “court”     within   the  meaning  of   this
      section.
      15. Applying the above principles in the
      instant case, we are of the opinion that the
      Deputy Commissioner of Labour (Appeals), which
      was an authority constituted under Section
      41(2)    of   the    Tamil    Nadu   Shops    and
      Establishments Act, 1947 to hear and decide
      appeals, was a “court” within the meaning of
      Section 14 of the Limitation Act and the
      proceedings pending before him were civil
      proceedings. It is not disputed that the
      appellant could file an appeal before the Local
      Board of the Bank, which was purely a
      departmental appeal. In this view of the
      matter, the entire period of time from the date
      of institution of the departmental appeal as
      also the period from the date of institution of
      the appeal under Section 41(2) before the
      Deputy Commissioner of Labour (Appeals) till it
      was dismissed will, therefore, have to be
      excluded for computing the period of limitation
      for filing the suit in question. If the entire
      period is excluded, the suit, it is not
      disputed, would be within time.”
20. There are two reasons due to which the above case is
not applicable in the present case. Firstly, in the above
case this Court was considering applicability of Section
14   of   Limitation   Act   for   excluding  time    (civil
proceeding). The present is a case where applicability of
Section 5 of the Limitation Act has to be examined. Thus,
the above judgment is distinguished. The second reason
for not relying the above judgment is three­Judge Bench

                                                            17
judgment of this Court in The Commissioner of Sales Tax,
U.P. Lucknow vs. M/s. Parson Tools and Plants, Kanpur,
(1975) 4 SCC 22. In the above case under the U.P. Sales
Tax   Act,   1948   the    appellate    authority  has   been
constituted. The question arose as to whether the period
taken   in  pursuing   the   appellate   proceedings  can  be
excluded by applying Section 14 of the Limitation Act for
purposes   of   filing   revision    before   the  Revisional
Authority under Section 10(3­B) of the U.P. Sales Tax
Act, 1948. In the above context, this Court held that
appellate   authority   and  the  Judge(Revisions)   are  not
courts, hence, Section 14 of the Limitation Act shall not
be applicable. In paragraph 9 following has been laid
down:
      “9. The above observations were quoted with
      approval by this Court in Jagannath Prasad
      case1 and it was held that a Sales Tax Officer
      under U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 was not a court
      within the meaning of Section 195 of the Code
      of Criminal Procedure although he is required
      to perform certain quasi­judicial functions.
      The decision in Jagannath Prasad case it seems,
      was not brought to the notice of the High
      Court. In view of these pronouncements of this
      Court, there is no room for argument that the
      Appellate Authority and the Judge (Revisions)
      Sales tax exercising jurisdiction under the
      Sales Tax Act, are “courts”. They are merely
      Administrative Tribunals and “not courts”.
      Section 14, Limitation Act, therefore, does

                                                             18
      not, in terms apply to proceedings before such
      tribunals.”
21. There being three­Judge Bench judgment having held
that appellate authority under U.P. Sales Tax Act is not
a Court, we are not persuaded to follow the judgment of
two­Judge Bench in P Sarthy (supra).
Question Nos.2 and 3
22. Both the above questions being inter­connected are
taken together. The main question to be answered in this
appeal is as to; whether the Commissioner while hearing
appeal under Section 69 of the Act, 1959 is entitled to
condone the delay in filing an appeal by applying the
provision  of   Section  5  of  the   Limitation  Act,   1963?
Whether   on   the  strength   of   Section   29(2)   of   the
Limitation   Act,  1963  provisions   of  Sections  4  to   24
(inclusive of the Limitation Act) shall apply in the
proceedings of appeal before Commissioner under Section
69 of the Act, 1959? When by special or local law a
different  period   of  limitation   is  prescribed  for   any
suit,   appeal   or  application,    the   suit,  appeal    or
application contemplated under Section 29(2) are suit,

                                                             19
appeal or application in a Court or Section 29(2) shall
also cover suit, appeal or application which are to be
filed before the statutory authorities or quasi­judicial
authorities and tribunals also?
23. The Limitation Act, 1963 is an Act to consolidate
and amend the law for the limitation of suits and other
proceedings and for purposes connected therewith. The law
of Limitation before enactment of Act, 1963 was governing
by the law of limitation under Indian Limitation Act,
1908. The different provisions of Limitation Act, 1963
refers   to   ‘Court’.   Section   4   provides    where   the
prescribed period for any suit, appeal or application
expires on a day when the court is closed, the suit,
appeal or application may be instituted, preferred or
made  on  the   day  when  the  court   reopens.   Similarly,
Section 5 provides that any appeal or any application,
other than an application under any of the provisions of
Order XXI of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 may be
admitted after the prescribed period, if the appellant or
the applicant satisfies the court that he has sufficient
cause  for  not   preferring   the   appeal  or   making   the
application   within  such  period.   Section   6   refers  to

                                                               20
institution of a suit or making of application for the
execution of a decree by a minor or insane, or an idiot
who may institute the suit or make the application within
the same period after the disability has ceased.
24. Sections 9,10 and 11 refer to suit. Section 12 deals
with computation of period of limitation. The section
refers to computation of period of limitation for an
appeal  or  an  application   for  leave   to  appeal    or  for
revision or for review of a judgment, obviously was meant
for  judgment  of  a  court.   Section  13   again   refers   to
Court.  Section   14  specifically   refers    to   the   Court.
Section 14 of the Act is as follows:
          “Section    14.    Exclusion    of     time    of
      proceeding    bona    fide   in    court     without
      jurisdiction. –(1) In computing the period of
      limitation for any suit the time during which
      the plaintiff has been prosecuting with due
      diligence another civil proceeding, whether in
      a court of first instance or of the appeal or
      revision, against the defendant shall be
      excluded, where the proceeding relates to the
      same matter in issue and is prosecuted in good
      faith in a court which, from defect of
      jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature,
      is unable to entertain it.
      (2) In computing the period of limitation for
      any application, the time during which the
      applicant   has    been   prosecuting     with    due
      diligence another civil proceeding, whether in

                                                           21
      a court of first instance or of appeal or
      revision, against the same party for the same
      relief shall be excluded, where such proceeding
      is prosecuted in good faith in a count of first
      instance or of appeal or revision, against the
      same party for the same relief shall be
      excluded, where such proceeding is prosecuted
      in good faith in a court which, from defect of
      jurisdiction or other cause of a like nature,
      is unable to entertain it.
      (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in rule
      2 of Order XXIII of the Code of Civil
      Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), the provisions of
      sub­section (1) shall apply in relation to a
      fresh suit instituted on permission granted by
      the court under rule of that Order, where such
      permission is granted on the ground that the
      first suit must fail by reason of a defect in
      the jurisdiction of the court of other cause of
      a like nature.
          Explanation   ­  For  the   purpose   of  this
      section, ­
          (a) in excluding the time during which a
          former civil proceeding was pending, the
          day on which that proceeding was instituted
          and the day on which it ended shall both be
          counted;
          (b) a plaintiff or an applicant resisting
          an appeal shall be deemed to be prosecuting
          a proceeding;
          (c)misjoinder of parties or of causes of
          action shall be deemed to be a cause of a
          like nature with defect of jurisdiction.”
21.  Subsequent   Sections   16  and   17  refer   to  suits.
Sections   18 to   21 again   contain   different  provisions

                                                          22
pertaining to computation of limitation. Thereafter comes
Section 29, which is a saving provision. Section 29 is as
follows:
         “Section 29. Savings. – (1) Nothing in this
     Act, shall affect section 25 of the Indian
     Contract Act,1872.
         (2)   Where   any   special   or  local   law
     prescribes for any suit, appeal or application
     a period of limitation different from the
     period    prescribed   by   the   Schedule,   the
     provisions of section 3 shall apply as if such
     period were the period prescribed by the
     Schedule and for the purpose of determining any
     period of limitation prescribed for any sit,
     appeal or application by any special or local
     law, the provisions contained in section 5 to
     24 (inclusive shall apply only in so far, as
     and to the extent to which, they are not
     expressly excluded by such special or local
     law.
         (3) Save as otherwise provided in any law
     for the time being in force with respect to
     marriage and divorce, nothing in this Act shall
     apply to any suit or other proceeding under any
     such law.
         (4) Sections 25 and 26 and the definition
     of "easement" in section 2 shall not apply to
     cases arising in the territories to which the
     Indian Easements Act,1882 may for the time
     being extend.
22. The Schedule of the Act provides for “Periods of
Limitation”. First Division deals with different kinds of
suits.  Second   Division  deals  with  appeals  and   Third

                                                                23
Division deals with applications. The suits, appeals and
applications which have been referred to in the Schedule
obviously   mean   suits,    appeals   and   applications   to  be
filed in Court as per the provisions referred to in the
Act noted above.
23. Section    29(2)   provides    that  where    any  special  or
local law prescribes for any suit, appeal or application
a  period    of    limitation    different     from   the   period
prescribed by the Schedule, the provisions of Section 3
shall apply as if such period were the period prescribed
by the Schedule and for the purpose of determining any
period   of  limitation     and  the  provisions     contained  in
Sections 4 to 21 (inclusive) shall apply only in so far
as, and to the extent to which, they are not expressly
excluded    by   such     special    or    local    law.   Whether
prescription    of   appeal   of  limitation     of  any  suit  or
application in any special or local law relates to suit,
application or appeal to be filed in Court or it may
refer to statutory authorities and tribunals also, is the
question to be answered. Different special or local laws
have   been   enacted    by   Legislature     covering   different
subjects, different rights and liabilities, methodology

                                                             24
of establishing, determining rights and liabilities and
remedies provided therein. Special or local law may also
provide  remedy   by   institution   of   suits,   appeals  and
applications in the Courts, i.e., civil court and to its
normal  hierarchy    and  also   create    special   forum  for
determining rights and liabilities and provide remedies.
Most common example of creating statutory authorities for
determining rights, liabilities and remedies are taxing
statutes where assessing authorities have been provided
for with hierarchy of authorities. The remedy of appeal
and  revision  is  also   provided  in   the   taxing  statutes
which authorities are different from normal civil courts.
Section 29(2) in reference to different special or local
laws came for consideration before this Court in large
number of cases. This Court had occasion to consider the
provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, in reference to
different  statutes   which   contain   provisions   of  suits,
appeals         or         applications           to        the
courts/authorities/tribunals.      There     are    series   of
judgments of this Court holding that provisions of the
Limitation Act are directed only when suit, appeal or

                                                        25
application are to be filed in a Court unless there are
express provisions in a special or local law.
24. Section 29(2) also came for consideration before this
Court in several cases. There is another set of cases
where it was held that the provisions of the Limitation
Act,  1963  is  to be applied  even for suit,   appeal  or
application under special/local law is to be filed before
statutory authorities and the tribunal. We shall notice
both sets of cases to find out the ratio which need to be
applied in the present case.
25. The   first  case to  be  noticed  is  Town  Municipal
Council, Athani vs. The Presiding Officer, Labour Courts,
Hubli,(1969) 1 SCC 873. In the above case applications
under Section 33(c)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 were filed by various workmen of the appellant. The
question which was considered by this Court in the above
was as to whether Article 137 of the Schedule of the
Limitation Act, 1963 governs applications under Section
33(c)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.   Referring
to various articles of Limitation Act, 1963, this Court
laid down following:

                                                                  26
         “12…………The scope of the various articles in
      this division cannot be held to have been so
      enlarged as to include within them applications
      to bodies other than courts, such as a quasi
      judicial     tribunal,      or   even   an   executive
      authority. An Industrial Tribunal or a Labour
      Court dealing with applications or references
      under the Act are not courts and they are in no
      way governed either by the Code of Civil
      Procedure or the Code of Criminal Procedure. We
      cannot, therefore, accept the submission made
      that     this    article     will    apply    even    to
      applications made to an Industrial Tribunal or
      a Labour Court…………”
26. A three­Judge Bench of this Court in Nityananda, M.
Joshi  and    others.    vs.   Life  Insurance    Corporation    of
India and others, (1965)          2 SCC 199,    had occasion     to
consider    the   applicability      of   Article    137   of   the
Limitation    Act   to  an   application    filed  under   Section
33(c)(1) and (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
before the Labour Court. Three­Judge bench categorically
held that the scheme of the Limitation Act is that it
only deals with application to Courts, and the Labour
Court   is   not   a   Court    within   Limitation    Act,   1963.
Following was laid down in paragraph 3:
      “3. In our view Article 137 only contemplates
      applications to Courts. In the Third Division
      of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963 all
      the other applications mentioned in the various

                                                        27
     articles are applications filed in a court.
     Further Section 4 of the Limitation Act, 1963,
     provides    for   the    contingency  when   the
     prescribed period for any application expires
     on   a   holiday   and    the  only  contingency
     contemplated is “when the court is closed.”
     Again under Section 5 it is only a court which
     is enabled to admit an application after the
     prescribed period has expired if the court is
     satisfied that the applicant had sufficient
     cause for not preferring the application. It
     seems to us that the scheme of the Indian
     Limitation Act is that it only deals with
     applications to courts, and that the Labour
     Court is not a court within the Indian
     Limitation Act, 1963.”
27. Another three­Judge Bench of this Court had occasion
to consider the provisions of U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948
and the Limitation Act, 1963, in      The Commissioner of
Sales Tax Act, 1948, U.P. Lucknow vs. M/s. Parson Tools
and Plants, Kanpur, (1975) 4 SCC 22. The question which
came for consideration in the above case has been noted
in paragraph 1 which is to the following effect:
     “1. The    common     question    of   law   for
     determination in these appeals by special leave
     is: Whether Section 14(2) of the Limitation
     Act, in terms, or, in principle, can be invoked
     for excluding the time spent in prosecuting an
     application under Rule 68(6) of the U.P. Sales
     Tax Rules for setting aside the order of
     dismissal of appeal in default, under the U.P.
     Sales Tax Act, 1948 (for short, “the Sales Tax
     Act”) from computation of the period of

                                                                   28
      limitation    for   filing    a   revision   under   that
      Act?”
28. The assessee’s appeals against assessment order were
dismissed in default on 10.05.1963. The assessee made
applications    for   setting     aside    the  dismissal    order.
Revision Petitions under Section 10 of the Sales Tax Act
were filed more than 18 months after the dismissal of
the appeal. Assessee prayed for exclusion of time spent
by him in prosecuting proceedings for setting aside the
dismissal    of    appeals     in     default.    The    revisional
authority excluded the time spent by applying Section 14
of the Limitation Act. The Commissioner made a reference
to the High Court as to “Whether under the circumstances
of the case, Section 14 of the Limitation Act extended
the  period   for   filing    of   the   revisions    by  the   time
during   which    the    restoration      applications     remained
pending as being prosecuted bona fide”. The High Court
answered the reference in affirmative which judgment was
questioned   before    this   Court.     Three­Judge    Bench   held
that the appellate authority and the Judge (Revisions)
Sales­tax   exercising     jurisdiction     under   the   Sales­tax
Act  are   not   courts     and    hence,    Section   14   of   the

                                                          29
Limitation Act does not apply. Following was laid down
by this Court in paragraphs 9 and 24:
        “9……………In view of these pronouncements of
     this Court, there is no room for argument that
     the    Appellate   Authority    and   the    Judge
     (Revisions) Sales tax exercising jurisdiction
     under the Sales Tax Act, are “courts”. They are
     merely    Administrative   Tribunals   and    “not
     courts”. Section 14, Limitation Act, therefore,
     does not, in terms apply to proceedings before
     such tribunals………”
        24. For all the reasons aforesaid, we are of
     the opinion that the object, the scheme and
     language of Section 10 of the Sales Tax Act do
     not permit the invocation of Section 14(2) of
     the Limitation Act, either in terms, or in
     principle, for excluding the time spent in
     prosecuting proceedings for setting aside the
     dismissal    of   appeals    in   default,    from
     computation    of   the  period   of   limitation
     prescribed for filing a revision under the
     Sales Tax Act. Accordingly, we answer the
     question referred, in the negative.”
29. In The Kerala State Electricity Board, Trivandrum
vs. T.P. Kunhaliumma, (1976) 4 SCC 634, this Court had
occasion  to  consider  applicability  of  Article   137 of
Limitation Act, application filed under Section 16 of
the Telegraphs Act, 1885. This Court in the above case
differing with the view taken by the two­Judge Bench in
Athani’s case held that application under Article 137 of
Limitation    Act   is   not   confined   to    application

                                                                 30
contemplated   by    or   under   the    C.P.C.    However,    the
application contemplated under Telegraphs Act has to be
an  application   to   a  Court.   In   paragraphs    18   and  22
following has been laid held:
      “18. The alteration of the division as well as
      the change in the collocation of words in
      Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963
      compared   with     Article    181    of    the    1908
      Limitation     Act    shows     that     applications
      contemplated     under    Article     137    are    not
      applications confined to the Code of Civil
      Procedure. In the 1908 Limitation Act there was
      no division between applications in specified
      cases and other applications as in the 1963
      Limitation     Act.    The    words      “any    other
      application” under Article 137 cannot be said
      on the principle of ejusdem generis to be
      applications under the Civil Procedure Code
      other than those mentioned in Part I of the
      third division. Any other application under
      Article   137     would    be    petition     or    any
      application under any Act. But it has to be an
      application to a court for the reason that
      Sections 4 and 5 of the 1963 Limitation Act
      speak of expiry of prescribed period when court
      is closed and extension of prescribed period if
      applicant or the appellant satisfies the court
      that he had sufficient cause for not preferring
      the appeal or making the application during
      such period.
        22. The conclusion we reach is that Article
      137 of the 1963 Limitation Act will apply to
      any petition or application filed under any Act
      to a civil court. With respect we differ from
      the view taken by the two­judge bench of this
      Court in Athani Municipal Council case and hold
      that Article 137 of the 1963 Limitation Act is

                                                        31
      not confined to applications contemplated by or
      under the Code of Civil Procedure. The petition
      in the present case was to the District Judge
      as a court. The petition was one contemplated
      by the Telegraph Act for judicial decision. The
      petition is an application falling within the
      scope of Article 137 of the 1963 Limitation
      Act.”
30. In the above case since the application under the
Telegraphs Act was filed before the Court, this Court held
that Article 137 of the Limitation Act was applicable. It
is to be noticed that in the above mentioned cases this
Court held that applications contemplated under Limitation
Act are applications to a Court but in the above cases the
Court did not refer to Section 29(2) of the Limitation
Act.
31. A two­Judge Bench judgment of this Court in Sakuru
vs. Tanaji, 1985(3) SCC 590, needs to be noticed. In the
above case the question was as to whether delay in filing
appeal before Court under Section 19 is condonable under
Section 5 of Limitation Act, 1963. This Court held that
the  provisions  of  Limitation  Act, 1963  apply  only to
proceedings in ‘courts’ and not to appeals or applications
before bodies other than courts such as quasi­judicial
tribunals or executive authorities, notwithstanding the

                                                              32
fact that such bodies or authorities may be vested with
certain specified powers conferred on courts under the
Codes  of   Civil  or   Criminal   Procedure.  In   paragraph   3
following has been laid down:
      “3.    After    hearing    both   sides    we    have
      unhesitatingly come to the conclusion that
      there is no substance in this appeal and that
      the view taken by the Division Bench in
      Venkaiah case1 is perfectly correct and sound.
      It is well settled by the decisions of this
      Court in town Municipal Council v. Presiding
      Officer, Labour Court, Nityananda M. Joshi v.
      Life    Insurance    Corporation    of  India     and
      Sushila Devi v. Ramanandan Prasad that the
      provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 apply
      only to proceedings in “courts” and not to
      appeals or applications before bodies other
      than courts such as quasi­judicial tribunals or
      executive authorities, notwithstanding the fact
      that such bodies or authorities may be vested
      with certain specified powers conferred on
      courts under the Codes of Civil or Criminal
      Procedure. The Collector before whom the appeal
      was preferred by the appellant herein under
      Section 90 of the Act not being a court, the
      Limitation Act, as such, had no applicability
      to the proceedings before him…………”.
32. This    Court,  however,    further  held   that   relevant
special    statute   may    contain   an   express    provision
conferring    on  the   appellate   authority,   such   as  the
Collector, to extend the prescribed period of limitation
which needs to be examined looking to the scheme of the

                                                          33
special statute. Section 93 of the Act was a provision
pertaining to the applicability of the Limitation Act.
Referring to the said provision this Court held that
1958  Act   does  not  indicate   that  Section  5  of  the
Limitation Act is applicable. Following was further laid
down in paragraph 3:
          “3…………But even in such a situation the
     relevant special statute may contain an express
     provision     conferring    on    the    Appellate
     Authority, such as the Collector, the power to
     extend the prescribed period of limitation on
     sufficient cause being shown by laying down
     that the provisions of Section 5 of the
     Limitation Act shall be applicable to such
     proceedings. Hence it becomes necessary to
     examine whether the Act contains any such
     provision entitling the Collector to invoke the
     provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation Act
     for condonation of the delay in the filing of
     the appeal. The only provision relied on by the
     appellant in this connection is Section 93 of
     the Act which, as it stood at the relevant
     time, was in the following terms:
             93. Limitations.—Every appeal and
           every application for revision under
           this Act shall be filed within sixty
           days from the date of the order
           against    which    the     appeal    or
           application    is    filed    and    the
           provisions of the Indian Limitation
           Act, 1908 shall apply for the purpose
           of the computation of the said period.
     On a plain reading of the section it            is
     absolutely clear that its effect is only        to
     render applicable to the proceedings before    the
     Collector, the provisions of the Limitation    Act

                                                              34
     relating to “computation of the period of
     limitation”.      The    provisions   relating     to
     computation of the period of limitation are
     contained in Sections 12 to 24 included in Part
     III of the Limitation Act, 1963. Section 5 is
     not a provision dealing with “computation of
     the period of limitation”. It is only after the
     process of computation is completed and it is
     found that an appeal or application has been
     filed after the expiry of the prescribed period
     that the question of extension of the period
     under Section 5 can arise. We are, therefore,
     in complete agreement with the view expressed
     by the Division Bench of the High Court in
     Venkaiah case1 that Section 93 of the Act did
     not have the effect of rendering the provisions
     of Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963
     applicable to the proceedings before the
     Collector.”
33. This    Court   in    Officer  on   Special   Duty    (Land
Acquisition) and another vs. Shah Manilal Chandulal and
others, (1996) 9 SCC 414, the Land Acquisition Officer
has rejected the application for reference under Section
18 on the ground that it was barred by limitation. A
writ  petition   was   filed  contending  that   provision   of
Section   5   of   the   Limitation   Act   applies    to   the
proceedings    before    the   Collector.   The   High    Court
accepted  the   argument   and  condoned  the   delay  against
which judgment appeal was filed before this Court. This
Court held that Section 5 of the Limitation Act cannot
be applied for extension of the period of limitation

                                                                35
prescribed under proviso to sub­section (2) of Section
18. Following was held in paragraph 18:
         “18. Though hard it may be, in view of the
      specific limitation provided under proviso to
      Section 18(2) of the Act, we are of the
      considered view that sub­section (2) of Section
      29 cannot be applied to the proviso to sub­
      section (2) of Section 18. The Collector/LAO,
      therefore, is not a court when he acts as a
      statutory     authority     under   Section     18(1).
      Therefore, Section 5 of the Limitation Act
      cannot be applied for extension of the period
      of limitation prescribed under proviso to sub­
      section (2) of Section 18. The High Court,
      therefore, was not right in its finding that
      the Collector is a court under Section 5 of the
      Limitation Act.”
34. Another     judgment   which    needs   to   be  noticed   is
Consolidated     Engineering     Enterprises     vs.    Principal
Secretary,   Irrigation Department and        others, (2008) 7
SCC 169.    The question    which    was posed, in     the above
case,   for   consideration    before   this    Court   has  been
mentioned   in   paragraph   18  which   is   to  the   following
effect:
         “18. The question posed for consideration
      before the Court is whether the provision of
      Section 14 of the Limitation Act would be
      applicable to an application submitted under
      Section 34 of the Act of 1996 for setting aside
      the award made by the arbitrator………”

                                                             36
35. The provision of sub­section (3) of Section 34 has
been noticed in paragraph 19 which is to the following
effect:
        “19. A bare reading of sub­section (3) of
     Section 34 read with the proviso makes it
     abundantly clear that the application for
     setting   aside    the   award    on    the   grounds
     mentioned in sub­section (2) of Section 34 will
     have to be made within three months. The period
     can further be extended, on sufficient cause
     being shown, by another period of 30 days but
     not thereafter. It means that as far as
     application for setting aside the award is
     concerned, the period of limitation prescribed
     is three months which can be extended by
     another period of 30 days, on sufficient cause
     being shown to the satisfaction of the court.”
36. Section  29(2)   of   the  Limitation     Act  as  well as
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act was referred to. This
Court after noticing the provisions of Section 34 opined
that Section 5 of the Limitation Act is excluded. In
paragraph 20 following has been laid down:
        “20. Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act
     inter alia provides that where any special or
     local law prescribes for any suit, appeal or
     application a period of limitation different
     from the period of limitation prescribed by the
     Schedule, the provisions of Section 3 shall
     apply as if such period was the period
     prescribed by the Schedule and for the purpose
     of   determining    any    period    of    limitation
     prescribed for any suit, appeal or application
     by any special or local law, the provisions

                                                       37
     contained in Sections 4 to 24 shall apply only
     insofar as, and to the extent, they are not
     expressly excluded by such special or local
     law. When any special statute prescribes
     certain period of limitation as well as
     provision for extension up to specified time­
     limit, on sufficient cause being shown, then
     the period of limitation prescribed under the
     special law shall prevail and to that extent
     the provisions of the Limitation Act shall
     stand excluded. As the intention of the
     legislature in enacting sub­section (3) of
     Section 34 of the Act is that the application
     for setting aside the award should be made
     within three months and the period can be
     further extended on sufficient cause being
     shown by another period of 30 days but not
     thereafter, this Court is of the opinion that
     the provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation
     Act would not be applicable because the
     applicability of Section 5 of the Limitation
     Act stands excluded because of the provisions
     of Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act.
     However, merely because it is held that Section
     5 of the Limitation Act is not applicable to an
     application filed under Section 34 of the Act
     for setting aside an award, one need not
     conclude that provisions of Section 14 of the
     Limitation Act would also not be applicable to
     an application submitted under Section 34 of
     the Act of 1996.”
37. The three­Judge Bench noticed earlier judgment of
this Court in CST v. Parson Tools and Plants. The three­
Judge Bench held that proceedings initiated for setting
aside the arbitral award are not “courts” and three­
Judge Bench held that in CST v. Parson Tools and Plants
the appellate authority and the revisional court were

                                                               38
not  the   courts   hence   this   case   was   distinguished.
Following was laid down in paragraph 26:
        “26. From the judgment of the Supreme Court
     in CST, (1975) 2 SCC 22, it is evident that
     essentially what weighed with the Court in
     holding that Section 14 of the Limitation Act
     was not applicable, was that the appellate
     authority and the revisional authority were not
     “courts”. The stark features of the revisional
     powers pointed out by the Court, showed that
     the legislature had deliberately excluded the
     application     of   the    principles     underlying
     Sections 5 and 14 of the Limitation Act. Here
     in this case, the Court is not called upon to
     examine scope of revisional powers. The Court
     in this case is dealing with Section 34 of the
     Act which confers powers on the court of the
     first instance to set aside an award rendered
     by an arbitrator on specified grounds. It is
     not the case of the contractor that the forums
     before    which     the    Government     of     India
     undertaking     had   initiated    proceedings     for
     setting aside the arbitral award are not
     “courts”.     In     view     of    these     glaring
     distinguishing features, this Court is of the
     opinion that the decision rendered in CST did
     not    decide    the    issue    which   falls     for
     consideration of this Court and, therefore, the
     said decision cannot be construed to mean that
     the provisions of Section 14 of the Limitation
     Act are not applicable to an application
     submitted under Section 34 of the Act of 1996.”
38. Three­Judge    Bench   held   that   Section    14  of   the
Limitation Act was applicable to application filed under
Section   34   of    the   Arbitration     Act,    1996.    R.V.
Raveendran, J. in his concurring opinion has held that

                                                            39
Sections 3 and    29(2)   of the Limitation    Act will not
apply to proceedings before the tribunal, to appeals or
applications   before   the   tribunals,   unless   expressly
provided. In paragraph 44 following was laid down:
     “44. It may be noticed at this juncture that
     the Schedule to the Limitation Act prescribes
     the period of limitation only to proceedings in
     courts and not to any proceeding before a
     tribunal      or      quasi­judicial     authority.
     Consequently Sections 3 and 29(2) of the
     Limitation Act will not apply to proceedings
     before the tribunal. This means that the
     Limitation Act will not apply to appeals or
     applications     before    the  tribunals,   unless
     expressly provided.”
39. The   most   elaborate     judgment  holding   that   the
Limitation Act applies only to courts and not to the
tribunals is the judgment of this Court in M.P. Steel
Corporation vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, 2015(7)
SCC 58, Rohinton Fali Nariman, J. speaking for the Court
reviewed all earlier judgments of two­Judge and three­
Judge Benches of this Court. In paragraphs 11 to 35 all
earlier  judgments   have   been  considered.  In  the  above
case  Commissioner    of   Customs(Appeals)   dismissed   the
appeal filed by the appellant on the ground that appeal
is barred by time and the Commissioner(Appeals) had no

                                                                40
power to condone delay beyond the period specified in
Section   128  of  the   Customs   Act.  In    the  above  case,
benefit of Section 14 of the Limitation Act was sought.
It was contended before this Court that while Section 2
of the Limitation Act, Section 14 of the Limitation Act
was also applied to criminal, special or local law. This
Court   noticed   the    ingredients    of    applicability    of
Section 14. Two­Judge Bench has held that relying on
earlier judgments of this Court that provisions of the
Limitation Act are applicable only to suits, appeals and
applications   filed   in   Courts.  Section    29(2)  was   also
considered by this Court and following was laid down in
paragraph 33:
      “33……Section 29(2) states:
         “29. Savings.—(1)      *   *     *
           (2) Where      any   special    or    local  law
        prescribes     for     any   suit,      appeal    or
        application a period of limitation different
        from the period prescribed by the Schedule,
        the provisions of Section 3 shall apply as if
        such period were the period prescribed by the
        Schedule and for the purpose of determining
        any period of limitation prescribed for any
        suit, appeal or application by any special or
        local law, the provisions contained in
        Sections 4 to 24 (inclusive) shall apply only
        insofar as, and to the extent to which, they
        are not expressly excluded by such special or
        local law.”

                                                41
A bare reading of this section would show that
the special or local law described therein
should prescribe for any suit, appeal or
application a period of limitation different
from the period prescribed by the Schedule.
This would necessarily mean that such special
or local law would have to lay down that the
suit, appeal or application to be instituted
under   it  should   be   a   suit,  appeal  or
application of the nature described in the
Schedule. We have       already held that such
suits, appeals or applications as are referred
to in the Schedule are only to courts and not
to quasi­judicial bodies or tribunals. It is
clear, therefore, that only when a suit, appeal
or application of the description in the
Schedule is to be filed in a court under a
special or local law that the provision gets
attracted. This is made even clearer by a
reading of Section 29(3). Section 29(3) states:
    “29. Savings.—(1)­(2) *     *   *
    (3) Save as otherwise provided in any law
  for the time being in force with respect to
  marriage and divorce, nothing in this Act
  shall apply to any suit or other proceeding
  under any such law.”
When it comes to the law of marriage and
divorce, the section speaks not only of suits
but other proceedings as well. Such proceedings
may be proceedings which are neither appeals
nor applications thus making it clear that the
laws relating to marriage and divorce, unlike
the law of limitation, may contain proceedings
other than suits, appeals or applications filed
in courts. This again is an important pointer
to the fact that the entirety of the Limitation
Act including Section 29(2) would apply only to
the three kinds of proceedings mentioned all of
which are to be filed in courts.”

                                                            42
40. Two­Judge Bench, however, held that provisions of
Section 14 would certainly apply. We in the present case
are concerned only with applicability of Section 5 of
the Limitation Act.
41. Now, we come to the second set of cases which cases
have applied provisions of Limitation Act on special and
local   law.   A   three­Judge    Bench   judgment   in   The
Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. vs. M/s. Madan Lal Das &
Sons, Bareilly, (1976) 4 SCC 464, has been relied by the
counsel for the respondents. In the above case an appeal
relating to assessment year 1960­61 was decided by the
appellate authority. The copy of the appellate order was
served on the dealer on 02.08.1965. The dealer lost the
copy of the appellate order and on 15.06.1966 made an
application   for  obtaining  another    copy  of  the  order
which was ready on 17.08.1967. Revision under Section 10
of the U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948 was filed by the dealer
before the Judge(Revision) Sales Tax on 09.09.1967. The
dealer   claimed   that   the   time   taken    in  obtaining
certified copy needs to be excluded under Section 12(2)
of  the    Limitation   Act,   1963.    The   Judge(Revision)
accepted the contention and decided revision on merits.

                                                        43
At  the  instance  of  the Commissioner  of  Sales  Tax a
question was referred to the High Court as to whether
the time taken by the dealer in obtaining another copy
of the appellate order could be excluded for the purpose
of limitation for filing revision under Section 10(1) of
the Act, 1948. The High Court answered the question in
favour of the dealer and against the Revenue.
42. The Commissioner of Sales Tax filed an appeal in
this Court questioning the judgment of the High Court.
It was contended before this Court that U.P. Sales Tax
Act constitutes a complete court in itself and the High
Court committed an error in relying on Section 12(2) of
the Limitation Act, 1963. In paragraph 4 of the judgment
following was laid down:
        “4. There can be no manner of doubt that the
      U.P. Sales Tax Act answers to the description
      of a special or local law. According to sub­
      section (2) of Section 29 of the Limitation
      Act, reproduced above, for the purpose of
      determining any period of limitation prescribed
      for any application by any special or local
      law, the provisions contained in Section 12(2),
      inter alia, shall apply insofar as and to the
      extent to which they are not expressly excluded
      by such special or local law. There is nothing
      in the U.P. Sales Tax Act expressly excluding
      the application of Section 12(2) of the
      Limitation Act for determining the period of
      limitation prescribed for revision application.

                                                                 44
      The conclusion would, therefore, follow that
      the    provisions     of    Section   12(2)   of   the
      Limitation Act of 1963 can be relied upon in
      computing the period of limitation prescribed
      for filing a revision petition under Section 10
      of the U.P. Sales Tax Act.”
43. This Court held that Section 12(2) of the Limitation
Act  can   be   relied   upon    in   computing  the   period   of
limitation    prescribed     for    filing  the   revision.    The
Judge(Revision) before whom revision is filed is not a
Court, it is clear from the scheme of the U.P. Sales Tax
Act,   1948.   Section   10   under   which  revision   is   filed
provides for Revising Authority. Section 10(1) provides
for   appointment    of   Revising     Authority   which    is  as
follows:
          “Section 10. Power of revision.­(1) The
          State Government shall appoint as Revising
          Authority a person qualified under clause
          (2) of Article 217 of the Constitution for
          appointment as Judge of a High Court.”
44. The above provision makes it clear that revision is
to be filed before a Revising Authority created under
Act, 1948 and is not a Court. We have already noticed
above that a three­Judge         Bench   of this   Court   in  The
Commissioner of Sales Tax, U.P. Lucknow vs. M/s. Parson
Tools   and   Plants,   Kanpur    (supra)   had  considered    the

                                                             45
question of applicability of Limitation Act, 1963 before
Revision Authority under U.P. Sales Tax Act, 1948. This
Court in paragraph 9 of the judgment has categorically
held    that   Judge(Revisions)    Sales     Tax    exercising
jurisdiction under Section 10 are not courts but mere
administrative tribunals. In CST, U.P. vs. M/s. Parson
Tools   and  Plants,   the  question   was   with   regard  to
applicability of Section 14 of the Limitation Act. The
three­Judge     Bench    categorically     held    that    the
Judge(Revision) being not a Court, Section 14 of the
Limitation Act does not apply to the proceedings before
such tribunal. Before three­Judge Bench which heard CST,
U.P. vs. M/s. Madan Lal Das & Sons(supra) unfortunately
the earlier judgment of equal strength i.e. three­Judge
Bench in CST, U.P. vs. M/s. Parson Tools and Plants was
not cited.    CST, U.P. vs. M/s. Parson Tools and Plants
was judgment was on the same issue i.e. applicability of
the   Limitation   Act  in   reference   to   Judge(Revision)
exercising   the  jurisdiction  under   the   U.P.  Sales  Tax
Act, CST, U.P. vs. M/s. Parson Tools and Plants(supra)
has held that Limitation Act is not applicable to such
authority.    Thus,   three­Judge   judgment     was   neither

                                                            46
noticed and a contrary view was expressed in CST, U.P.
vs. M/s. Madan Lal Das & Sons. We have also noticed that
there has also been earlier three­Judge Bench judgment
in Nityananda, M. Joshi and others. vs. Life Insurance
Corporation of India and others(supra) where it was held
that Limitation Act applies only to suits, applications
and appeals filed in Courts. The judgment of this Court
in CST, U.P. vs. M/s. Madan Lal Das & Sons having not
referred to earlier judgments of equal strength, we are
persuaded   to   follow   the   earlier  three­Judge    Bench
judgment of this Court in       CST, U.P. vs. M/s. Parson
Tools and Plants.
45. The judgment on which reliance has been placed by
the learned counsel for the respondent is Mukri Gopalan
vs. Cheppilat Puthanpurayil Aboobacker, (1995) 5 SCC 5.
In the above case, question for consideration was as to
whether   the  appellate   authority  under  Section  18   of
Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965 has
power to condone the delay in filing appeal. The issue
which   has   been  noticed   in  paragraph  1  is   to   the
following effect:

                                                      47
     “1.   In this appeal by special leave a short
     but   an   interesting   question   falls   for
     determination. It is to the effect “whether the
     appellate authority constituted under Section
     18 of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent
     Control) Act, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as
     the ‘Rent Act’) has power to condone the delay
     in the filing of appeal before it under the
     said section”. Majority of the Kerala High
     Court in the case of Jokkim Fernandez v. Amina
     Kunhi Umma, AIR 1974 Ker 162, has taken the
     view that the appellate authority has no such
     power. Following the said decision a Division
     Bench of the Kerala High Court by its judgment
     and order under appeal has dismissed the
     revision application moved by the appellant
     herein whose appeal before the appellate
     authority was dismissed as time barred and the
     application for condonation of delay was
     treated to be not maintainable before the
     appellate authority.”
46. One fact which is to be noticed is that appellate
authority under the above Act was District Judge. The
notification issued by the State Government conferring
on the District Judge power of the appellate authority
has been noticed and extracted in paragraph 5 of the
judgment.    Relevant  part  of  paragraph  No.5  is as
follows:
        “5. …………………………At this stage it will be
     useful to note that the Government of Kerala in
     exercise of its power under Section 18(1) has
     issued a notification conferring on District
     Judges the powers of appellate authority for

                                                          48
     the purpose of Kerala Rent Act. The said
     notification reads as under:
        “Buildings (Lease & Rent Control) Act, 1965­
     Noti.   under    Section   18(1)   conferring   on
     District     Judges     powers     of    appellate
     authorities
        (Published in Kerala Gazette No. 38 dated
     26th September, 1989 : SRO :1631 of 1989)
                        NOTIFICATION
        S.R.O. No. 1631 of 1989 In exercise of the
     powers conferred by clause (a) of sub­section
     (1) of Section 18 of the Kerala Buildings
     (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965 (2 of 1965)
     and    in    supersession     of    all   previous
     notifications on the subject, the Government of
     Kerala hereby confers on the District Judges
     having jurisdiction over the areas within which
     the provisions of the said Act have been
     extended,    the    powers    of   the   appellate
     authorities for the purposes of the said Act,
     in the said areas.”
47. This Court in the above case held that appellate
authority  was  not  “persona   designata”.  This  Court in
paragraph 8 held that the appellate authority who was
District Judge would be court and not persona designata.
Following was observed in paragraph 8:
     “8…………When the aforesaid well settled tests for
     deciding whether an authority is a court or not
     are applied to the powers and functions of the
     appellate authority constituted under Section
     18 of the Rent Act, it becomes obvious that all
     the aforesaid essential trappings to constitute
     such an authority as a court are found to be
     present. In fact, Mr Nariman, learned counsel
     for respondent also fairly stated that these

                                                          49
     appellate authorities would be courts and would
     not be persona designata…………”
48. Section   29(2)  was   also   considered.   This  Court
further held that Section 29(2) will get attracted to
appeals filed before appellate authority under Section
18 of the Rent Act. In paragraphs 11 and 15 following
has been laid down:
     “11. It is also obvious that once the aforesaid
     two conditions are satisfied Section 29(2) on
     its own force will get attracted to appeals
     filed before appellate authority under Section
     18 of the Rent Act. When Section 29(2) applies
     to appeals under Section 18 of the Rent Act,
     for   computing   the    period   of   limitation
     prescribed for appeals under that Section, all
     the provisions of Sections 4 to 24 of the
     Limitation Act would apply. Section 5 being one
     of them would therefore get attracted. It is
     also obvious that there is no express exclusion
     anywhere in the Rent Act taking out the
     applicability of Section 5 of the Limitation
     Act to appeals filed before appellate authority
     under Section 18 of the Act. Consequently, all
     the legal requirements for applicability of
     Section 5 of the Limitation Act to such appeals
     in the light of Section 29(2) of Limitation Act
     can be said to have been satisfied. That was
     the view taken by the minority decision of the
     learned Single Judge of Kerala High Court in
     Jokkim Fernandez v. Amina Kunhi Umma. The
     majority did not agree on account of its wrong
     supposition     that      appellate      authority
     functioning under Section 18 of the Rent Act is
     a persona designata. Once that presumption is
     found to be erroneous as discussed by us
     earlier, it becomes at once clear that minority

                                                  50
view in the said decision was the correct view
and the majority view was an erroneous view.”
  15. After repealing of Indian Limitation
Act, 1908 and its replacement by the present
Limitation Act of 1963 a fundamental change was
made in Section 29(2). The present Section
29(2) as already extracted earlier clearly
indicates that once the requisite conditions
for its applicability to given proceedings
under special or local law are attracted, the
provisions contained in Sections 4 to 24 both
inclusive would get attracted which obviously
would bring in Section 5 which also shall apply
to such proceedings unless applicability of any
of the aforesaid sections of the Limitation Act
is expressly excluded by such special or local
law. By this change it is not necessary to
expressly state in a special law that the
provisions contained in Section 5 of the
Limitation Act shall apply to the determination
of the periods under it. By the general
provision contained in Section 29(2) this
provision is made applicable to the periods
prescribed under the special laws. An express
mention in the special law is necessary only
for any exclusion. It is on this basis that
when the new Rent Act was passed in 1965 the
provision contained in old Section 31 was
omitted. It becomes therefore apparent that on
a   conjoint   reading  of   Section   29(2)   of
Limitation Act of 1963 and Section 18 of the
Rent Act of 1965, provisions of Section 5 would
automatically     get   attracted     to    those
proceedings, as there is nothing in the Rent
Act    of    1965   expressly    excluding    the
applicability of Section 5 of the Limitation
Act to appeals under Section 18 of the Rent
Act.”

                                                        51
49. This Court in the above case held that Section 5 was
attracted  in  appeal  which  was   to  be  heard  by the
appellate authority.  It is, further, relevant to notice
that in M.P. Steel Corporation (supra), Mukri Gopalan
has been referred to and has been held to be no longer
good law in view of the earlier three­Judge judgments of
this Court. Dealing with Mukri Gopalan’s case two­Judge
Bench in M.P. Steel Corporation had held following in
paragraph 29 :
        “29. Quite apart from Mukri Gopalan case
     being out of step with at least five earlier
     binding judgments of this Court, it does not
     square also with the subsequent judgment in
     Consolidated Engg. Enterprises v. Irrigation
     Deptt. A three­Judge Bench of this Court was
     asked to decide whether Section 14 of the
     Limitation Act would apply to Section 34(3) of
     the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
     After discussing the various provisions of the
     Arbitration Act and the Limitation Act, this
     Court held:…………”
        32. Obviously, the ratio of Mukri Gopalan
     does not square with the observations of the
     three­Judge   Bench   in    Consolidated   Engg.
     Enterprises. In the latter case, this Court has
     unequivocally held that Parson Tools is an
     authority   for   the   proposition   that   the
     Limitation Act will not apply to quasi­judicial
     bodies or tribunals. To the extent that Mukri
     Gopalan is in conflict with the judgment in
     Consolidated Engg. Enterprises case, it is no
     longer good law.”

                                                          52
50. Learned counsel for the respondent relied on three­
Judge Bench judgment of this Court in State of Madhya
Pradesh and another vs. Anshuman Shukla, (2014) 10 SCC
814. In the above case this Court was examining as to
whether delay in filing revision before the High Court
under  M.P.  Madhyastham  Adhikaran   Adhiniyam,  1983  was
condonable  applying  Section  5  of  the  Limitation  Act,
Section 29(2) as well as Mukri Gopalan case was referred
to by three­Judge Bench. In paragraph 20 following was
laid down:
      “20. Section 19 of the Act confers the power of
      revision on the High Court. It provides that
      the aggrieved party may make an application for
      revision before the High Court within three
      months of the date of the award. This section
      was amended in 2005, to confer the power on the
      High Court to condone the delay. Since this
      dispute pertains prior to 2005, thus, the
      provision of the unamended Act shall apply in
      the present case.”
51. After   considering  the  legislative  scheme  of  Act,
1983 following was laid down in paragraph 32 and 33:
      “32. Section 19 of the 1983 Act does not
      contain any express rider on the power of the
      High Court to entertain an application for
      revision after the expiry of the prescribed
      period of three months. On the contrary, the
      High Court is conferred with suo motu power, to

                                                               53
     call for the record of an award at any time. It
     cannot, therefore, be said that the legislative
     intent was to exclude the applicability of
     Section 5 of the Limitation Act to Section 19
     of the 1983 Act.
        33. In our opinion, it is unnecessary to
     delve into the question whether the Arbitral
     Tribunal constituted under the Act is a court
     or not for answering the issue in the present
     case as the delay in filing the revision has
     occurred before the High Court, and not the
     Arbitral Tribunal.”
52. It is relevant to notice that this Court from the
scheme   of  Act,   1983,   itself   found   that  legislative
intent was not to exclude the applicability of Section 5
of the Limitation Act. There cannot be any dispute to
the  proposition    that   if   the   legislative    scheme   of
special or local law indicate that enactment intended
applicability    of   Section    5.    Section   5    shall   be
applicable independent with operation of Section 29(2).
However, in paragraph 33, the Court did not delve into
the question as to whether Arbitral Tribunal is a court
or not. Due to a reason that revision was filed before
the High Court and there cannot be any issue as to the
High   Court   is   not   a   Court,    thus,   when    revision
application was filed before a Court Section 29(2) was
clearly attracted applying Section 5 of the Limitation

                                                           54
Act. The said judgment cannot be said to be authority
for  the   proposition  that    in   appeals  filed   before
statutory authorities which are not Court, Section 5 of
the Limitation act shall be attracted. Another judgement
relied by the respondent is Syed Zalil Akhtar vs. Zila
Sahkari Krishi Avam Gramn Vikas Bank, Mydt., (2016) 12
SCC 365. This Court in the above case was considering
the power of condonation of delay in filing appeal under
Section 55(2) of M.P. Cooperative Societies Act, 1960.
The High Court has upheld the decision of the M.P. State
Cooperative   Tribunal,   appellant’s    application   filed
under Section 55(2) was belated and since there being no
provision  for  condoning   the  delay   in  filing  of  the
appeal and Section 5 of the Limitation Act was also not
applicable.   Two­Judge  Bench    has   referred  to   Mukri
Gopalan (supra). Relying on Mukri Gopalan and Anshuman
Shukla,  two­Judge  Bench   held   that  Section  5  of  the
Limitation Act would be applicable. In paragraphs 11 and
12 following has been held:
     “11. Having noted the said view expressed in
     para 34, as compared to a detailed analysis
     made in the earlier decision of this Court made
     in Mukri Gopalan case we are of the considered
     view that in the light of the subsequent larger
     Bench decision of this Court in Anshuman

                                                       55
     Shukla case which has given its seal of
     approval to the decision in Mukri Gopalan case,
     the latter decision can be followed in all
     respects and the one held in Noharlal Verma
     case cannot be said to be good law.
        12. Therefore, applying the law thus laid
     down by this Court in Mukri Gopalan case and
     Anshuman Shukla case we are convinced that
     Section 5 of the Limitation Act would apply in
     all force to the case on hand and consequently
     when we consider the extent of delay involved,
     we find that the last date for filing the
     application   was  8­9­1995,   application  was
     presented on 11­9­1995, in between two days,
     namely, 9­9­1995 and 10­9­1995 were second
     Saturday and Sunday. Therefore, it must be held
     that   there   was  every    justification  and
     sufficient cause for the appellant in his claim
     for condoning the said two days in filing the
     application before the original authority.
     Consequently, we ourselves hereby condone the
     said delay of two days and since the Tribunal
     by its order dated 18­3­2009 merely dismissed
     the appeals of the appellant as well as that of
     the respondent on the sole ground of delay
     caused by the appellant in preferring the
     original application, the said order cannot be
     sustained.”
53. We have already noticed that Mukri Gopalan was held
to be not a good law by this Court in M.P. Steel on the
ground that it has not noticed earlier three­Judge Bench
judgments and also in view of the subsequent three­Judge
Bench judgment, the said case is not a good law. As far
as Anshuman Shukla’s case is concerned we have already
noticed the issue, in the said case, of applicability of

                                                          56
Section 5 of Limitation Act in the revision filed in the
High Court, High Court being a Court, Limitation Act was
fully applicable and the said judgment does not support
the proposition that in application before not a Court,
Section 5 shall automatically be applicable.
54. The  ratio   which  can  be  culled   from above  noted
judgments, especially judgment of three­Judge Benches,
as noted above, is as follows:
     (1) The suits, appeals and applications referred to
         in the Limitation Act, 1963 are suits, appeals
         and applications which are to be filed in a
         Court.
     (2) The suits, appeals and applications referred to
         in  the   Limitation   Act   are  not  the  suits,
         appeals and applications which are to be filed
         before a statutory authority like Commissioner
         under Act, 1959.
     (3) Operation of Section 29(2) of the Limitation
         Act  is   confined  to   the  suits,  appeals  and
         applications referred to in a special or local
         law  to   be  filed   in   Court  and  not  before

                                                          57
     statutory  authorities   like   Commissioner     under
     Act, 1959.
(4) However,   special   or  local   law   vide   statutory
     scheme can make applicable any provision of the
     Limitation Act or exclude applicability of any
     provision of Limitation Act which can be decided
     only   after    looking    into    the     scheme    of
     particular, special or local law.
            55.     We,  thus,   answer   question    Nos.2
            and 3 in the following manner:
(i)    The applicability of Section 29(2) of the
       Limitation Act is with regard to different
       limitations    prescribed     for    any    suit,
       appeal or application when to be filed in
       a Court.
(ii)   Section 29(2) cannot be pressed in service
       with regard to filing of suits, appeals
       and   applications    before    the    statutory
       authorities   and  tribunals    provided    in  a
       special   or  local   law.   The   Commissioner
       while hearing of the appeal under Section
       69 of the Act, 1959 is not entitled to

                                                             58
            condone the delay in filing appeal, since,
            provision  of   Section    5   shall   not   be
            attracted by strength of Section 29(2) of
            the Act.
Question No.4
56. A special or local law can very well provide for
applicability  of  any  provision   of   Limitation    Act  or
exclude  applicability  of  any   provision    of  Limitation
Act. The provisions of Limitation Act including Section
5 can very well be applied in deciding an appeal by
statutory  authority   which   is   not   a   Court   by   the
statutory scheme of special or local law. We, thus, need
to notice the provisions of Act, 1959 as to whether the
scheme under Act, 1959 shows that enactment intended to
apply Section 5 of the Limitation Act.
57. Section 110 provides for procedure and powers at
inquiries  under  Chapters   V  and  VI.   The   Commissioner
hears appeals under Section 69 which is under Chapter V
of the Act. Section 110 of the Act is as follows:
     “Section 110. Procedure and powers at inquiries
     under Chapters V and VI.­ (1) Where a
     Commissioner or a Joint Commissioner or a

                                                              59
      Deputy Commissioner makes an inquiry or hears
      an appeal under Chapter V or Chapter VI, the
      inquiry shall be made and the appeal shall be
      heard, as nearly as may be, in accordance with
      the procedure applicable under the Code of
      Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act V of 1908)
      to the trial of suits or the hearing of
      appeals, as the case may be.
          (2) The provisions of the Indian Evidence
      Act, 1872(Central Act I of 1872) and the Indian
      Oaths Act, 1873 (Central Act X of 1873), shall
      apply to such inquiries and appeals.
                                         1
          (3)    The    Commissioner      [or    a   Joint
      Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner] holding
      such inquiry or hearing such an appeal shall be
      deemed to be a person acting judicially within
      the meaning of the Judicial Officers Protection
      Act, 1850 (Central Act XVIII of 1850).”
58. The    mere   fact   that   a   statutory    authority   is
empowered to follow the procedure as nearly may be in
accordance with procedure under C.P.C. to the trial of
suits  or  hearing   of  appeals,   the   statutory   authority
shall not become a Court. There is nothing under Section
110 which indicates that Limitation Act is also made
applicable in hearing of the appeal.
59. Section 115 deals with limitation. It only provides
that in computing the period of limitation prescribed
under  Act,   1959  for  any   proceeding,    suit,  appeal  or
application   for  revision   against   any   order  or  decree

                                                                 60
passed under this Act, the time requisite for obtaining
a   certified  copy   of   such   order   or   decree   shall   be
excluded.
60.   The  provision   of   Section   69   of   Act,   1959   also
indicates     that      Legislature      never       contemplated
applicability   of   Section   5  of   the   Limitation    Act  in
proceedings   before    Commissioner.    Section     69(2)   noted
above   provides   that   any   order   passed    by   the   Joint
Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner, as the case may,
in respect of which no appeal has been preferred within
the period specified in sub­section (1) may be revised by
the Commissioner suo motu and the Commissioner may call
for and examine the records of the proceedings to satisfy
himself as to the regularity of such proceedings or the
correctness, legality or propriety of any decision or
order passed    by  the   Joint Commissioner      or the Deputy
Commissioner, as the case may be.
61. Thus,    Section   69(2) gives    suo motu     power   to  the
Commissioner to call for and examine the records of the
proceedings    of    Joint    Commissioner     or    the    Deputy
Commissioner   in   respect   of   which   no  appeal   has   been
preferred   within   the   period   specified    in   sub­section

                                                            61
(1). Thus, in a case appeal is not filed within 60 days
against the order of Joint Commissioner or the Deputy
Commissioner, the Commissioner is vested with suo motu
power to call for and examine the records. The suo motu
power has been given to the Commissioner to correct the
orders of Joint Commissioner or the Deputy Commissioner
even if no appeal has been filed within 60 days. Giving
of suo motu power to the Commissioner is with object to
ensure that an order passed by the Joint Commissioner or
the Deputy Commissioner may be corrected when appeal is
not filed within time under Section 69(1). The scheme of
Section 69 especially sub­section (2) also re­enforces
our   conclusion    that   Legislature   never   contemplated
applicability    of   Section   5   in   Section   69(1)  for
condoning  the   delay   in  filing  an  appeal  by  applying
Section 5 of the Limitation Act.
62. Learned counsel for the respondent has referred to
two Rules framed under Section 116 of 1959, Act, namely,
the Application and Appeal Rules dated 30.08.1961 and
the  Holding  of   Inquiries   Rules  dated  30.08.1961.  The
Application and Appeal Rules provide for procedures and
details of filing application, affidavits, memorandum of

                                                                 62
appeal, application for revision, etc. The said Rules,
in  no  manner,   support   the    contention   of   the   learned
counsel   for   the   respondent     that   Section    5   of  the
Limitation   Act   is   applicable.     Similarly,    Holding   of
Inquiries   Rules   provide   for    procedure   of   holding   of
inquiries, issue of notice, etc. The above Rules also do
not throw any light on the applicability of Section 5 of
the Limitation Act.
63. The above provision clearly indicates that provision
for   only   computation    of    limitation    has    been   made
applicable to the proceedings under Act, 1959. Section
115  cannot    be   read   in   a    manner   as   to    providing
applicability of Section 5. There is no other provision
in the scheme from which it can be inferred that Act,
1959   intended    applicability      of   Section    5    of  the
Limitation   Act   to   proceedings     of  appeal    before   the
Commission. We, thus, conclude that Section 5 of the
Limitation Act is not applicable as per the scheme of
Act, 1959.
64. In view of the foregoing discussions, we allow the
appeal,  set   aside   the  impugned     judgment   of   the  High
Court. The order of the Commissioner dated 31.07.2013 is

                                                            63
set aside and the appeal filed by respondent No.3 stands
dismissed.
65. We   may,   however,  observe   that  dismissal   of  the
appeal  filed   by  respondent   No.3  as  above   shall  not
preclude  the   Commissioner  in  exercising   his  suo  motu
power under Section 69(2) of the Act, 1959. We, however,
are not expressing any opinion with regard to exercise
of suo motu by the Commissioner under Section 69(2) in
the  present   case  and  it  is  for  the   Commissioner  to
invoke  his   power   under  Section   69(2)   if  he  is  so
satisfied. Further, this will be without prejudice to
any other remedy open to the respondent No.3 in law.
66. The parties shall bear their own costs.
                                  ......................J.
                                    ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
                                  ......................J.
                                    ( K.M. JOSEPH )
New Delhi,
May 03, 2019


