                                                                  NON-REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL No.2597 OF 2016
                       KODENDERA K. UTHAIAH (D) BY LR.           ........APPELLANT(s)
                                                   VERSUS
                       P.M. MEDAPPA AND OTHERS                   ......RESPONDENT(s)
                                                  JUDGMENT
                       NAVIN SINHA, J.
                             The respondent was the plaintiff in O.S. No. 42/1991,
                       seeking dissolution of the partnership firm and rendition of
                       accounts. The suit was decreed in part, holding that the legal
                       heirs of the deceased partner, were entitled to 1/4 th share to
                       be quantified in terms of Clause 14 of the partnership deed.
                       R.F.A. No. 231/1996 preferred by the plaintiff, against grant of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
                       partial relief, was allowed on 08.02.2006 directing dissolution
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2017.10.05
17:42:52 IST
Reason:
                       of the firm and settlement of accounts “as of date”. Aggrieved,
                                                       1

the defendant has preferred the present appeal. The parties,
for convenience, shall be referred to by their respective
positions in the suit.
2.    The facts, in brevity are, that the father of the plaintiff i.e.
P.M. Medappa, along with three others constituted a registered
partnership firm, M/s. Rums & Co.           The partnership deed
dated 27.01.1971, in Clause 14, stipulated that in the event of
death of a partner, the remaining partners shall have the
option to give a written notice within three months of the
death, to the legal heirs of the deceased partner, for purchase
of the shares of the deceased. The purchase price was to be
the amount of the share of the deceased as determined at the
last annual general accounts, inclusive of interest @ 10% per
annum, upto the date of purchase. P.M. Medappa was
deceased on 27.07.1990. The surviving partners, defendants
1 to 3, gave notice on 15.10.1990 in terms thereof to the
plaintiff and defendants 4 to 9, being the legal heirs of the
deceased partner.
                                  2

3.    The   plaintiff  preferred   O.S.   No.  42/1991    seeking
dissolution of the firm and rendition of accounts, alleging
refusal of the remaining partners to pay the legal heirs of the
deceased partner, the due share under Clause 14. The suit
was decreed in part by the Civil Judge on 03.01.1996 holding
that the plaintiff and defendants 4 to 9 as legal heirs of the
deceased partner, were entitled to 1/4 th share to be worked
out on basis of the last annual general accounts, together with
interest @ 10% per annum from the date of death till the date
of decree. Aggrieved by the grant of partial relief, the plaintiff
preferred R.F.A. No. 231/1996.          The High Court, by the
impugned order, held that the notice dated 15.10.1990 had
not been served on all the legal heirs of the deceased partner.
Clause 14 therefore never became operational, directing
dissolution of the firm and settlement of accounts “as of date”
entitling the legal heirs to 1/4th share in the assets and profits
of the firm with interest @ 6% per annum till settlement.
Liberty was further granted to seek appointment of a receiver
                                 3

to take care and manage the assets of the partnership firm
pending finalisation of settlement of accounts.
4.    During the pendency of the litigation, the partnership
underwent several changes, and today Subbaiah, the nephew
of the original defendant no.2 is the sole proprietor of the
erstwhile partnership business, permitted to be substituted by
order dated 04.03.2016.
5.    Shri R. Basant, learned senior counsel for the appellant-
defendant submitted that the plaintiff in his evidence had
admitted due service of the notice dated 15.10.1990. Clause
14 evinced an intention to the contrary for continuance of the
partnership on the demise of a partner and therefore Section
42(c) of the Partnership Act (hereinafter referred to as “the
Act”) providing for dissolution by operation of law on the death
of a partner, has no application.    The manner for calculation
of the dues of the deceased partner was provided for in
                                4

Clause 14.      Section 37 of the Act, therefore, had no
application.   The remaining partners were always ready and
willing  to   pay   the   legitimate    dues in accordance with
Clause 14. The plaintiff insisted on induction of the wife of the
deceased partner, and refused settlement of accounts, raising
unreasonable demands. The dues could not be paid as in the
meantime the plaintiff filed the suit and the partners bonafide
decided to await outcome of the suit. There was no intentional
delay or desire to defeat the rights of the legal heirs of the
deceased partner.
6.    Conversely, Shri Nanju Ganpathi, learned senior counsel
for the respondent-plaintiff, submitted that the finding with
regard to non-compliance with Clause 14 by failure to serve
notice on all the legal heirs calls for no interference. After the
service of notice dated 15.10.1990 upon him, the plaintiff
made several endeavours to persuade the remaining partners
to pay 1/4th share of the deceased partner in terms of
Clause 14. Ultimately, on 31.05.1991, the plaintiff asked for
                                 5

the audited balance sheet but was denied the same on the
pretext that the auditing was still not complete and some more
time was required. The auditing of the accounts was in fact
completed    and    filed  on  31.10.1990    despite  which    the
remaining partners did not pay the legitimate dues to the legal
heirs. In absence of any justification by the defendants to act
in accordance with Clause 14, the High Court has committed
no error in directing dissolution and settlement of accounts
“as of date” since it has been admitted that the share of the
profits to the account of the deceased were ploughed back for
the benefit of the partnership. The appeal may be dismissed.
7.    We have considered the respective submissions and
perused the materials and evidence on record.          The order
sheet dated 02.12.2016 records that the appellant was
required to file proof of deposit of Rs.50 lacs. The office report
states that only Rs.25 lacs have been deposited. The attention
of the Court was not invited to these facts during arguments,
by learned Counsel for the parties and neither has any
                                 6

mention been made regarding the same in the written
submissions filed by the parties.
8.    The primary facts with regard to the constitution of the
partnership firm comprising of four partners, the demise of
one of the partners on 27.07.1990 and consequent exercise of
option under Clause 14 of the partnership deed on 15.10.1990
by the remaining partners are not in dispute. The controversy
with regard to service of notice on all the legal heirs of the
deceased partner need not be dwelt upon at length, in view of
the fact that it was in fact served on the plaintiff, and the rest
of the notices were sent to the address of their mother, and
acceptance refused by others. The plaintiff has admitted that
he impleaded the other legal heirs as defendants 4 to 9, as
they refused to join him as plaintiffs.
9.    Section 37 of the Act provides that if any member of a
firm dies and the surviving partners carry on the business
without any final settlement of accounts, the estate of the
                                 7

deceased partner is entitled to such share of the profits made
as may be attributable to his share of the property or to
interest @ 6% per annum on the amount of his share in the
property of the firm. In our considered opinion, it will have no
application in the facts of the case in view of Clause 14 of the
partnership deed, which also provides for the manner of
calculating the dues.     Similarly, Section 42(c) of the Act,
providing for dissolution of the firm on the death of a partner,
will also have no application in view of the aforesaid clause
evincing a clear intention to continue the partnership on the
death of a partner.
10.   The last audited accounts upto 31.03.1989 having been
signed by the deceased as a partner, the only controversy is
with regard to the period thereafter till his death on
27.07.1990. Clause 14 of the partnership deed provides for
determination of the purchase price of the share of the
deceased partner on the basis of the last annual general
account with interest @ 10% per annum upto the date of the
                                8

purchase. Admittedly, no final accounts till date of death has
been furnished much less purchase of the share of the
deceased been made till date by actual payment of the
legitimate 1/4th share to the legal heirs of the deceased
partner.
11.   The plea of the defendant, that delay in payment of the
legitimate dues was attributable to the conduct of the plaintiff
is not tenable from the facts and materials on record.     The
plaintiff has averred that after receipt of the notice dated
15.10.1990 he had contacted the surviving partners several
times, held discussions with them, and requested for the
accounts. Ultimately on 31.05.1991, he wrote to them asking
for the balance-sheet. An incorrect reply was furnished that
the accounts had not been audited when in fact they had
already been filed on 31.10.1990. The defendant K.K. Uthaiah
in his evidence has acknowledged discussions with the legal
heirs of the deceased partner and that the share of the assets
of the deceased partner had remained in the firm itself, even
                               9

while the surviving three partners continued to take their
share of the profits after accounting. Though he deposed that
a copy of the audited report was sent to the plaintiff through
his driver, neither was the date mentioned or any evidence led
in support of the same.
12.  It is not the case of the appellant that the Income-Tax
Returns of the Partnership firm were not filed within statutory
time. If the returns were so filed, naturally the share of the
deceased partner payable under Clause 14 till his demise on
27.07.1990 posed no difficulty for payment. The plea that in
view of the pending litigation the dues were not paid is
unacceptable and not bonafide.         The legal heirs of the
deceased partner are, therefore, held entitled to 1/4 th share
with 10% interest per annum from 27.07.1990 till the date of
purchase.
13.  The finding that Clause 14 of the partnership deed was
not complied with and, therefore, never became operational is
                                10

held to be unsustainable and is set aside. The consequential
direction for dissolution and settlement of accounts “as of
date” for that reason, is also set aside. The legal heirs are held
not to be entitled to any share in the profits after 27.07.1990.
The liberty to move for appointment of receiver to take care
and manage the assets of the partnership firm pending
finalisation   of  accounts    and    settlement   calls  for  no
interference. The plaintiff is permitted to withdraw the deposit
made before this court after due furnishing of proof of identity.
The said amount shall be adjusted against the final dues
found payable to the legal heirs after settlement of accounts.
14.   The appeal is allowed, but only to the extent indicated.
                                    ………………………………….J.
                                                 (Ranjan Gogoi)
                                     ……….………………………..J.
                                                  (Navin Sinha)
New Delhi,
October 04, 2017
                                 11

12

