                                                             1
                                                                                  REPORTABLE
                                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                             Civil Appeal No(s). 4483 OF 2019
                                        (Arising out of SLP(C) No. 20017 of 2017)
                    Snowtex Investment Limited                                   Appellant(s)
                                                                  Versus
                    Principal Commissioner of Income Tax,
                    Central-2, Kolkata                                           Respondent(s)
                                                      JUDGMENT
                    Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J
                     1       Leave granted.
                     2       This appeal arises from a judgment of a Division Bench of the High Court
                     of Calcutta dated 22 November 2016 in an appeal under Section 260A of the
                     Income Tax Act, 1961.
                     3       The appellant was registered as a non-banking financial company under
                     the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. The appellant filed its return of income on 27
                     September 2008. The return was processed under Section 143(1) on 8 October
                     2009. On the case being selected for scrutiny, a notice was issued under Section
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MANISH SETHI
Date: 2019.05.13
16:56:12 IST
Reason:
                     143(2). By an order dated 14 December 2010 the assessing officer recorded that
                     the principal business activity of the assessee is trading in shares and securities.
                     The loss from share trading was held to be a speculation loss. The assessing

                                          2
officer held that in view of the provisions of Section 43(5)(d), activities pertaining
to futures and options could not be treated as speculative transactions.The loss
from speculation was held not to be capable of being set off against the profits
from business.
4        Against the order of the assessing officer for assessment year 2008-2009,
an appeal was filed before the CIT(A). The CIT(A) held that the assessee derived
income from trading in derivatives and share business along with dividend and
interest and was an NBFC. The CIT(A) inter alia held that the provisions of
Section 43(5) came into existence with effect from 1 April 2006 and hence,
transactions in futures and options must be treated as business income as distinct
from trading in shares. Consequently, the CIT(A) rejected the contention of the
assessee that the assessing officer had erred in not allowing the speculation loss
to be set off against profits of trading in futures and options.
5        The Revenue appealed against the decision of the CIT(A). The Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal1 by its decision dated 6 November 2015 held that the claim of
the assessee for setting off the loss from share trading should be allowed against
the profits from transactions in futures and options, since the character of the
activities was similar. The ITAT held that the assessee which was in the business
of share trading had treated the entire activity of the purchase and sale of shares
which comprised both of delivery based and non-delivery based trading, as one
composite business.
6        The Revenue appealed before the High Court which by its judgment dated
22 November 2016 accepted its submission. The High Court held that the profits
1 “ITAT”

                                        3
which had arisen from trading in futures and options were not profits from a
speculative business. Hence the loss on trading in shares could not be set off
against the profits arising from the business of futures and options.
7       The dispute in the present case pertains to assessment year 2008-2009.
8       Mr. R.V. Easwar, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant has urged two submissions in order to assail the decision of the High
Court. First, it has been submitted that the Explanation to Section 73 as it stood
prior to its amendment with effect from 1 April 2015 by Finance (No. 2) Act, 2014
contemplated that where any part of the business of a company, other than a
company, the principal business of which is the granting of loans and
advances, consists in the purchase of shares of other companies, the company
shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be carrying on a speculation
business. In other words, the explanation as it then stood clarified that where the
principal business of the company consists of the grant of loans and advances,
the deeming fiction provided in the explanation would not be attracted. In the
present case, it was urged that the principal business of the assessee for AY
2008-2009 was of granting loans and advances. This submission was sought to
be buttressed on the basis of the figures drawn from the balance sheet of the
appellant as extracted in the order of assessment.        Those figures, it has been
submitted, indicate that for the financial year ending 31 March 2008, the following
position emerges:
        (i) The total funds available – Rs 13.48 crores;
        (ii) Funds deployed for loans and advances - Rs 11.32 crores
        (iii) Percentage – 84%

                                        4
        (iv) Deployed for share business – Rs 1.28 crores
        (v) Percentage – 9.5%
        (vi) Unsecured loans – Rs 5.92 crores
Consequently, the submission which has been urged under the first head is that
the assessee having deployed a substantial part of its funds during the
assessment year for loans and advances, the High Court erred in accepting the
view of the assessing officer. It was urged that the assessee has a certificate as
an NBFC under the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act 1934.
9       The second limb of the submissions, which is in the alternative, is that the
provisions of the Explanation to Section 73 were amended so as to bring trading
in shares within its purview by Finance (No. 2) Act 2014. It was urged that this
amendment should be construed to be retrospective, though Parliament has
brought it into force with effect from 1 April 2015. In this regard, it was submitted
that insofar as trading in derivatives is concerned, the provisions of Section 43(5)
were amended by Finance Act, 2005 to provide that an eligible transaction in
respect of trading in derivatives of securities carried out on a recognised stock
exchange shall not be deemed as a speculative transaction. It was urged that
there was a clear anomaly in the provisions of law.            The anomaly, it was
submitted, consisted in the fact that delivery based trading in shares was treated
as a speculative business until the amendment to the Explanation to Section 73
was brought into force on 1 April 2015. On the other hand, what was essentially
speculative and non-delivery based, namely, trading in derivatives on recognised
stock exchanges was removed from the purview of the business of speculation
with effect from 2006-2007.       Reliance has been placed on the Circular of the

                                       5
CBDT dated 27 February 2006 explaining the provisions of the Finance Act, 2005
and on the Circular dated 21 January 2015 explaining the provisions of Finance
(No. 2) Act, 2015. Hence, it is urged that even though Parliament brought into
force the amendment to the Explanation to Section 73 with effect from 1 April
2015, this would not affect the judicial authority of this Court to indicate that the
amendment must, by its very nature, be regarded as retrospective having regard
to the intent and purpose of the amendment. Reliance was placed on the
decisions of this Court in Allied Motors (P) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income
Tax, Delhi2 and in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Alom Extrusions Ltd.3.
10      On the other hand, it has been urged on behalf of the Revenue by Mr Arijit
Prasad that in evaluating what constitutes the principal business of the assessee
within the meaning of the Explanation to Section 73, the High Court has relied on
two significant circumstances.    The first circumstance is the admission of the
assessee before the assessing officer to the effect that share trading was the sole
business of the assessee during the assessment year in question.         The second
circumstance is that while the assessee had received interest on loans of Rs
2,21,917, it had paid out interest of Rs 62,84,111.60. The Revenue has urged
that the figures from the balance sheet of the assessee would indicate that while
the assessee had borrowed unsecured loans to the tune of Rs 5.92 crores and
had given loans and advances of Rs 11.32 crores, this included interest free
lending of Rs. 9.58 crores.     In this background, the High Court came to the
conclusion that the principal business for the assessment year was not the
granting of loans and advances.      This finding was supported on the above two
 2 (1997) 3 SCC 472
 3 (2010) 1 SCC 489

                                       6
grounds.
11      On the second issue of the claim of retrospectivity, it was urged that
though the Court has the power in an appropriate case, based on the intent of the
legislature to hold that an amendment is retrospective, the position in this case is
quite distinct.  In the present case, it was submitted that when the provisions of
Section 43(5) were amended with effect from 2006 by the Finance Act 2005, the
legislature took note of the provisions of Section 73.    Yet it did not consider it
appropriate to make a corresponding amendment in the Explanation to Section 73
and it is only nine years thereafter that an amendment to the latter provision was
introduced. Hence, it was urged that the intent of the legislature was not to make
the amendment to the Explanation to Section 73 retrospective.
12      Reliance has been placed on the decisions of this Court in Commissioner
of Income Tax (Central)-I, New Delhi v. Vatika Township Private Ltd.4 and on
the judgment of a three judge Bench of this Court in Vijay Industries v
Commissioner of Income Tax5.
13      These submissions now fall for consideration.
14      The provisions of Section 43(5) were amended by the Finance Act, 2005.
Prior to the amendment, Section 43(5) defined a ‘speculative transaction’ to mean
a transaction in which a contract for the purchase or the sale of any commodity
including stocks and shares is settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or
transfer of the commodity or scrips.        The impact of the amendment by the
Finance Act, 2005 was that an eligible transaction on a recognised stock
4 (2015) 1 SCC 1
5 (2019) 4 SCC 184

                                                  7
exchange in respect of trading in derivatives was deemed not to be a speculative
transaction.         With effect from 1 April 2006, trading in derivatives was by a
deeming fiction not regarded as a speculative transaction when it was carried out
on a recognized stock exchange.
15      The circular of the CBDT dated 27 February 2006 indicated that this
amendment was occasioned by the changes which were introduced by SEBI both
at the legal and technological level for bringing in greater transparency in the
market for derivatives.           Explaining the reason for the amendment, the Circular
states:
        “3.10 Excluding ‘trading in derivatives’ on recognised stock
        exchanges from the ambit of ‘speculative transactions’
        Existing provisions of clause (5) of section 43 define ‘speculative
        transaction’ to mean a transaction in which a contract for the
        purchase or sale of any commodity including stocks and shares is
        settled otherwise than by the actual delivery or transfer of the
        commodity or scrips. The proviso to section 43(5) lists out certain
        transactions which are not deemed to be speculative transactions.
        Systemic and technological changes introduced by SEBI have
        resulted in sufficient transparency in the stock markets and have to
        a large extent curbed the scope for generating fictitious losses
        through artificial transactions or shifting of incidence of loss from
        one person to another. The screen based computerized trading
        provides for audit trail. In the wake of these developments, the
        present distinction between speculative and non-speculative
        transactions, in respect of trading in derivatives of securities is
        losing relevance.
        The Finance Act, 2005 has, accordingly, amended section 43(5) to
        provide that an eligible transaction in respect of trading in
        derivatives of securities carried out on a recognised stock exchange
        shall not be deemed as speculative transaction. The notification
        prescribing the rules and the conditions to be fulfilled by a stock
        exchange to be recognized by the Central Government for the
        purposes of section 43(5) [i.e., Rules 6DDA and 6DDB of the
        Income-tax Rules, 1962] has been published in the Official Gazette
        on 1st July, 2005 vide S. O. No. 932(E).
        Applicability: From A.Y. 2006-07 onwards.”
16      Section 73 deals with losses from speculation business.               Under sub-

                                           8
Section (1) of Section 73, a loss computed in relation to speculation business
carried on by an assessee can only be set off against the profits and gains of
another speculation business. The Explanation to Section 73 contains a deeming
fiction where certain businesses shall, for the purposes of the section, be deemed
to be speculation businesses.        The Explanation also carves out an exception in
respect of certain specified businesses which shall lie outside the fold of the
deeming fiction. Prior to the amendment of the Explanation by the Finance (No.
2) Act 2014 with effect from 1 April 2015, the business of trading in shares carried
on by a company was not excluded from its purview.                   However, by the
amendment which was brought into force from 1 April 2015, the explanation to
Section 73 reads as follows:
        “Explanation - Where any part of the business of a company
        (other than a company whose gross total income consists
        mainly of income which is chargeable under the heads
        “Interest on securities”, “Income from house property”,
        “Capital gains” and “Income from other sources”, or a
        company the principal business of which is the business of
        trading in shares or banking or the granting of loans and
        advances) consists in the purchase and sale of shares of
        other companies, such company shall, for the purposes of
        this section, be deemed to be carrying on a speculation
        business to the extent to which the business consists of the
        purchase and sale of such shares.”
17      While on the one hand, Parliament amended Section 43(5) with effect
from 1 April 2006 as a result of which trading in derivatives on recognised stock
exchanges fell outside the purview of the business of speculation, a
corresponding amendment to the Explanation to Section 73 in respect of trading
in shares was brought in only with effect from 1 April 2015.
18      The submission which has been urged on behalf of the appellant is that
there was no logical reason to exclude from the purview of speculation business,
trading in shares, whereas trading in derivatives was excluded, as we have seen,

                                           9
from the ambit of Section 43(5) after 1 April 2006.      We will consider this aspect
of the alternative submission subsequently.
19       At this stage, we will deal with the first submission which is that the
Explanation to Section 73, as it stood prior to the amendment, excluded from the
deeming definition of a speculation business, a situation where the principal
business of a company was granting of loans and advances.
20       In the present case, there is no dispute about the fact that the assessee
was registered as an NBFC under the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act,
1934.     Section 73(1) does not define specifically, the circumstances in which the
principal business of a company would be regarded as a business of the specified
description. In the present case, the principal business was            urged to be the
granting of loans and advances. We cannot accept this submission and are of the
view that the High Court was justified in rejecting it. The circumstance, which in
our view is of crucial significance, is how the assessee construed its own line of
business.       The High Court has extracted what the assessee stated before the
assessing officer namely:
              “………… in our case the share trading is our sole business during
              the assessment year under concern”.
         From the above statement of the assessee, it is evident that the assessee
itself stated that share trading was its sole business during the assessment year
in question i.e. A.Y. 2008-2009.
21       Mr. R.V. Easwar, learned senior counsel submits that while the assessee
did make this statement before the assessing officer, it should not be regarded as

                                             10
      conclusive.    It was urged that the submission of the assessee was also rejected
      on the basis that while it had received interest on loans of Rs 2.21 lakhs, it had
      paid out interest of Rs 62.84 lakhs.    The submission is that, it is not merely the
      receipt of interest on loans and advances, but the deployment of funds which
      should have a bearing in determining the principal nature of the business. In this
      context, reliance was placed on the view taken by a Division Bench of the
      Calcutta High Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Savi Commercial P.
      Ltd.6.   The High Court, while dealing with the provisions of the Explanation to
      Section 73, observed that income alone cannot be taken into account and where
      the activity of granting loans and advances “is on a larger scale than the business
      of buying and selling shares” that would be an important indicator.         In other
      words, it was held that profit alone cannot be made a distinctive factor.
      22      The correctness of this aspect of the submission which has been urged by
      learned senior counsel need not be determined in the facts of the present aspect,
      since we are of the view that the High Court was justified in relying upon the
      specific admission of the assessee that during the assessment year in question,
      its sole business was of dealing in shares.          We must also advert to the
      circumstance that while the assessee had furnished loans and advances of Rs
      11.32 crores during the assessment year, this included interest free lending to the
      extent of Rs 9.58 crores. Having regard to these facts and circumstances, the
      specific admission of the assessee before the assessing officer assumes
      significance.     The assessee made an admission on a statement of fact which in
      our view, must bind it. In this view of the matter, the principal business of the
6 (2015) 373 ITR 243

                                            11
assessee was not of granting loans and advances during the assessment year. As
a consequence, the deeming fiction under Section 73 would be attracted. Hence,
the finding of the High Court, on the first aspect, cannot be faulted.
23      That leads the Court to the second submission which has been canvassed
in the course of the hearing of the appeal. The provisions of Section 43(5) were
amended with effect from 1 April 2006.               The Finance Act, 2005 contained the
following memorandum explaining the amendment:
             “The proposed amendment, therefore, seeks to provide that an
             eligible transaction carried out in respect of trading in derivatives in a
             recognised stock exchange shall not be deemed to be a speculative
             transaction. The proposed amendment also seeks to notify relevant
             rules etc. regarding conditions to be fulfilled by recognised
             exchanges in this regard. Further it is also proposed to amend sub-
             section (4) of section 73 so as to reduce the period of carry forward
             of speculation losses from eight assessment years to four
             assessment years.”
24      While amending the provisions of Section 43(5), the Parliament indeed
was cognizant of the provisions which were contained in Section 73(4).                  The
above memorandum indicates that the provisions of Section 73(4) were proposed
to be amended so as to reduce the period of carry forward of speculation losses
from eight assessment years to four assessment years. Having introduced an
amendment to Section 73(4), the Parliament would have, if it intended to bring
about a parity with the provisions of Section 43(5) introduced a specific
amendment. Parliament, however, did not do so by the Finance Act 2005. It was
only with effect from 1 April 2015 that an amendment was brought about to
exclude trading in shares from the deeming provision contained in the Explanation
to Section 73.          Parliament may have had reasons to allow the situation to
continue until the amendment was brought into force, including its view in regard

                                             12
to the stability of the stock market. Insofar as this Court is concerned, It would be
difficult to hold that the provisions which were contained in the Finance Act (No. 2)
2014 insofar as they amended the Explanation to Section 73 were clarificatory or
that notwithstanding the provision by which the amendment was brought into force
with effect from 1 April 2015, that it should be given retrospective effect. We reject
the second submission.
25       Even though an amendment, including one in the context of the Finance
Act is brought into force with effect from a stipulated date, the Court may as an
exercise of statutory interpretation, determine whether the amendment is
clarificatory or was intended to operate with retrospective effect. Such an exercise
was carried out by this Court in its decision in Allied Motors (supra).
Interpreting the provisions of Section 43B, this Court held thus:
             “10…While interpreting Section 43-B without the first proviso some of
             the High Courts, in order to prevent undue hardship to the assessee,
             had taken the view that Section 43-B would not be attracted unless the
             sum payable by the assesee by way of tax, duty, cess or fee was
             payable in the same accounting year. If the tax was payable in the
             next accounting year, Section 43-B would not be attracted. This was
             done in order to prevent any undue hardship to assessees such as the
             ones before us. The Memorandum of Reasons takes note of the
             combined effect of Section 43-B and the first proviso inserted by the
             Finance Act, 1987. After referring to the fact that the first proviso now
             removes the hardship caused to such taxpayers it explains the insertion
             of Explanation 2 as being for the purpose of removing any ambiguity
             about the term “any sum payable” under clause (a) of Section 43-B.
             This Explanation is made retrospective. The Memorandum seems to
             proceed on the basis that Section 43-B read with the proviso takes care
             of the hardship situation and hence Explanation 2 can be inserted with
             retrospective effect to make clear the ambit of Section 43-B(a).
             Therefore, Section 43-B(a), the first proviso to Section 43-B and
             Explanation 2 have to be read together as giving effect to the true
             intention of Section 43-B. If Explanation 2 is retrospective, the first
             proviso will have to be so construed.      Read in this light also, the
             proviso has to be read into Section 43-B from its inception along with
             Explanation 2.”
26     The decision of the Court was intrinsically based on a holistic reading of the
provisions of Section 43-B. The memorandum proceeded on the basis that

                                                13
Section 43-B read with the proviso was intended to alleviate a situation of
hardship. Hence, Explanation 2 was enacted with retrospective effect to clarify
the ambit of Section 43-B(a).                   This Court held that if Explanation 2 is
retrospective, the first proviso would be similarly so construed. This position was
re-enforced by a departmental circular. The Court, in other words, interpreted the
intent of Parliament.
27      A similar line of enquiry has been adopted in the subsequent decision of
this Court in Alom Extrusions (supra).                      In that case, while construing the
provisions of Section 43-B, this Court held:
          “25. Before concluding, we extract hereinbelow the relevant observations
          of this Court in CIT v. J.H. Gotla (1985)7 which reads as under: (SCC p. 360,
          para 47)
          “47. … we should find out the intention from the language used by the
          legislature and if strict literal construction leads to an absurd result i.e. result
          not intended to be subserved by the object of the legislation found in the
          manner indicated before, and if another construction is possible apart from
          strict literal construction then that construction should be preferred to the
          strict literal construction. Though equity and taxation are often strangers,
          attempts should be made that these do not remain always so and if a
          construction results in equity rather than in injustice, then such construction
          should be preferred to the literal construction.
The test to be applied is essentially one of the intent of the legislature.
28      In a more recent decision in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Vatika
Township Pvt. Ltd.8, a Constitution Bench of this Court held thus:
            “42.1. “Notes on Clauses” appended to the Finance Bill, 2002 while
            proposing insertion of proviso categorically states that “this amendment
            will take effect from 1.6.2002”. These become epigraphic 9 words, when
            seen in contradistinction to other amendments specifically stating those to
            be clarificatory or retrospectively depicting clear intention of the
            legislature. It can be seen from the same notes that a few other
            amendments in the Income Tax Act made by the same Finance Act
            specifically making those amendments retrospective. For example, clause
            40 seeks to amend S.92-F. Clause (iii-a) of S.92-F is amended “so as to
 7 (1985) 4 SCC 343
 8 (2015) 1 SCC 1
 9      Ed.: As per the Oxford Dictionary, “epigraphic” here means: intending to suggest the
        theme or purpose of the amendment

                                               14
            clarify that the activities mentioned in the said clause include the carrying
            out of any work in pursuance of a contract.” (emphasis supplied). This
            amendment takes effect retrospectively from 1-4-2002. Various other
            amendments also take place retrospectively. The Notes on Clauses show
            that the legislature is fully aware of three concepts:
                  (i) prospective amendment with effect from a fixed date;
                  (ii) retrospective amendment with effect from a fixed anterior date; and
                  (iii) clarificatory amendments which are retrospective in nature.”
29       In M/s. Vijay Industries (supra), decided on 1 March 2019, a three judge
Bench of this Court held that the provisions of Section 80AB which were
introduced by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1980 with effect from 1 April 1981 could not
be regarded as clarificatory in nature. The Court held that the provision was made
with prospective effect and the amendment would not apply to assessment years
1979-1980 and 1980-1981 because the amended provision was brought on the
statute book after the assessment years in question.
30       In conclusion, we therefore, hold that the amendment which was brought
by Parliament to the Explanation to Section 73 by the Finance (No 2) Act 2014
was with effect from 1 April 2015.                 In its legislative wisdom, the Parliament
amended Section 43(5) with effect from 1 April 2006 in relation to the business of
trading in derivatives, Parliament brought about a specific amendment in the
Explanation to Section 73, insofar as trading in shares is concerned, with effect
from 1 April 2015.            The latter amendment was intended to take effect from the
date stipulated by Parliament and we see no reason to hold either that it was
clarificatory or that the intent of Parliament was to give it retrospective effect.
31       The consequence is that in A.Y. 2008-2009, the loss which occurred to the
assessee as a result of its activity of trading in shares (a loss arising from the
business of speculation) was not capable of being set off against the profits which

                                        15
it had earned against the business of futures and options since the latter did not
constitute profits and gains of a speculative business.
32      For the reasons we have indicated, we find no error in the decision of the
High Court. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.        There shall be no order as
to costs.
33      Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
                                          ……….………………................................J.
                                           (Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud)
                                            ………………………...............................J.
                                           (Hemant Gupta)
New Delhi
April 30, 2019

                                   16
ITEM NO.15                 COURT NO.9               SECTION XVI
                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No. 20017/2017
(Against the Final judgment and order dated 22.11.2016 passed by
the Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta in ITAT No. 199 of 2016)
M/S SNOWTEX INVESTMENT LIMITED                       Petitioner(s)
                                  VERSUS
PRINCIPAL COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX,
CENTRAL -2, KOLKATA                                  Respondent(s)
Date : 30-04-2019 This petition was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :
          HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE HEMANT GUPTA
For Appellant(s)
                     Mr.  R.V. Easwar, Sr. Adv.
                     Mr.  Naveen R. Nath, AOR
                     Ms.  Lalit Mohini Bhat, Adv.
                     Mr.  Rahul Jain, Adv.
                     Ms.  Rubal Bansal, Adv.
For Respondent(s)
                     Mr. Arijit Prasad, Sr. Adv.
                     Ms. Rukhmini Bobde, Adv.
                     Mrs. Anil Katiyar, AOR
           UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                               O R D E R
     Leave granted.
     The appeal is dismissed in terms of the signed reportable
judgment.
     Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
(MANISH SETHI)                                    (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
COURT MASTER (SH)                                    BRANCH OFFICER
           (Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)


