                                                                      REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1175 OF 2014
           RAJU                                                    ...APPELLANT
                                             VERSUS
           THE STATE OF HARYANA                                    ...RESPONDENT
                                             JUDGMENT
           MOHAN M. SHANTANAGOUDAR, J.
                       This appeal is directed against the final judgment and order
           dated 24.08.2011 passed by the High Court of Punjab and
           Haryana at Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal No. 1830­SB of 2003,
           by which the High Court dismissed the appeal filed by the
           Appellant herein challenging the judgment of conviction under
           Section 376(2)(g) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) dated 08.11.2002
           and order of sentence dated 11.11.2002 rendered by the
           Additional Sessions Judge, Gurgaon, in Sessions Case No.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
VISHAL ANAND
Date: 2019.02.25
13:35:28 IST
           5/2001.
Reason:
                                                                                  1

2.     The brief facts leading to the instant appeal are that an FIR
was lodged against the Appellant Raju s/o Rajendar Singh, and
two other persons, viz. Raju s/o Bhim and Raja @ Raj Kumar s/o
Makhsi, alleging that the three persons had intercepted the
prosecutrix when she was passing by some fields along with her
one­year­old brother and had taken her to a field nearby,
whereupon Raju s/o Bhim and Raja @ Raj Kumar s/o Makhsi
engaged in the gang­rape of the prosecutrix, while the Appellant
stood outside the field. The prosecutrix was aged fifteen years at
the time of the incident, which occurred on 14.09.2000. The
three accused were convicted for the offence punishable under
Section 376(2)(g) of the IPC, and sentenced to 10 years’ rigorous
imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 500/­, and further two months’
rigorous imprisonment in default of payment of fine. Aggrieved by
the same, the three accused appealed to the High Court.
3.    The Appellant, inter alia, raised the defence before the High
Court that he was aged less than 18 years at the time of
commission of the offence, i.e. 14.09.2000, and hence was
entitled to the benefit of the provisions of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000 (in short, “the 2000
Act”). The High Court, however, rejected such contention and
                                                                   2

affirmed the conviction of the three accused, including the
Appellant.
4.     Aggrieved by the above judgment, the Appellant filed the
instant appeal, inter alia raising the plea of juvenility again. The
Appellant relied upon a transfer certificate issued in his favour by
the Dayanand Middle School, Sohna, Gurgaon which showed his
date of birth to be 12.07.1984. He also relied upon a certificate
issued by the Government Senior Secondary School (Boys),
Sohna which showed his date of birth to be the same. It was
submitted by the Appellant before this Court that the certificates
in question prima facie entitled him to claim the conduct of an
inquiry in terms of Section 7A of the 2000 Act. The Appellant
referred to the decisions of this Court in Murari Thakur v.
State of Bihar, (2009) 16 SCC 256, Dharambir v. State (NCT
of Delhi), (2010) 5 SCC 344, and Jitendra Singh @ Babboo
Singh v. State of U.P., (2010) 13 SCC 523.
5.    Keeping in mind such circumstances and the certificates
relied upon, this Court vide order dated 09.08.2012 directed the
Registrar (Judicial) of this Court to conduct an inquiry in respect
of the age of the Appellant in terms of Section 7A of the 2000 Act
                                                                   3

read with the rules framed thereunder, and to submit a report to
this Court within four months from the order.
6.    This Court received such report on 07.01.2013, which
determined that the age of the Appellant was 16 years, 2 months
and 2 days at the time of commission of the offence and that he
was thus a juvenile at that time. Thereafter, arguments were
heard and judgement reserved. However, subsequently, the State
raised the argument that the Court had not looked into the
question of whether the plea of juvenility as decided by the
Registry of this Court should be given precedence over the view of
the High Court. By an order dated 25.04.2014, this Court
directed that the appeal be heard further. Shri Siddhartha Dave
was subsequently appointed as amicus curiae to assist the
Court.
7.   It was submitted by the learned amicus curiae that the
learned Registrar (Judicial) of this Court had, after duly calling
for records and appreciating the material adduced, reached the
conclusion that the Appellant was a juvenile at the time of
commission of the offence, and there was no reason to deny the
Appellant the benefit of such finding. Moreover, he submitted
that seeing that it was upon the direction of this Court that the
                                                                 4

learned Registrar had conducted the inquiry under Section 7A of
the 2000 Act and the rules framed thereunder, and had
submitted his report to this Court after conducting such inquiry
in accordance with law, the report may be treated as having been
made by this Court itself.
8.      Heard the learned amicus curiae and advocate for the
State, and perused the material on record.
9.    It is by now well­settled, as was held in Hari Ram v. State
of Rajasthan, (2009) 13 SCC 211, that in light of Sections 2(k),
2(l), 7A read with Section 20 of the 2000 Act as amended in
2006, a juvenile who had not completed eighteen years on the
date of commission of the offence is entitled to the benefit of the
2000 Act (also see Mohan Mali v. State of Madhya Pradesh,
(2010) 6 SCC 669; Daya Nand v. State of Haryana, (2011) 2
SCC 224; Dharambir v. State (NCT) of Delhi (supra); Jitendra
Singh @ Babboo Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2013) 11
SCC 193). It is equally well­settled that the claim of juvenility can
be raised at any stage before any Court by an accused, including
this Court, even after the final disposal of a case, in terms of
Section 7A of the 2000 Act (see Dharambir v. State (NCT) of
                                                                    5

Delhi, (supra), Abuzar Hossain v. State of West Bengal, (2012)
10 SCC 489; Jitendra Singh @ Babboo Singh v. State of UP,
(supra); Abdul Razzaq v. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2015) 15
SCC 637).
10.    In light of the above legal position, it is evident that the
Appellant would be entitled to the benefit of the 2000 Act if his
age is determined to be below 18 years on the date of commission
of the offence. Moreover, it would be irrelevant that the plea of
juvenility was not raised before the Trial Court, in light of Section
7A. As per the report of the inquiry conducted by the Registrar
(Judicial) of this Court, in this case, the Appellant was below 18
years of age on the date of commission of the offence. The only
question before us that needs to be determined is whether such
report may be given precedence over the contrary view taken by
the High Court, so that the benefit of the 2000 Act may be given
to the Appellant.
11.    Before proceeding further, it would be useful to refer to
Section 7A of the 2000 Act and Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007 (in short, “the 2007
Rules”), which deal with the making of an inquiry by the Court in
                                                                    6

case of a claim of juvenility. Section 7A of the 2000 Act is as
follows:
      “7A. Procedure to be followed when claim of
      juvenility is raised before any court—
      (1) Whenever a claim of juvenility is raised before any
      court or a court is of the opinion that an accused
      person was a juvenile on the date of commission of the
      offence, the court shall make an inquiry, take such
      evidence as may be necessary (but not an affidavit) so
      as to determine the age of such person, and shall
      record a finding whether the person is a juvenile or a
      child or not, stating his age as nearly as may be:
      Provided that a claim of juvenility may be raised before
      any court and it shall be recognised at any stage, even
      after final disposal of the case, and such claim shall be
      determined in terms of the provisions contained in this
      Act and the rules made thereunder, even if the juvenile
      has ceased to be so on or before the date of
      commencement of this Act.
      (2) If the court finds a person to be a juvenile on the
      date of commission of the offence under sub­section
      (1), it shall forward the juvenile to the Board for
      passing appropriate orders and the sentence, if any,
      passed by a court shall be deemed to have no effect.”
                                           (emphasis supplied)
12.     Sub­rule (3) of Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules states the
following regarding the procedure to be followed for age
determination:
      “In every case concerning a child or juvenile in conflict
      with law, the age determination inquiry shall be
      conducted by the court or the Board or, as the case
                                                                7

     may be, the Committee by seeking evidence by
     obtaining –
     (a)      (i) the matriculation or equivalent certificates, if
         available; and in the absence whereof;
            (ii) the date of birth certificate from the school
     (other than a play school) first attended; and in the
     absence whereof;
            (iii) the birth certificate given by a corporation or a
     municipal authority or a panchayat;
     (b) and only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or (iii) of
         clause (a) above, the medical opinion will be sought
         from a duly constituted Medical Board, which will
         declare the age of the juvenile or child. In case exact
         assessment of the age cannot be done, the Court or
         the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee,
         for the reasons to be recorded by them, may, if
         considered necessary, give benefit to the child or
         juvenile by considering his/her age on lower side
         within the margin of one year,
     and while passing orders in such case shall, after
     taking into consideration such evidence as may be
     available, or the medical opinion, as the case may be,
     record a finding in respect of his age and either of the
     evidence specified in any of the clauses (a)(i), (ii), (iii) or
     in the absence whereof, clause (b) shall be the
     conclusive proof of the age as regards such child or the
     juvenile in conflict with law.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
13.   It is evident from a perusal of the above that if any Court,
including this Court, is of the opinion that an accused person
was a juvenile on the date of commission of the offence, or if a
claim of juvenility is raised before it, the Court must conduct an
                                                                     8

inquiry regarding the determination of the age of the accused.
The evidence collected by way of such inquiry, as is specified in
clauses (a)(i), (ii), and (iii) of Rule 12(3), or in the absence whereof,
clause (b) of the same, is treated as conclusive proof of the age of
the accused. In such a situation, it would be clear that such an
inquiry conducted by this Court would be given precedence over
a view of the age of the accused taken by the High Court. It is
relevant to note here itself that in this case, the High Court
decided the issue merely upon an assessment of the material on
record without resorting to the procedure governing inquiries for
the determination of age as laid out in Section 7A of the 2000 Act
and Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules.
14.    At this point, it is necessary to briefly discuss the findings
of the High Court in the impugned judgment regarding the age of
the accused to underscore that it has not conducted the inquiry
stipulated as per Section 7A and Rule 12. Before the High Court,
the Appellant submitted a report of the Assistant Commissioner
of Police, Bhondsi, Gurgaon to the effect that his date of birth
was 12.07.1984, thereby claiming the benefit of the 2000 Act.
This plea was rejected on the grounds of failure to raise the plea
of juvenility before the Trial court; non­production of birth
                                                                       9

certificate in spite of an opportunity being granted to do so;
absence of the Appellant’s name in the birth register dated
12.07.1984 and for the years                 1983­84 and 1984­85;
non­corroboration of the date of birth certificates issued by
schools attended by the Appellant through other documentary
evidence; non­matching of the name on such certificates (Raj
Kumar) with the name of the Appellant as brought on record
(Raju); and non­corroboration of the address of the Appellant
through such certificates, which simply stated that the date of
birth of the student named Raj Kumar was 12.07.1984.
15.    The High Court evidently did not even frame its discussion
in terms of whether the evidence brought on record was sufficient
to conduct an inquiry under the 2000 Act and the 2007 Rules, let
alone order and conduct such an inquiry. On the contrary, it
simply recorded that the evidence did not go to show that the
Appellant was a juvenile at the time of the commission of the
offence, and proceeded to affirm the conviction of the Appellant
on merits.
16.     Therefore, it is evident that the only inquiry as stipulated
under the 2000 Act and the 2007 Rules was conducted by the
Registrar (Judicial) upon the directions of this Court, after the
                                                                  10

Court was satisfied upon going through the school certificates
adduced by the Appellant that the certificates in question prima
facie entitled him to claim the conduct of such an inquiry. In
such a situation, the question regarding whether precedence may
be given to the inquiry of a Registrar (Judicial) of this Court over
the opinion of the High Court regarding the age of an accused
can be restated as whether such inquiry conducted by the
Registrar (Judicial) upon the direction of this Court, if thereafter
affirmed by this Court, would amount to an inquiry conducted by
this Court itself. If this be the case, the findings of such inquiry
would prevail over the view taken by the High Court, as is evident
from the preceding discussion.
17.    We are of the opinion that the above question must be
answered in the affirmative. This Court, on previous occasions
as well, has adopted the practice of directing the Registrar
(Judicial) to conduct the inquiry in terms of Rule 12 of the 2007
Rules on behalf of this Court, and accepted the findings made
therein (see Dharambir v. State (NCT) of Delhi, (supra). Seeing
that the Registrar (Judicial) is a District Judge serving on
deputation at the Supreme Court, recourse to his or her
assistance in the form of collecting evidence and arriving at a
                                                                  11

finding regarding the claim of juvenility of the person concerned
may be undertaken by this Court in order to save its judicial
time. However, it must be stressed that the findings in an inquiry
conducted by the Registrar (Judicial) would not per se prevail
upon a contrary view taken by the High Court. Only after this
Court applies its judicial mind to such report with due regard to
the confines of the procedure stipulated in Section 7A of the 2000
Act and Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules, and only if it thereafter
confirms the findings in such report would the same prevail upon
a contrary view taken by the High Court which is not based upon
any such inquiry.
18.    We may now undertake to consider the findings in the
report submitted by the Registrar (Judicial). As already noted, as
per the report, the age of the Appellant was 16 years, 2 months
and 2 days at the time of commission of the offence and he was
thus a juvenile at that time. In the said report, the learned
Registrar referred to the original Transfer Certificate in Hindi
issued by the Headmaster, Dayanand Arya Middle School, Sohna
dated 24.03.2012 and the Transfer Certificate issued by the
Principal, Government Senior Secondary School (Boys), Sohna
dated 12.12.2000. These certificates contain the official seal of
                                                                12

the respective schools and the signatures of the respective
authorities, and state the name of the student as Raj Kumar, son
of Rajendar Singh, and record his date of birth as 12.07.1984. A
certificate dated 07.12.2010 was also issued by the Principal of
the Government Senior Secondary School (Boys), Sohna, verifying
that the student named Raj Kumar, son of Rajendar Singh, used
to study at the school, and that the school records reflected his
date of birth as 12.07.1984 and the name of his mother as Smt.
Sarla Devi.
19.     The learned Registrar also duly corroborated the contents
of these certificates by referring to other school records and also
examined witnesses. With respect to the Dayanand Arya Middle
School, Sohna, the learned Registrar examined Mr. Suresh
Chand, Teacher, appearing under the directions of the School
Headmaster, who confirmed that the Transfer Certificate dated
24.03.2012 was bona fide and issued under the signature of the
then Principal. The Registrar also verified the certificate by
comparing it with the office copy of the same in the School
Leaving Certificate Register produced before him. The original
Admission and Withdrawal Register of the school was also
examined, which also recorded the Appellant’s date of birth as
                                                                 13

12.07.1984, and stated that he was admitted in the school on
23.07.1992 and withdrew on 310.3.1996 after passing Class V.
20.     With respect to the Government Senior Secondary School
(Boys), Sohna, the learned Registrar also called for the school
records, which were produced through Mrs. Nirmal Kalra,
Teacher, under the instructions of the Principal of the school.
She too affirmed that the Transfer Certificate dated 12.12.2000
was bona fide, and issued under the signature of the then
Principal. She affirmed having compared the entries in the
certificate with the corresponding entries in the relevant register
of the school, copies of which had been submitted to the learned
Registrar. The following details with respect to the Appellant’s
period of study in the school were also affirmed by Mrs. Kalra on
affidavit:
S.    Admissio     Date        of Date        of Reasons      for
No    n            Admission Striking Off Striking Off the
.     No.                                        Name
1.    14163        7.5.1996 (in 19.4.1997        Non­payment of
                   Class VI)      (in    Class School Funds
                                  VII)
2.    14678        17.5.1997      March 1999 Failed in Class
                   (in    Class (in      Class VIII         Board
                   VII)           VIII)          Examination
3.    15546        7.7.1999 (in 7.8.1999 (in Continued
                   Class VIII)    Class VIII)    absence
                                                                 14

21.     The learned Registrar concluded that the school transfer
certificates dated 24.03.2012 and 12.12.2000, read along with
the relevant entries of school registers of the respective schools,
were admissible as evidence under Rule 12(3)(a)(ii) of the 2007
Rules, i.e., they were found to be in the nature of the “date of
birth certificate from the school (other than a play school) first
attended” as specified in the said clause, and thus accepted the
Appellant’s claim of juvenility. It was also found that the
certificates contained the name of the Appellant as Raj Kumar,
son of Rajendar Singh, born on 12.07.1984. This name was
found to be the full name of the Appellant and the name Raju
appearing on the SLP record taken to be an alias, as affirmed by
both his parents by way of separate affidavits.
22.    In our opinion, the learned Registrar has duly affirmed the
veracity and bona fide nature of the certificates adduced by the
schools attended by the Appellant. At the same time, since Rule
12(3)(a)(ii) specifically mentions that the certificate showing the
date of birth of the person shall be from the school first attended
(other than a play school), we find that the certificate issued and
school records maintained by the Dayanand Arya Middle School,
Sohna, where the Appellant studied for four years till class V, as
                                                                 15

duly affirmed through the examination of a witness from such
school, is sufficient to satisfy the requirement of clause (a)(ii) of
Rule 12(3). Of course, it goes without saying that the certificate
issued by the Government Senior Secondary School (Boys),
Sohna and the accompanying school records serve to corroborate
the veracity of the records furnished by the former school. It
would not be out of place to highlight here that the findings in
the inquiry report have also not been controverted by the State.
23.     We are also conscious of the limitation envisaged under
Section 7A of the 2000 Act that the evidence adduced with
respect to the age of the accused cannot be in the form of mere
affidavits. Due to this reason, the reliance of the learned
Registrar upon affidavits to conclude that the name used in the
certificates placed on record (i.e. Raj Kumar) is the full name of
the Appellant and the name Raju is merely an alias is not tenable
in our view. However, we find that there is sufficient evidence on
record in the form of the appearance of the name of the father of
the Appellant on the certificate dated 24.03.2012 issued by the
Dayanand Arya Middle School, Sohna, to indicate that the name
Raj Kumar appearing on such certificate was the full name of the
Appellant.
                                                                   16

24.    In light of the above discussion, we are of the opinion that
it has been conclusively established that the date of birth of the
Appellant was 12.07.1984 and as such he was aged 16 years, 2
months and 2 days at the time of commission of the offence
dated 14.09.2000. In such circumstances, we do not have any
doubt that the inquiry conducted by the Registrar (Judicial) upon
the direction of this Court in the instant matter amounts to an
inquiry conducted by this Court itself, and is conclusive proof of
the age of the Appellant as provided in Rule 12(3) of the 2007
Rules. As the Appellant satisfies the requirement of Sections 2(k)
and 2(l) of the 2000 Act, the said Act is applicable to him in full
force in light of Section 7A and Section 20.
25.    Criminal Appeal hereby stands allowed and the order of the
High Court affirming the conviction and sentence of the Appellant
under Section 376(2)(g) of the IPC is set aside. Seeing that the
Appellant has already spent 6 years in imprisonment, whereas
the maximum period for which a juvenile may be sent to a special
home is only 3 years as per Section 15(1)(g) of the 2000 Act, and
since the Appellant has already been enlarged on bail by virtue of
the order of the Court dated 09.05.2014, he need not be taken
into   custody.    His  bail  bonds   stand  discharged    and   all
                                                                 17

proceedings against him, so far as they relate to the present case,
stand terminated.
26.   Before we part with this matter, we would like to place on
record our appreciation for the valuable assistance rendered to
this Court by Shri Siddhartha Dave, the learned amicus curiae in
this matter.
                                   ..…………………………..……..J.
                                                    [N.V. Ramana]
                                   ..…………………………..……..J.
                                     [Mohan M. Shantanagoudar]
                                    ..…..……………………..……..J.
                                                [Indira Banerjee]
New Delhi;
February 22, 2019.
                                                                  18


