                                                        NON­REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 807 OF 2006
           WESTERN COALFIELDS LTD.                           ……Appellant(s)
                                 VERSUS
           COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE
           TRICHY/MADURAI                                    .….Respondent(s)
                                               WITH
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 7625 OF 2005
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 3217­3218 OF 2010
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 8439­8440 OF 2011
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 9693­9694 OF 2011
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 4992 OF 2012
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NO(s). 4826 OF 2012
                                           JUDGMENT
           Rastogi, J.
           1.          The present batch of appeals are directed against the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
           judgment and order passed by the Customs, Excise and Service
NEETU KHAJURIA
Date: 2019.02.20
17:50:24 IST
Reason:
           Tax         Appellate  Tribunal, at South   Zonal  Bench, Chennai
                                                                            1

(hereinafter being referred to as “Tribunal”) rejecting the claim of
the appellant (buyer) for refund of the claim of the central excise
duty    under    Section   11B    of  the   Central    Excise   Act,
1944(hereinafter being referred to as “the Act”) which was paid
under protest by the manufacturer(M/s. Fenner (India) Ltd.).
2.    The short point for consideration in the present batch of
appeals is whether the period of limitation of six months shall
apply where the refund of central excise duty has been claimed
by the buyer and paid by the manufacturer(M/s. Fenner (India)
Ltd.) under protest.
3.    With the consent of the parties, we are dealing with the
facts of Civil Appeal No. 7625 of 2005 as all other are analogous
on facts and law.
4.    The appellant is a Public Sector Undertaking engaged in
coal mining. The price of coal is fixed by the Coal Ministry and
the appellants sell the goods on the price fixed by the Ministry
and no central excise duty is payable on coal.         M/s. Fenner
(India) Ltd.(manufacturer) cleared their finished goods viz.
                                                                   2

feneplsat PVC impregnated conveyor beltings classifying the same
under sub­heading 3920.12 on the Central Excise Tariff Act,
1985 as suggested by the department and paid the duty under
protest.   The dispute with regard to classification of feneplast
PVC impregnated conveyor beltings came to this Court and
finally decided vide judgment dated 28 th March, 1995(M/s.
Fenner (India) Ltd. Vs. Collector of Central Excise, Madurai
reported in 1995 (Suppl.) 2 SCC 567) holding that the conveyor
beltings would be classifiable under sub­heading 3922.90 for the
period from December 1986 to February 1987 and under sub­
heading no. 3926.90 for the period from 10 th February 1987 to
June, 1987 and also for the later period. Indisputedly, M/s.
Fenner (India) Ltd. pending classification deposited central excise
duty under protest and had never applied for its refund after the
classification dispute was finally decided by this Court of which a
reference has been made.
5.    The appellant herein is the buyer of conveyor beltings from
M/s. Fenner (India) Ltd. filed application for claim of refund on
20th December, 1996 for the period 20 th July 1988 to 15th
January 1994 on the premise that the payment was made
                                                                  3

towards    central   excise  duty    by   the  manufacturer(M/s.
Fenner(India) Pvt. Limited, Madurai) under protest due to
pending classification of PVC impregnated conveyor beltings
dispute in the Court of law and after issue of classification has
been settled by this Court in favour of the manufacturer M/s.
Fenner (India) Ltd. by judgment dated 28 th March, 1995, the
central excise duty collected should be refunded by the excise
department and there is no bar in claiming of refund in terms of
the amendment made under Section 11B of the Act and
limitation of six months shall not apply where duty has been paid
under protest.
6.    In furtherance of the application, show cause notice dated
17th February, 1997 was served by the Department holding that
since the appellant did not pay any duty and, therefore, is
precluded from making any application under Section 11B of the
Act and after affording opportunity of hearing order in original
came to be passed by the Authority dated 4 th August, 1997
rejecting the refund application filed by the appellant on the
ground of limitation and also on unjust enrichment. The appeal
preferred by the appellant against order dated 4 th August, 1997
                                                                4

before the Appellate Authority, Chennai came to be rejected on
the ground of limitation under Order dated 18 th January, 1999
and confirmed by the Appellate Tribunal under order impugned
dated 8th August, 2005 placing reliance on the judgment of this
Court in Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai­II Vs.
Allied Photographics India Ltd. 2004(4) SCC 34. The subject
matter of challenge is in appeal before us.
7.   The main thrust of submission of learned counsel for the
appellant is that since the manufacturer of the conveyor beltings
had paid duty under protest, the restriction of limitation of six
months under 2nd proviso to Section 11B(1) may not apply to the
refund claim filed by the appellant buyer and further submitted
that the only relevant question would be as to whether excise
duty for which refund claim is made has been paid under protest
or not and if the answer is in affirmative, the protest made by the
manufacturer at the time of payment of duty has to be taken into
consideration even to determine whether the buyer has filed the
refund claim within time.
                                                                  5

8.   Learned counsel submits that when the duty paid by the
manufacturer is permitted to be claimed by the buyer who
ultimately bears the burden, protest made by such manufacturer
at the time of paying the central excise duty for which the buyer
can also apply for the refund and bar of limitation of six months
may not apply to the buyer claiming refund of excise duty paid by
the manufacturer under protest.
9.   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent while
supporting the order of the Tribunal submits that although the
buyer can move an application for refund of central excise duty
under the provision of Section 11B of the Act provided the duty of
excise borne by the buyer had not passed on the incidence of
such duty to any other person and application is submitted for
seeking refund claim within a period of six months from the date
of purchase of the goods which indeed in the instant appeal is
beyond the period of limitation and have been rightly rejected by
the Tribunal placing reliance on the judgment of this Court in
Commissioner     of  Central    Excise,   Mumbai­II   Vs.   Allied
Photographics India Ltd’s case (supra) and further submitted
that claim for refund under Section 11B, the right of the
                                                                  6

manufacturer and the right of the buyer are separate and distinct
and    indisputedly,      the     application       was     filed by the
appellant(buyer) much after the period of six months from the
date of purchase of goods which was time barred in terms of 2 nd
proviso to Section 11B(1) of the Act and rightly rejected by the
competent authority and affirmed by the Tribunal and needs no
further interference.
10.  Before we proceed to examine the question, it would be
apposite to take note of relevant provision of Section 11B of the
Act applicable at the relevant time(pre­amended) which reads as
under:­
         “SECTION 11B. Claim for refund of duty. —
         (1) Any person claiming refund of any duty of excise
         may make an application for refund of such duty to the
         [Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy
         Commissioner of Central Excise] before the expiry of
         [six months] [from the relevant date] [[in such form and
         manner] as may be prescribed and the application
         shall be accompanied by such documentary or other
         evidence (including the documents referred to in
         section 12A) as the applicant may furnish to establish
         that the amount of duty of excise in relation to which
         such refund is claimed was collected from, or paid by,
         him and the incidence of such duty had not been
         passed on by him to any other person :
         Provided that where an application for refund has been
         made before the commencement of the Central Excises
         and Customs Laws (Amendment) Act, 1991, such
         application shall be deemed to have been made under
         this sub­section as amended by the said Act and the
                                                                       7

same shall be dealt with in accordance with the
provisions of sub­section (2) substituted by that Act:]
[Provided further that] the limitation of [six months]
shall not apply where any duty has been paid under
protest.
(2) If, on receipt of any such application, the [Assistant
Commissioner        of   Central    Excise   or     Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise] is satisfied that the
whole or any part of the duty of excise paid by the
applicant is refundable, he may make an order
accordingly and the amount so determined shall be
credited to the Fund :
Provided that the amount of duty of excise as
determined by the [Assistant Commissioner of Central
Excise or Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise]
under the foregoing provisions of this sub­section
shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to
the applicant, if such amount is relatable to –
      (a)…..
      (b)….
      (c )….
      (d)….
      (e) the duty of excise borne by the buyer, if he
      had not passed on the incidence of such duty
      to any other person;
      (f)….
(3) ….
(4) …
(5) For the removal of any notification issued under
clause (f) of doubts, it is hereby declared that the first
proviso to sub­section (2), including any such
notification approved or modified under sub­section
(4), may be rescinded by the Central Government at
any time by notification in the Official Gazette.]
[Explanation. — For the purposes of this section, ­
(A) ….
(B) “relevant date” means, ­
      (a) …
                                                           8

                   (i) …
                   (ii) …
                   (iii) ….
         (b) ….
         (c) ….
         (d)….
         (e) in the case of a person, other than the
         manufacturer, the date of purchase of the goods by
         such person;]
         in the case of goods which are exempt from payment of
         duty
              (eb) ….
              (ec) ….
         (f) ….”
11.   It is not disputed that the excise duty was paid by the
manufacturer(M/s. Fenner (India) Ltd.) under protest to the
department and the dispute with regard to the classification of
the product finally came to be decided by this Court in M/s.
Fenner India’s case(supra) and the manufacturer M/s. Fenner
(India) Ltd. never moved any application for refund of the excise
duty at any given point of time. The appellant herein is the buyer
and purchased conveyor beltings from the manufacturer M/s.
Fenner (India) Ltd. during the period 20 th July, 1988 to 15th
January, 1994 indicated in Civil Appeal No. 7625 of 2005. The
period for which the refund of excise duty has been claimed
                                                                 9

differs but in all the cases, applications have been filed by the
appellant(buyer) much after the period of limitation which was
six months from the date of purchase of goods at the time of
filing of the application to claim refund under Section 11B of the
Act.
12.   Section 11B deals with the claim of refund of duty as paid
on his own accord by any person for refund of such duty to the
competent authority before the expiry of six months from the
relevant date as prescribed but where the duty was paid under
protest in terms of the 2nd proviso to Section 11B(1), the period of
limitation may not apply. Although the buyer can also apply for
refund provided the duty of excise is borne by the buyer and he
had not passed on the incidence of such duty to any other person
as referred to under Section 11B(2)(e) and the application has
been moved within the period of six months from the relevant
date of purchase of the goods by such person in terms of Section
11B(5)(B)(e) of the Act.     The scheme of Section 11B makes a
distinction between right of the manufacturer to claim refund
from right of the buyer to claim refund treating them separate
and distinct for making an application for refund exercising their
                                                                  10

right under Section 11B of the Act and it has been examined by
the three­Judge Bench of this Court in Commissioner of
Central Excise, Mumbai­II Vs. Allied Photographics India
Ltd. case(supra) as under:­
            “Therefore, Section 11­B(3) stated that no refund
         shall be made except in terms of Section 11­B(2).
         Section 11­B(2)( e ) conferred a right on the buyer to
         claim refund in cases where he proved that he had not
         passed on the duty to any other person. The entire
         scheme of Section 11­B showed the difference between
         the rights of a manufacturer to claim refund and the
         right of the buyer to claim refund as separate and
         distinct. Moreover, under Section 4 of the said Act,
         every payment by the manufacturer whether under
         protest or under provisional assessment was on his
         own account. The accounts of the manufacturer are
         different from the accounts of a buyer(distributor).
         Consequently, there is no merit in the argument
         advanced on behalf of the respondent that the
         distributor was entitled to claim refund of “on­account”
         payment made under protest by the manufacturer
         without complying with Section 11­B of the Act.”
            It was further held as under:­
            “Having come to the conclusion that the respondent
         was bound to comply with Section 11B of the Act and
         having come to the conclusion that the refund
         application dated 11­2­1997 was time­barred in terms
         of Section 11B of the Act, we are not required to go into
         the merits of the claim for refund by the respondent
         who has alleged that it has not passed on the burden
         of duty to its dealers.”
13.   It may be appropriate to notice that the view earlier
expressed by the two­Judge Bench of this Court in National
Winder Vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, Allahabad
                                                                   11

2003(11) SCC 361 was held to be per incuriam in Commissioner
of Central Excise, Mumbai­II Vs. Allied Photographics India
Ltd. case(supra).
14.   In the instant case, indisputedly the application was filed by
the appellant as a buyer of the goods(conveyor belts) from M/s.
Fenner (India) Ltd. who paid the duty under protest much after a
period of limitation(six months) as prescribed under the mandate
of law disentitles the claim of refund to the appellant as prayed
for in view of the judgment of this Court in Commissoiner of
Central Excise, Mumbai­II Vs. Allied Photographics India
Ltd. case(supra) holding that the purchaser of the goods was not
entitled to claim refund of duty made under protest by the
manufacturer without complying the mandate of Section 11B of
the Act, 1944.
15.   In our considered view, the appeals are without substance
and deserve to be rejected. Consequently, the appeals fail and
are accordingly dismissed.
                                                                  12

                  ………………………….J.
                  (A.M. KHANWILKAR)
                  ………………………….J.
                  (AJAY RASTOGI)
NEW DELHI
February 20, 2019
                                    13


