                      1
                                     REPORTABLE
        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1834 OF 2018
   [ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION
          (CIVIL) NO.34336 OF 2009]
STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA
LTD.                           ...APPELLANT(S)
                   VERSUS
CHOUDHARY TILOTAMA DAS
& ORS.                        ...RESPONDENT(S)
                      WITH
        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1835 OF 2018
   [ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION
           (CIVIL) NO.2564 OF 2010]
                    JUDGMENT
RANJAN GOGOI, J.
SLP(C) NO.34336 OF 2009
1.   Leave granted.
2.   In the year 1999, to be precise on 12 th
February, 1999, the Rourkela Steel Plant
(hereinafter     referred    to    as   “RSP”)
introduced a Voluntary Retirement Scheme,
1999 covering employees who had served for

                           2
a minimum of 15 years or who are above 40
years    of    age.      Thereafter     by   Circular
dated    9th    August,    1999   the   RSP   floated
another        scheme      called     “Scheme      for
Allotment       of   Quarters     to    Ex-employees
Separating       under    the   SAIL    VRS   Scheme,
1999”.       Under   the    said   Scheme   of  1999,
employees      of   the   RSP   who   were   allotted
official quarters were allowed to occupy
such    quarters      on    licence    basis   for   a
period of 22 (twenty two) months following
their leaving the RSP/Company on the basis
of voluntary retirement.
3.   The respondents, 53 (fifty three) in
number, were allotted quarters by the RSP
and   had     opted    for   voluntary     retirement
under the Scheme. Accordingly, they were
allowed    to    retain    the   official    quarters
for   a  period     of   22   (twenty    two)  months
which period was extended. Thereafter, the
RSP   came     up  with    another    Scheme   called
“Sail    Scheme     for    Leasing   of    Houses   to

                       3
Employees, 2002”. This was on 22nd July,
2002.        The    said     Scheme    of    2002
contemplated allotment of houses/flats on
long   term    lease   basis    (33   years)   to
serving   employees.    Ex-employees    like  the
respondents–writ petitioners were excluded
from the purview of the scheme.
4.   The said Scheme of 2002 was challenged
in a writ petition before the High Court
of Orissa which was instituted way back in
the year 2002.       As it would appear from
the pleadings of the parties before the
High Court, while the appellant – Steel
Authority of India Limited, at that point
of time, had pressed for the inclusion of
the ex-employees within the framework of
the   said    Scheme    of   2002,   the    State
Government    took   the   stand  that   such  an
action   may   invite    public   criticism.   No
affidavit was, however, filed by the State
Government.     By the impugned judgment and
order dated 7th September, 2009 the writ

                     4
petition  in  question   was  closed/disposed
of by the following operative direction:
         “In view of such, we dispose
     of this writ petition with a
     direction to the O.P. - SAIL
     Authorities to consider the case
     of the petitioners for allotment
     of quarters, which are in their
     occupation,     on     long     term
     sub-lease basis, in terms of the
     Circular    dated    22.7.2002    in
     Annexure-5. We further direct
     that in the event the quarters
     are allotted to the petitioners
     on long term sub-lease basis, the
     cost of such quarters shall be
     computed at the rate at which it
     was prevalent at the time when
     the Scheme came into force, along
     with interest thereon @ 9% per
     annum and the same shall be paid
     by the petitioners.      Apart from
     that the petitioners are also
     liable to pay the unpaid house
     rent, electricity duty, water
     charges, if any, along with the
     aforesaid cost.      However, there
     shall be no charge of penal rent
     from the petitioners.
         We make it clear that this
     order   only   relates    to   those
     petitioners, who are presently in
     occupation of the quarters.
         The writ petition as well as
     Misc.    Case     Nos.     842/2002,
     3924/2003 & 354/2006 is also
     disposed of accordingly.”

                     5
5.  Aggrieved,   the    Steel   Authority  of
India Limited has filed the present appeal
before this Court.
6.  We  have   heard    Shri   Ranjit  Kumar,
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
appellant – Steel Authority of India Ltd.,
Shri Ratnakar Dash, learned Senior Counsel
appearing    for     the     respondents–writ
petitioners  and   Shri    Shibashish  Misra,
learned counsel for the State of Odisha.
7.  Though several    grounds including   the
authority of SAIL to grant a sub lease as
directed by the High Court has been urged,
the case of the appellant in the appeal
before us is primarily based on subsequent
facts which have been brought on record by
means of an additional affidavit dated 22nd
January, 2018. In the aforesaid additional
affidavit dated 22nd January, 2018 it has
been stated that the RSP, a unit of Steel
Authority of India Limited (SAIL), had an

                        6
initial   production      capacity   of  2   (two)
million tons per annum which was expanded
and the plant modernized to reach a target
production of 4.2 million tons per annum.
This was at an overall cost of Rs.13684
crores and was completed in the year 2013.
In the said additional affidavit dated 22nd
January, 2018 it has been further stated
that   the   SAIL    is    now  engaged   in   the
process of enhancing the annual capacity
of the RSP to 7.5 million tons per annum
for     which     a     huge      infrastructural
investment will have to be made running
into almost Rs. 2.6 million crores.          It is
further   stated    by   the   appellant   in  the
said    additional      affidavit     dated    22nd
January, 2018 that keeping in mind that
the   optimum    number      of   employees    per
million ton of production should be 3200,
once the production capacity is raised to
7.5 million tons the RSP will have about
24000 employees.      It is contended that the
entire township of Rourkela is established

                        7
and maintained by the RSP itself which is,
therefore, required to provide additional
accommodation       to      various      Government
Agencies    like   Police,     Revenue    Officers,
Government       employees,       employees       of
Government School/Colleges, Banks, Public
Sector   Undertakings      (PSUs),    etc.   In  the
said   additional       affidavit       dated    22nd
January, 2018, the appellant has further
stated that as per the directive received
from    the     Union      Cabinet      Secretariat
long-term    lease   is   presently     prohibited.
It is further stated that presently the
available    quarters     are    about    19916   of
which  about     18300    quarters     are   already
occupied by the employees/ex-employees and
various    other    employees      of    the   State
Government,    PSUs,    etc.      It    is   further
stated that about 250-300 quarters are in
a  dilapidated     condition.     The    remaining/
vacant quarters would be required not only
to house the in-coming employees but also
various Agencies that would be working at

                        8
the     site     in    connection       with    the
expansion/modernization        plans.       On  the
strength of the aforesaid statements and
the     official     correspondences/decisions
enclosed in this regard to the additional
affidavit     dated   22nd   January,     2018  the
appellant submits that the order of the
High     Court     should     be     appropriately
interfered with.
8.   Shri    Ratnakar    Dash,    learned    Senior
Counsel    appearing   for    the   respondents   –
writ     petitioners       has     disputed     the
statements made by the appellant in the
additional     affidavit    dated    22nd  January,
2018 and has drawn the attention of the
Court to the reply of the respondent to
the   said   additional    affidavit     dated  22nd
January, 2018 filed by the appellant.           The
learned    counsel   for   the   respondents–writ
petitioners,     apart    from    contesting    the
various statements made in the additional
affidavit dated 22nd January, 2018 filed by

                       9
the appellant, has submitted that the RSP
is a loss making concern and admittedly is
reducing its workforce. It is claimed that
huge   number     of   vacant     quarters    are
available   and    even   if    the   production
capacity  of   the   RSP  is  enhanced    to  7.5
million tons there would still be surplus
of accommodation/quarters.
9.   The respondents-writ petitioners have
brought  on   record   a  Circular    dated   23rd
August,  2017   by   which   applications    have
been invited for allotment of one room/1
BR(L.T) quarters on licence basis for a
period of 33 (thirty three) months.          Such
applications     have    been    invited     from
employees,   ex-employees     of   the  RSP   who
would be separating from the RSP/Company.
The   said     fact,     according      to    the
respondents – writ petitioners, has belied
the claim made by the appellant – Steel
Authority of India Limited.

                      10
10. Insofar   as   the   State  of   Odisha  is
concerned, Shri Shibashish Misra, learned
counsel appearing for the State of Odisha
has  taken  a  stand   that  the   appellant  –
Steel Authority of India Limited is free
to take its decision in the matter subject
to the conditions of lease under which the
land   has  been    allotted   to   the   Steel
Authority of India Limited.
11. We have considered the matter.
12. “Sail Scheme for Leasing of Houses to
Employees, 2002” was valid for a period of
three months.    The operation of it had not
been extended.     Under the said Scheme of
2002, ex-employees, to which category the
respondents–writ petitioners belong, were
not    vested     with     any     right    for
consideration of their cases for allotment
on long-term lease.       In fact, the lease
deed between the State of Orissa and Steel
Authority of India Limited makes it very

                       11
clear that the lands can be used only for
the   Steel   plant    and    for   the   purposes
ancillary    thereto    and     that   the    Steel
Authority of India Limited shall not            use
the land for any other purpose except with
the previous sanction of the Government.
13. “Sail Scheme for Leasing of Houses to
Employees,    2002”   was    introduced     in  the
year 2002.     Considerable time has elapsed
in the meantime.       The Scheme of 2002 was
applicable      only      to      regular/serving
employees and not to ex-employees.           In the
long   period   of   interval     that   has   been
occasioned by the pendency of the present
litigation the very basis for introduction
of the Scheme of 2002 has changed and the
facts    now    stated    in     the    additional
affidavit dated 22nd January, 2018 of the
appellant    –   Steel    Authority      of   India
Limited   would    indicate     that   today    any
long-term         lease         of        quarters
built/maintained      by    the    RSP     is   not

                       12
feasible.       In   fact,    according     to   the
appellant    –    Steel    Authority     of    India
Limited,   there    would    be   a   shortage    of
accommodation/quarters       in    the   immediate
future   and,    perhaps,     new   constructions
will   have    to   be   raised     to   meet    the
increasing    demand    for    accommodation      on
account of increase of production levels
of the RSP.
14. In a situation where no legal right
can be understood to have been vested in
the respondents – writ petitioners under
the Scheme of 2002 and operation of the
said    Scheme     of   2002     today     is    not
considered   feasible     or   necessary    by   the
appellant on account of the reasons stated
in   the  additional      affidavit     dated    22nd
January, 2018, as noticed herein above, we
do   not  see    how   the    appellant     can   be
compelled to grant any long-term lease of
the official quarters in the RSP to the
respondents – writ petitioners who are its

                     13
ex-employees.   Such    subsequent    facts  and
developments that have taken place during
the    interregnum     would     certainly    be
material   in  moulding    the    relief(s)  and
answering the issues arising before this
Court.
15. Consequently and in the light of the
above we are of the view that no relief
can  be   afforded  to   the   respondents–writ
petitioners,    at   this     point   of   time.
Consequently,   we  allow    this   appeal;  set
aside the order of the High Court but at
the   same    time   we     direct    that   the
respondents–writ     petitioners       (53    in
number) or their legal heirs, as may be,
be allowed to remain in occupation of the
quarters for a period of 33 (thirty three)
months   with  effect    from   today,   on  the
expiry of which they will handover vacant
and   peaceful    possession     of   the   said
accommodation/quarter      to    the   competent
authority of the RSP.

                    14
16. The appeal, consequently, is disposed
of in the above terms.
S.L.P.(C) NO.2564 OF 2010
17. Leave granted.
18. The appeal is disposed of in terms of
the judgment/order passed in Civil appeal
arising   out of   Special   Leave  Petition
(Civil) No.34336 of 2009.
                        .................,J.
                           (RANJAN GOGOI)
                        .................,J.
                           (R. BANUMATHI)
NEW DELHI
                       FEBRUARY 12, 2018


