                                                                    REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                             CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 6202­6205 OF 2019
                        (Arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 13573­13576 of 2014)
           Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd.                             …Appellant
                                               Versus
           Canara Bank & Ors.                                       …Respondents
                                             JUDGMENT
           INDU MALHOTRA, J.
                    Leave granted.
           1. The present Special Leave Petitions have been filed to
                    challenge Order dated 16.09.2011 passed in W.P. (C) No. 560
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2019.08.09
17:32:12 IST
Reason:
                                                   1

   of 1995, Order dated 21.10.2011 passed in C.M. No. 12230 of
   2011, Order dated 05.07.2013 passed in C.M. No. 8100 of
   2012, and Order dated 10.01.2014 passed in C.M. No. 324
   and 325 of 2014 by the Delhi High Court.
2. The background facts of the case are as follows :
2.1. In 1992, MTNL floated 17% Non­Cumulative Secured
      Redeemable Bonds described as the VI Series (Private
      Placement) worth Rs. 425 crores. On 10.02.1992, MTNL
      placed bonds worth Rs.200 crores with Can Bank Financial
      Services Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as “CANFINA”) under
      an MOU agreement. The bond amount of Rs. 200 cores was
      placed as fixed deposit by MTNL with CANFINA. CANFINA
      paid back Rs. 50 crores of the fixed deposit in 1992. The
      balance fixed deposit amount of Rs. 150 crores along with
      interest was not paid by CANFINA to MTNL. As a
      consequence, MTNL did not service the interest on bonds.
      MTNL was of the view that since it did not receive the entire
      bond amount of Rs. 200 crores, the entire deal did not go
      through. Against payment of Rs. 50 crores received from
                                 2

     CANFINA, MTNL serviced the bonds of approximately Rs. 31
     crores to the public. MTNL was of the view that only a sum
     of Rs.5.41 crores was payable to CANFINA, which was not
     accepted by CANFINA.
2.2. As per Canara Bank, soon after the bonds were subscribed,
     there was an out­break of a security scam which led to a
     collapse of the secondary market in shares, security and
     bonds. There were very few buyers in the secondary market.
     Even such buyers were offering very low prices for these
     bonds. In these circumstances, CANFINA was faced with a
     severe liquidity crunch.
2.3. In these circumstances, Respondent No. 1 – Canara Bank
     purchased the Bonds issued by MTNL, of the face value of
     Rs. 80 crores, from Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA which is
     its wholly owned subsidiary.
2.4. Canara Bank requested for registration of these Bonds with
     MTNL, and lodged letters of allotment for purchase of the
     bonds from CANFINA.
                               3

2.5. MTNL vide letter dated 14.10.1992 addressed to Canara
     Bank, refused to transfer the Bonds, on the various grounds
     mentioned in the letter.
2.6. MTNL by a subsequent letter dated 16.02.1993, informed
     Canara Bank that it had registered a part of the face value
     of Rs. 40 crores, in favour of CANFINA. The bond
     instruments were however retained on the ground that
     CANFINA had failed to pay the deposit money of Rs. 150
     crores, which was payable to MTNL with an accrued interest
     of 12% p.a.
2.7. MTNL vide letter dated 20.10.1993, cancelled all the Bonds
     inter alia on the ground that letters of consideration
     remained with CANFINA.
2.8. Canara Bank vide its reply dated 13.01.1994 contended
     that it is the holder in due course, and is entitled to have
     the shares registered in its name, and receive the interest as
     and when it fell due.
2.9. MTNL sent a statement of accounts by adjusting the
     proceeds of the cancellation of bonds towards the dues of
                                 4

      CANFINA. It was stated that the bonds and interest accrued
      thereon cannot be refunded. MTNL with its letter dated
      13.01.1994, attached a cheque for Rs. 5,41,17,463 as the
      amount payable to Canara Bank.
2.10.       Canara Bank, however, returned the cheque vide letter
      dated     10.02.1994,   demanding      the   restoration and
      registration of the bonds.
2.11.       Canara Bank filed W.P. (Civil) No. 560 of 1995 before
      the Delhi High Court to challenge the cancellation of the
      Bonds, and a direction to pay the Interest accrued.
            It is relevant to note that CANFINA was joined as a
      proforma party in the Writ Petition filed by Canara Bank.
2.12.       The Delhi High Court vide Order dated 09.09.1996
      directed the Union of India to decide the issues between the
      parties in light of this Court’s judgment in O.N.G.C. v.
      Commissioner of Central Excise1.
              The Writ Petition was dismissed on the ground of
      availability of an alternative and efficacious remedy before
1 (1995) Supp. 4 SCC 541.
                                  5

     the Company Law Board under Section 111 of the
     Companies Act, 1956.
2.13.                       The proceedings before the Company
     Law Board came to be dismissed vide Order dated
     26.02.1998, since the remedy was no longer available, as
     per the amendment of Section 111 by the Depositories Act,
     1996.
2.14.                        Canara Bank filed an application for
     Restoration of the Writ Petition, which was restored vide
     Order dated 12.05.1999.
2.15.                       Canara Bank made a representation
     to the Cabinet Secretary.
            On 27.03.2001, a meeting was convened by the
     Cabinet Secretariat, Litigation Cell which was presided by
     the Cabinet Secretary, and attended by the representatives
     of MTNL, Canara Bank, and CANFINA.
         The Committee directed Canara Bank, CANFINA and
     MTNL to settle the disputes through arbitration by making
                                6

     an appropriate reference to the Permanent Machinery of
     Arbitration,   functioning   in the  Department     of  Public
     Enterprises. The Committee did not permit Canara Bank,
     CANFINA and MTNL to pursue the litigation in Court.
2.16.                        The Delhi High Court vide Order
     dated 30.05.2008 referred the disputes between the parties
     to the Committee on Disputes. The Writ Petition was
     adjourned sine die. Canara Bank was granted liberty to
     revive the Petition in the event that the Committee on
     Disputes was unable to resolve the disputes between the
     parties.
2.17.                         The Committee of Disputes held a
     meeting on 16.12.2008, which was attended by the
     representatives of MTNL, Canara Bank and CANFINA. The
     Committee, after hearing the parties, expressed the view
     that all the three parties should take recourse to arbitration
     in view of the different inter­linked transactions between
     them.
                                 7

            The representatives of Canara Bank expressed the
     apprehension that arbitration by the Permanent Machinery
     of Arbitration would take much longer than judicial
     recourse.
            The Committee observed that to expedite arbitration,
     the parties should expeditiously enter into an arbitration
     agreement under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
2.18.                      Pursuant to the meeting held on
     16.12.2008, Canara Bank vide its letter dated 05.03.2009
     sent a draft arbitration agreement to the Chairman and
     Managing Director of MTNL. The draft arbitration agreement
     sent by Canara Bank was between Canara Bank and
     CANFINA on the one side, with MTNL on the other.
2.19.                      By letter dated 17.03.2010, Canara
     Bank requested the Deputy Secretary, Cabinet Secretariat
     to advise MTNL to execute the arbitration agreement in
     accordance with the direction of the Ministry of Law and
     Justice.
                              8

2.20.                         The Delhi High Court vide Order
      dated 01.10.2010 disposed of the pending Writ Petition with
      the observation that the matter should be resolved by the
      Committee on Disputes expeditiously so that the arbitration
      agreement between the parties is signed as soon as
      possible.
2.21.                            The  decision    in  O.N.G.C.    v.
      Commissioner of Central Excise (supra) came to be overruled
      by a Constitution Bench in Electronics Corporation of India
      Ltd. v. Union of India & Ors.2
            Accordingly, Canara Bank moved the Delhi High Court
      u/S. 151, CPC for restoration of the disposed of Writ
      Petition.
2.22.                         The Delhi High Court restored the
      Writ Petition, and vide Order dated 16.09.2011 noted that
      the two principal issues which arise for consideration are:
2 (2011) 3 SCC 404.
                                  9

     (i)   Whether Canara Bank is liable for the acts or
           omissions of CANFINA; and
     (ii)  Whether Canara Bank should take over the liabilities
           and admit them in the arbitration agreement itself.
           During the course of the proceedings, the parties
     before the Delhi High Court agreed that these issues may be
     referred to arbitration. The parties were requested to
     suggest the name of a sole arbitrator to be appointed on the
     next date of hearing.
2.23.                        On 21.10.2011, the name of Mr.
     Justice A.P. Shah (Retd.) was suggested by the Counsel for
     Canara Bank, which was accepted by the Counsel for
     MTNL.
           Accordingly, Mr. Justice A.P. Shah (Retd.) came to be
     appointed as the Sole Arbitrator.
2.24.                        On 05.01.2012, the Sole Arbitrator
     issued notice to all the three parties i.e. MTNL, Canara
     Bank, and CANFINA.
                               10

2.25.                       Canara Bank raised an objection to
     joining CANFINA as a party to the arbitration. The
     Arbitrator heard the parties on 27.03.2012, on the issue
     whether CANFINA should be joined as a party to the
     proceedings.
             The learned Arbitrator passed an interim award
     holding that CANFINA had not appeared on 16.09.2011
     before the High Court, when the disputes were referred to
     arbitration. CANFINA was not a party to the arbitration
     agreement, and cannot be joined as a party to proceedings.
2.26.                       MTNL filed C.M. No. 8100 of 2012
     before the Delhi High Court seeking clarification of Order
     dated 16.09.2011, as to whether CANFINA ought to be
     impleaded    as   a  necessary  party   to  the  arbitration
     agreement.
           The   Delhi   Court  vide  order   dated  05.07.2013
     dismissed the application as “not pressed” on the statement
     made by the Counsel of MTNL.
                               11

2.27.                       Canara Bank filed its Statement of
     Claim before the learned Sole Arbitrator on 06.12.2013.
2.28.                       MTNL filed I.A. Nos. 324 – 325 of
     2014 before the Delhi High Court for recall of the Orders
     dated 16.09.2011, 21.10.2011 and 05.07.2013 passed in
     W.P. (C) No. 560 of 1995.
2.29.                       The Delhi High Court vide Order
     dated 10.01.2014, dismissed the Application for Recall on
     the ground that the application was identical to the
     application previously filed by MTNL being C.M. No. 8100 of
     2012. Since MTNL had not pressed the earlier application,
     the subsequent application being identical in nature, could
     not be considered, and was dismissed.
2.30.                        In May 2014, MTNL filed its reply to
     the Statement of Claim filed by Canara Bank, and also
     made a Counter­Claim against Canara Bank.
3. Aggrieved by the Orders dated 16.09.2011, 21.10.2011,
   05.07.2013, and 10.01.2014 passed by the Delhi High Court
                                 12

   in W.P. (C) No. 560 of 1995, C.M. No. 12230 of 2011, C.M. No.
   8100 of 2012 and C.M. No. 324 and 325 of 2014 respectively,
   the Appellant – MTNL filed the present Special Leave Petition.
   This Court vide Order dated 08.05.2014 issued Notice to all
   the Respondents, including CANFINA which has been joined as
   Respondent No. 2.
4. Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned ASG appeared on behalf of MTNL,
   Mr. Ameesh Dabass, learned Counsel appeared for Respondent
   No. 1 – Canara Bank, and Ms. Saumya Sinha, along with Mr.
   A.K. Sharma, learned Counsels appeared for Respondent No. 2
   – CANFINA.
5. The Counsel for the Appellant – MTNL inter alia submitted as
   under:
5.1. In the absence of a written agreement for arbitration
      between the parties, as stipulated by Section 2(b) r.w. 2(h)
      and 7(3) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, the
      arbitration cannot proceed.
5.2. The disputes which were referred to arbitration pertaining to
      transactions between the Appellant – MTNL on the one
                                13

     hand, and Respondent No. 1 and 2 – Canara Bank and
     CANFINA on the other hand.
5.3. The arbitration proceeding cannot proceed in the absence of
     Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA as the Bonds in question were
     subscribed by Respondent No, 2 – CANFINA, and were
     subsequently    transferred   to its  parent   Company     i.e.
     Respondent No. 1 – Canara Bank.
        In the absence of Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA being
     made a party to the arbitration, the arbitral proceedings
     may be rendered infructuous.
5.4. The only existing arbitration agreement between the parties,
     is a draft tripartite agreement forwarded by Canara Bank
     wherein MTNL and CANFINA were both made parties.
5.5. There is no legal relationship or privity of contract between
     the Appellant – MTNL and Respondent No. 1 – Canara Bank
     as the disputed Bonds were bought from the Appellant –
     MTNL by Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA.
                                14

        The Appellant – MTNL had consented to the disputes
     being referred to arbitration on the understanding that the
     arbitration would be amongst the three parties.
6. The Counsel for Respondent No. 1 Canara Bank inter alia
   submitted that :
6.1. The present appeal is not maintainable as the Appellant –
     MTNL filed the present Appeal after filing its reply to the
     Statement of Claim and Counter­Claim before the learned
     Sole Arbitrator, and has therefore submitted itself to the
     jurisdiction of the learned Sole Arbitrator.
6.2. The only remedy available to Appellant – MTNL was to file
     an application under Section 16 of the Arbitration and
     Conciliation Act, 1996.
6.3. Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA was merely joined as a
     proforma party in the Writ Petition before the Delhi High
     Court, and therefore cannot be made a party before the
     arbitral proceedings.
                                 15

6.4. At the time of giving consent to arbitration and appointment
      of the learned Sole Arbitrator, Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA
      was not before the Court on 16.09.2011 and 21.10.2011.
6.5. The Appellant – MTNL has not filed any claim against
      Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA, and therefore, cannot seek
      any remedy or relief against Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA at
      this belated stage. Further, it cannot be allowed to raise an
      issue of impleadment without having any claim against the
      party sought to be impleaded.
7. We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties, and
   perused the pleadings and Written Submissions filed.
8. ISSUES
      There    are  two   issues   which   have    arisen  for  our
   consideration : (i) the first issue raised by the Appellant –
   MTNL with respect to the existence of a valid arbitration
   agreement between the three parties; (ii) the second issue has
   been raised by Respondent No. 1 – Canara Bank that the
   Order dated 16.09.2011 and 21.10.2011 is between Canara
   Bank and MTNL. Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA, is not a party
                                 16

   to the arbitration agreement, and hence cannot be impleaded
   in the proceedings.
      These issues will be dealt with seriatim.
9. THE EXISTENCE OF A VALID ARBITRATION AGREEMENT
      A valid arbitration agreement constitutes the heart of an
   arbitration. An arbitration agreement is the written agreement
   between the parties, to submit their existing, or future
   disputes or differences, to arbitration. A valid arbitration
   agreement is the foundation stone on which the entire edifice
   of the arbitral process is structured. A binding agreement for
   disputes to be resolved through arbitration is a sine­qua­non
   for referring the parties to arbitration.
9.1. Section 7 defines “arbitration agreement” and reads as
      follows :
            7. Arbitration agreement. –
            (1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement” means an
            agreement by the parties to submit to arbitration all
            or certain disputes which have arisen or which may
            arise between them in respect of a defined legal
            relationship, whether contractual or not.
            (2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of
            an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of a
            separate agreement.
            (3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
                                      17

           (4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is
           contained in­
             (a) A document signed by the parties;
             (b) An exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other
             means of telecommunication which provide a
             record of the agreement; or
             (c) An exchange of statements of claim and defence
           in which the existence of the agreement is alleged by
           one party and not denied by the other.
           (5) There reference in a contract to a document
           containing an arbitration clause constitutes an
           arbitration agreement if the contract is in writing and
           the reference is such as to make that arbitration
           clause part of the contract.
9.2. The arbitration agreement need not be in any particular
     form. What is required to be ascertained is the intention of
     the parties to settle their disputes through arbitration. The
     essential elements or attributes of an arbitration agreement
     is the agreement to refer their disputes or differences to
     arbitration, which is expressly or impliedly spelt out from a
     clause      in   an     agreement,       separate       agreement, or
     documents/correspondence exchanged between the parties.
9.3. Section 7(4)(b) of the 1996 Act, states that an arbitration
     agreement can be derived from exchange of letters, telex,
     telegram or other means of communication, including
     through electronic means. The 2015 Amendment Act
                                     18

      inserted the words “including communication through
      electronic means” in Section 7(4)(b). If it can prima facie be
      shown that parties are ad idem, even though the other party
      may not have signed a formal contract, it cannot absolve
      him from the liability under the agreement3.
9.4. Arbitration agreements are to be construed according to the
      general principles of construction of statutes, statutory
      instruments,      and    other    contractual    documents. The
      intention of the parties must be inferred from the terms of
      the contract, conduct of the parties, and correspondence
      exchanged, to ascertain the existence of a binding contract
      between the parties. If the documents on record show that
      the parties were ad idem, and had actually reached an
      agreement upon all material terms, then it would be
      construed to be a binding contract.
            The meaning of a contract must be gathered by
      adopting a common sense approach, and must not be
3 Govind Rubber Ltd. v. Louis Dreyfus Commodities Asia (P) Ltd.,
      (2015) 13 SCC 477
                                     19

      allowed to be thwarted by a pedantic and legalistic interpre­
      tation.4
9.5.   A commercial document has to be interpreted in such a
      manner so as to give effect to the agreement, rather than to
      invalidate it.       An ‘arbitration agreement’ is a commercial
      document inter partes, and must be interpreted so as to give
      effect to the intention of the parties, rather than to
      invalidate it on technicalities.
9.6. In Khardah Company Ltd. v. Raymon and Co. (India) Pvt.
      Ltd.5,      this Court while ascertaining the terms of an
      arbitration agreement between the parties, held that:
             “If on a reading of the document as a whole, it can
             fairly be deduced from the words actually used
             herein, that the parties had agreed on a particular
             term, there is nothing in law which prevents them
             from setting up that term. The terms of a contract
             can be expressed or implied from what has been
             expressed. It is in the ultimate analysis, a question
             of construction of the contract.”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
9.7. In interpreting or construing an arbitration agreement or
      arbitration clause, it would be the duty of the court to make
      the same workable within the permissible limits of the law.
4 Union of India v. DN Revry and Co., (1976) 4 SCC 147.
5 [1963] 3 SCR 183.
                                       20

      This Court in Enercon (India) Ltd. and Ors. v. Enercon
      GMBH6, held that a common sense approach has to be
      adopted to give effect to the intention of the parties to
      arbitrate the disputes between them. Being a commercial
      contract, the arbitration clause cannot be construed with a
      purely legalistic mindset, as in the case of a statute.
9.8. In this case, MTNL raised a preliminary objection that there
      was no arbitration agreement in writing between the parties,
      at this stage of the proceedings.
            We will first deal with this issue. The agreement
      between MTNL and Canara Bank to refer the disputes to
      arbitration is evidenced from the following documents
      exchanged between the parties, and the proceedings :
      (i)   The   Minutes    of  the   Meeting   dated    27.03.2001
            convened by the Cabinet Secretariat, wherein all three
            parties   were   present    and   participated    in the
            proceedings. The Committee on Disputes, in the
            Meeting dated 16.12.2008 expressed the view that all
6 (2014) 5 SCC 1.
                                  21

      the three parties should take recourse to arbitration in
      view of the different inter­liked transactions between
      them. Canara Bank suggested that to expedite the
      arbitration,   it  should    be conducted   under    the
      Arbitration    &   Conciliation Act,  1996.  This   was
      accepted by MTNL, and no objection was raised.
(ii)  Pursuant to the proceedings conducted by the Cabinet
      Secretariat, Canara Bank addressed letters dated
      05.03.2009 and 17.03.2010 to MTNL, wherein it
      enclosed a draft Arbitration Agreements, wherein all
      three parties i.e. Canara Bank, CANFINA and MTNL
      would be joined in the arbitration proceedings.
(iii) In the Writ Petition filed by Canara Bank, the Delhi
      High Court vide Order dated 16.09.2011 recorded the
      consent of MTNL and Canara Bank to be referred to
      arbitration by a Sole Arbitrator under the 1996 Act.
            The    relevant  extract   of  the  Order   dated
      16.09.2011 passed by the Delhi High Court reads as
      follows :
                            22

        “Unfortunately,     although    the    parties   had
        displayed their willingness for arbitration, the
        Committee on Disputes could not resolve the
        specific clauses of the arbitration agreement. Nor
        have the parties been able to arrive at a
        consensus with regard to the specific clauses of
        the arbitration agreement. As noted in the order
        dated 01.10.2010, according to the petitioner, it is
        a matter of arbitration as to whether the petitioner
        is liable for the acts or omissions of CANFINA.
        However, the respondents were insisting that the
        petitioners should agree to take over the liabilities
        and admit them in the arbitration agreement itself.
        It has now been agreed by the parties that both
        these issues could be made the subject matter of
        the arbitration, namely, whether the petitioner is
        liable for the acts or omissions of CANFINA and
        whether the petitioner is liable to take over the
        liabilities of CANFINA. There is no necessity now
        of requiring the petitioner to agree to take over the
        liabilities of CANFINA prior to the arbitration
        proceedings because that itself would not be one
        of the points to be decided in the course of
        arbitration. Even though the learned counsel for
        the petitioner has placed before us the subsequent
        decisions of the Supreme Court with regard to the
        scope and ambit of powers of the Committee on
        Disputes, we are making the present order
        because the parties themselves have agreed to go
        in for arbitration as a mode for resolving their
        disputes. This is welcome because both the
        parties are PSUs. The counsel for the parties shall
        suggest names of the arbitrators.”
                                         (emphasis supplied)
(iv) Pursuant         thereto,    MTNL       participated     in the
     proceedings conducted by the Sole Arbitrator, and filed
     its Claim, and Counter­Claim. No objection was raised
                                23

              before the Sole Arbitrator that there was no arbitration
              agreement in writing between the parties. The only
              objection raised was that CANFINA should be joined as
              a necessary party in the proceedings.
 9.9. The agreement between the parties as recorded in a judicial
       Order, is final and conclusive of the agreement entered into
       between the parties.7 The Appellant – MTNL after giving its
       consent to refer the disputes to arbitration before the Delhi
       High Court, is now estopped from contending that there was
       no written agreement to refer the parties to arbitration.
9.10. An additional ground, for rejecting the preliminary objection
       raised by MTNL is based on Section 7(4)(c) of the Arbitration
       and Conciliation Act, 1996.
              Section   7(4)(c)   provides     that    there  can be an
       arbitration agreement in the form of exchange of statement
       of claims and defense, in which the existence of the
 7 State of Maharashtra v. Ramdas Shrinivas Nayak (1982) 2 SCC 463.
       See also Chitra Kumari v. Union of India (2001) 3 SCC 208.
                                      24

       agreement is asserted by one party, and not denied by the
       other.8
             In the present case, Canara Bank had filed its
       Statement of Claim before the Arbitrator, and MTNL filed its
       Reply to the Statement of Claim, and also made a Counter
       Claim against Canara Bank.
             The statement of Claim and Defence filed before the
       Arbitrator would constitute evidence of the existence of an
       arbitration agreement, which was not denied by the other
       party, under Section 7(4)(c) of the 1996 Act.
             In view of the aforesaid discussion, the objection raised
       by MTNL is devoid of any merit, and is hereby rejected.
10. JOINDER   OF CANFINA IN THE ARBITRAL PROCEEDINGS
10.1. Canara      Bank     raised  an    objection     to  the  joinder    of
       Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA as a party to the arbitration
       proceedings.
10.2. As per the principles of contract law, an agreement entered
       into by one of the companies in a group, cannot be binding
 8Savitri Goenka v. Kanti Bhai Damini & Ors., 2009 (1) Arb LR 320 (Del) (DB).
                                      25

      on the other members of the same group, as each company
      is a separate legal entity which has separate legal rights and
      liabilities.
             The parent, or the subsidiary company, entering into
      an agreement, unless acting in accord with the principles of
      agency or representation, will be the only entity in a group,
      to be bound by that agreement.
             Similarly, an arbitration agreement is also governed by
      the same principles, and normally, the company entering
      into the agreement, would alone be bound by it.
10.3. A non­signatory can be bound by an arbitration agreement
      on the basis of the “Group of Companies” doctrine, where
      the conduct of the parties evidences a clear intention of the
      parties to bind both the signatory as well as the non­
      signatory parties.
             Courts and tribunals have invoked this doctrine to join
      a non­signatory member of the group, if they are satisfied
      that the non­signatory company was by reference to the
                                   26

       common intention of the parties, a necessary party to the
       contract.
10.4. The doctrine of ‘Group of Companies’ had its origins in the
       1970’s from French arbitration practice. The ‘Group of
       Companies’ doctrine indicates the implied consent to an
       agreement to arbitrate, in the context of modern multi­party
       business transactions.
             It was first propounded in the case of Dow Chemical v.
       Isover­Saint­Gobain,9 where the arbitral tribunal held that:
             “… the arbitration clause expressly accepted by certain of
               the companies of the group should bind the other
             companies which, by virtue of their role in the conclusion,
             performance, or termination of the contracts containing
             said clauses, and in accordance with the mutual intention
             of all parties to the proceedings, appear to have been
             veritable parties to these contracts or to have been
             principally concerned by them and the disputes to which
             they may give rise”.
        The ‘Group of Companies’ doctrine has been invoked by
        courts and tribunals in arbitrations, where an arbitration
        agreement is entered into by one of the companies in the
        group; and the non­signatory affiliate, or sister, or parent
 9 1984 Rev Arb 137; 110 JDI 899 (1983).
                                      27

       concern, is held to be bound by the arbitration agreement,
       if the facts and circumstances of the case demonstrate that
       it was the mutual intention of all parties to bind both the
       signatories and the non­signatory affiliates in the group.
             The doctrine provides that a non­signatory may be
       bound by an arbitration agreement where the parent or
       holding company, or a member of the group of companies is
       a signatory to the arbitration agreement and the non­
       signatory entity on the group has been engaged in the
       negotiation or performance of the commercial contract, or
       made statements indicating its intention to be bound by the
       contract, the non­signatory will also be bound and
       benefitted by the relevant contracts.10
             The circumstances in which the ‘Group of Companies’
      Doctrine could be invoked to bind the non­signatory affiliate
      of a parent company, or inclusion of a third party to an
      arbitration, if there is a direct relationship between the
10   Interim Award in ICC Case No. 4131, IX YB Comm Arb 131 (1984);
   Award in ICC Case No. 5103, 115 JDI (Clunet) 1206 (1988).
      See also Gary B. Born: International Commercial Arbitration, Vol. I,
   2009, pp. 1170­1171.
                                  28

       party which is a signatory to the arbitration agreement;
       direct commonality of the subject matter; the composite
       nature of the transaction between the parties.
             A ‘composite transaction’ refers to a transaction which
       is inter­linked in nature; or, where the performance of the
       agreement may not be feasible without the aid, execution,
       and performance of the supplementary or the ancillary
       agreement,     for   achieving    the   common     object, and
       collectively having a bearing on the dispute.
10.5. The Group of Companies Doctrine has also been invoked in
        cases where there is a tight group structure with strong
        organizational and financial links, so as to constitute a
        single economic unit, or a single economic reality. In such a
        situation, signatory and non­signatories have been bound
        together under the arbitration agreement. This will apply in
        particular when the funds of one company are used to
        financially support or re­structure other members of the
        group.11
 11ICC  Case No. 4131 of 1982, ICC Case No. 5103 of 1988.
                                    29

10.6. The ‘Group of Companies’ doctrine has been invoked and
        applied by this Court in Chloro Controls India (P) Ltd. v.
        Severn Trent Water Purification Inc.,12 with respect to an
        international commercial agreement. Recently, this Court
        in Ameet Lal Chand Shah v. Rishabh Enterprises,13 invoked
        the Group of Companies doctrine in a domestic arbitration
        under Part I of the 1996 Act.
10.7. Coming to the facts of the present case, CANFINA was set
        up as a wholly owned subsidiary of Canara Bank. This is
        evident from the Report of the Joint Committee to Enquire
        into Irregularities in Securities and Banking Transactions,
        1993,14 which states as follows :
             “Canbank Financial Services Ltd.
             6.14 CANFINA was set up as a wholly owned
             subsidiary of Canara Bank and it commenced its
             operation with its Head Office at Bangalore on 1 st
             June, 1987. Its authorized and paid up capital are
             Rs. 50 crores and Rs. 10 crores respectively. It was
             staffed mostly be personnel from Canara Bank and
 12 (2013) 1 SCC 641.
       The Madras High Court has invoked the Group of Companies Doctrine
 in a foreign seated arbitration in SEI Adhavan Power Pvt. Ltd. v. Jinneng
 Clean Energy Technology Ltd. & Ors.2018 (4) CTC 46.
 13 (2018) 15 SCC 678.
 14 Report, Presented to the Lok Sabha on 21st December, 1993.
                                     30

           has branches at Ahmedabad, Bombay, Calcutta,
           Hyderabad, Madras and New Delhi besides
           Bangalore. As the Board comprised mostly of senior
           executives of Canara Bank and its Chief Executive is
           also a senior official of that bank (on deputation) the
           company functioned under the umbrella of the
           parent bank; besides it submits periodical returns on
           its functioning to the Board of Canara Bank for
           information.
           6.15 The activities authorized to be conducted by
           the Company are equipment leasing, merchant­
           banking, venture capital and consultancy services.
           The Company, initially deployed a major portion of
           its owned funds and deposits in equipment leasing
           business and obtained the classification of an
           ‘Equipment leasing company’ from the Department
           of Finance Companies of RBI; this classification
           entitles the company to mobilize public deposits to
           the extent of ten time its owned funds.
           …
           6.25 The Committee hope that the nature and extent
           of the financial assistance being provided by Canara
           Bank to its subsidiaries are such as could be
           justified on prudent commercial norms. Further the
           parent bank cannot be absolved of the responsibility
           for various irregularities of its subsidiary. ”
                                               (emphasis supplied)
10.8. The disputes between the parties emanated out of the
      transaction     dated    10.02.1992,        whereby    CANFINA has
      subscribed to the bonds floated by MTNL. CANFINA
      subsequently transferred the Bonds to its holding Company
      – Canara Bank. It is the contention of MTNL, that since
      CANFINA did not pay the entire sale consideration for the
                                       31

      Bonds, MTNL eventually was constrained to cancel the
      allotment of the Bonds.
10.9. It will be a futile effort to decide the disputes only between
      MTNL and Canara Bank, in the absence of CANFINA, since
      undisputedly, the original transaction emanated from a
      transaction between MTNL and CANFINA – the original
      purchaser of the Bonds. The disputes arose on the
      cancellation of the Bonds by MTNL on the ground that the
      entire consideration was not paid.
            There is a clear and direct nexus between the issuance
      of the Bonds, its subsequent transfer by CANFINA to
      Canara Bank, and the cancellation by MTNL, which has led
      to disputes between the three parties.
            Therefore, CANFINA is undoubtedly a necessary and
      proper party to the arbitration proceedings.
10.10.      Given the tri­patite nature of the transaction, there
      can be a final resolution of the disputes, only if all three
      parties are joined in the arbitration proceedings, to finally
                                    32

resolve the disputes which have been pending for over 26
years now.
     It  is  of  relevance    to note  that  CANFINA     has
participated in the proceedings before the High Court, and
the Committee on Disputes. CANFINA was also represented
by its separate Counsel before the Sole Arbitrator. Canara
Bank in CWP No. 560 of 1995 filed before the Delhi High
Court, had joined CANFINA as Respondent No. 2, even
though it was joined as a proforma party. CANFINA was
represented by Counsel in the Writ Proceedings before the
Delhi High Court. The Counsel for CANFINA was however
not   present   on  two  dates   i.e. on   16.09.2011    and
21.10.2011, when the High Court recorded the agreement
between the parties for reference of disputes to arbitration.
MTNL had submitted before the Delhi High Court that
Canara Bank should agree to take over the liabilities of
CANFINA before the arbitration could commence. The High
Court recorded that there was no necessity of requiring
Canara Bank to agree to take over the liabilities of
                           33

      CANFINA, prior to the arbitration proceedings. This issue
      would be decided in the arbitration.
10.11.     On the commencement of arbitration proceedings
      before the Sole Arbitrator, notice was issued by the Sole
      Arbitrator to all the three parties including CANFINA, which
      was represented by its Counsel.
10.12.     We find that the objection to CANFINA being impleaded
      as a party to the arbitration proceedings was raised by
      Canara Bank, and not CANFINA.
10.13.     We do not find any merit in the objection raised by
      Canara Bank opposing the joining of CANFINA as a party to
      the dispute. Canara Bank vide letters dated 05.03.2009 and
      17.03.2010 had enclosed a Draft Arbitration Agreement to
      MTNL, wherein it has clearly stated that the arbitration
      would be between three parties i.e. Canara Bank and
      CANFINA as party of the first part, and MTNL as party of the
      second part.
                                  34

            It is incomprehensible why Canara Bank is now
      objecting to the impleadment of CANFINA in the arbitration
      proceedings. There is no justifiable ground advanced by the
      Counsel for Canara Bank to oppose the impleadment of
      CANFINA in the arbitration proceedings.
10.14.      The present case is one of implied or tacit consent by
      Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA to being impleaded in the
      arbitral proceedings, which is evident from the conduct of
      the parties. We find that Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA has
      throughout participated in the proceedings before the
      Committee on Disputes, before the Delhi High Court, before
      the Sole Arbitrator, and was represented by its separate
      Counsel before this Court in the present appeal. There was
      a clear intention of the parties to bind both Canara Bank,
      and its subsidiary – CANFINA to the proceedings. In this
      case, there can be no final resolution of the disputes, unless
      all three parties are joined in the arbitration.
                                  35

11. In view of the aforesaid discussion, the present appeals are
    partly allowed. We invoke the Group of Companies doctrine, to
    join Respondent No. 2 – CANFINA i.e. the wholly owned
    subsidiary of Respondent No. 1 – Canara Bank, in the
    arbitration proceedings pending before the Sole Arbitrator.
            The matter is remitted to the Sole Arbitrator to
    continue with the arbitral proceedings, and conclude the same
    as expeditiously as possible. We have, however, expressed no
    opinion on the merits of the dispute.
            Pending   applications,   if   any,   are   disposed        of
    accordingly.
                                        …..……...........................J.
                                       (ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE)
                                        ..….……..........................J.
                                                (INDU MALHOTRA)
 New Delhi
 August 8, 2019.
                                 36

                                       REPORTABLE
         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
       CIVIL APPEAL Nos.6202­6205 OF 2019
 (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) Nos.13573­13676 of 2014)
Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Ltd.           ….Appellant(s)
                     VERSUS
Canara Bank & Ors.                     ….Respondent(s)
                 JUDGMENT
Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
1.    I have had the advantage of going through an
elaborate, well considered and scholarly drafted
judgment proposed by my esteemed Sister Justice
Indu Malhotra.
                         1                              1

2.   I entirely agree with the reasoning and the
conclusion, which my erudite Sister has drawn,
which are based on remarkably articulate process of
reasoning. However, having regard to the nature of
the controversy involved in these appeals, I wish to
add a few words of mine.
3.   As rightly observed by my learned Sister in
para   8,   following   two   questions   arise   for
consideration in these appeals:
4.     One, whether the arbitration agreement in
question is a bi­party agreement between the
MTNL(appellant      herein)   and    Canara     Bank
(respondent No. 1) or it is a tri­partite agreement
between the MTNL, Canara Bank and CANFINA
(respondent   No.   2)  and,   if so,  whether   the
agreement satisfies the conditions laid down in
Section 7(4)(b) and (c)     of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as
“the Act”) so as to enable the arbitral tribunal to
                         2                            2

decide the dispute which has arisen between these
parties in relation to the agreement.
5.   Second, if the answer to the first question is
that the agreement in question is a tri­partite
agreement, whether CANFINA is also a necessary
party to the arbitral proceedings for deciding the
rights of the parties inter se in relation to the
dispute.
6.    In my considered opinion also, the agreement
in question is essentially a tri­partite agreement
between the parties, namely, MTNL, Canara Bank
and CANFINA. Indeed, this is clear from the
documents      exchanged      between   the   parties,
pleadings and orders of the Court.
7.   It is also clear when one examines the nature
of the dispute. It is so inextricably linked between
the three parties that it can be effectively decided
only when all the three parties are made parties to
the arbitral proceedings.
                          3                            3

8.    Once we examine the issue on facts in the light
of requirements of Section 7(4)(b) and (c) of the Act,
we have no hesitation in coming to a conclusion
that the agreement in question is, in fact, a tri­
partite   agreement    between   the   three    parties
mentioned above.       In my view, it satisfies the
requirements of Section 7(4)(b) and (c) of the Act.
9.    This issue is extensively dealt with by my
learned Sister in the light of law laid down by this
Court in several decisions and I agree with her
reasoning.
10.     Somewhat similar question also arose in
international arbitrations as to when there are more
than two parties in a dispute then how such dispute
should be dealt with in the arbitral proceedings­
whether it should be dealt with in one arbitral
proceedings between one set of parties or it should
be dealt with in separate or parallel arbitration
proceedings.
                         4                              4

11.  This question was succinctly dealt with by the
learned Authors­Alan Redfern and Martin Hunter in
their book on “International Arbitration". (see ­
Redfern       and     Hunter     on    International
Arbitration ­ sixth edition­under the heading ‘J’
“Multiparty Arbitrations” (a) to (e) 2.212 to
2.247 pages 141 to 153).
12.  The       learned    authors    examined    the
aforementioned question in the context of ICC and
AAA Rules, decisions rendered by English Court of
appeal and the reports of ICC Commission on multi­
party arbitration. They opined that subject to the
terms of the agreement and any rules framed in that
behalf, it is desirable that such disputes should be
resolved    as   far  as  possible  in  one  arbitral
proceedings to avoid any inconsistent findings and
parallel arbitral proceedings.
                          5                           5

13.   Since    the  main     object   of the  arbitral
proceedings is to decide the disputes expeditiously
and within a time frame, this object can be achieved
only when the disputes are resolved as far as
possible in one arbitral proceedings. In this case,
this object can be achieved only when all the three
parties named above are made party in one arbitral
proceedings to enable the arbitral tribunal to finally
decide the dispute on merits in accordance with
law.
14.   As rightly observed by my learned Sister, the
undisputed facts brought on record, in clear terms,
entitles this Court to invoke the well known doctrine
of “Group of Companies” and apply its principle to
the facts of this case so as to enable the arbitral
tribunal to determine the rights of three parties
named above. In my considered view, one cannot
dispute the legal proposition the doctrine “Group of
Companies”      has    its   application  to  arbitral
                           6                           6

proceedings and, in appropriate cases, it can be so
applied (See­Redfern and Hunter on International
Arbitration ­ Sixth Edition ­ 1.115 page 33, 2.42­
2.51 pages 85 to 88)
15.  In view of what I have said above, I respectfully
agree with the reasoning and the conclusion of my
learned sister.
                        .………...................................J.
                        [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
New Delhi;
August 08, 2019
                         7                                        7


