                                               1
                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5953     OF 2018
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15500/2017)
      UNITED INDIA INSURANCE CO. LTD.                    … APPELLANT(S)
                                            VERSUS
                                                         … RESPONDENT(S)
                                             WITH
                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5955       OF 2018
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15971/2017)
      THE NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED … APPELLANT(S)
                                            VERSUS
                                                         … RESPONDENT(S)
                                             WITH
                            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5954          OF 2018
                          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 15755/2017)
      ORIENTAL INSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED                  … APPELLANT(S)
                                            VERSUS
                                                         … RESPONDENT(S)
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
                                              AND
Date: 2018.07.03
17:36:20 IST
Reason:
                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.5956     OF 2018
                       (Arising out of SLP (C) Diary No. 28109/2017)

                               2
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED …APPELLANT(S)
                            VERSUS
                                           … RESPONDENT(S)
                       J U D G M E N T
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
    Leave granted.
2.  The    appellants,    four   insurance      companies    are
aggrieved by the judgment dated 09.12.2016 of the Punjab
&  Haryana    High  Court   passed   in   a   Public    Interest
Litigation   being Writ   Petition   CWP   No.  6626   of  2015,
issuing certain directions regarding        payment of fee to
its empanelled advocates.
3.  Brief facts of the case resulting into the judgment
of the Division Bench are:-
        A FAO No. 2604 of 2013 – Rajesh Vs. Parmod & Anr.
   was filed by an injured of a motor accident, claiming
   compensation.     While   hearing   the   FAO,  the   learned
   Single Judge noticed that in spite of issue of notice

                            3
of   motion,   none  had   appeared     on   behalf   of the
insurance   company,  i.e.    United   India   Insurance Co.
Ltd.   Learned Single Judge in the aforesaid FAO passed
an order for treating the issue as of vital public
importance and registering a separate writ petition in
that regard. It is useful to extract the order dated
12.09.2014 passed by the learned Single Judge:-
        “……………………………….26        Standing       Counsel
        representing four Insurance Companies (1.
        United India Insurance Co. Ltd.;            2.
        Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.; 3. New India
        Assurance Co. Ltd. and 4. National
        Insurance Co. Ltd.) appeared before the
        Court and brought their plight to the
        notice of the Court of how the officers
        and officials of these Companies were
        circumventing    the     administration     of
        justice for their personal ends and
        gains. It has been highlighted during the
        course of hearing that these General
        Insurance   Companies     are    for   obvious
        reasons manipulating the guidelines/fee
        structures approved by GIPSA and under
        that undue exercise the Counsel were
        being not properly assisted and thus,
        intentionally    causing     delay    in   the
        disposal of these matters before the
        Court and invariably were causing loss to
        the exchequer of these Companies which
        mostly are public undertakings. It has
        been highlighted with much emphasis how
        the fees and bills of the advocates, who
        had been representing the Companies in
        the matters, were not being paid since
        decades. This unholy nexus and trend
        assumes greater importance as people in
        general, who repose faith in promises of
        financial    security      made    by    these

                           4
       Companies in times of their sufferings
       and injury, were left high and dry. Thus,
       what was invented as a social welfare has
       become a tool of exploitation in the
       hands of these officers of the Companies
       who are out and out also trying to harm
       the advocates who are the officers of the
       Court. It has often been seen that the
       Counsel who do not tow the line are
       changed in between the hearings. Thus,
       the sufferings are increased manifold by
       the inordinate intentional delay of these
       Companies and lack of assistance to their
       Counsel. Since these issues of vital
       public importance are being faced by
       almost all the Advocates present before
       the Court for these Insurance Companies,
       is an impediment and delaying process in
       the dispensation of justice.
          Thus, this Court is pleased to treat
       this issue as a writ petition and refer
       it to the Hon'ble Acting Chief Justice
       for constituting an appropriate Bench to
       look into the matter so that much relief
       could come about to the poor litigants."
    The above reference made by learned Single Judge
in  the   matter  was  placed   before  a   Division  Bench
treating it to be a Public Interest Litigation being
CWP  No.   6626  of  2015.    The  Division   Bench  issued
notice on 28.04.2015 to all four insurance companies,
i.e., United India Insurance Company Ltd., Oriental
Insurance Co. Ltd., New India Assurance Co. Ltd. and
National   Insurance   Co.  Ltd.     Before   the  Division
Bench,   all  the   four  insurance   companies   (who  are

                          5
appellants before us) have filed a joint reply dated
01.09.2015 and further a joint reply for placing on
record the fees schedule dated 05.05.2016.    Before the
Division  Bench,   Shri  Akshay   Bhan,  learned   senior
counsel appearing for the advocates, whose fee are due
and payable by the four insurance companies submitted
that the New India Assurance Co. Ltd. has committed to
pay all the fee in terms of its affidavit and they are
in the process of doing so.    It was further submitted
by the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of
the advocates before the High Court that the advocates
representing   the   Insurance   Companies   were   never
apprised of the Schedule relating to payment of fee to
the advocates. Division Bench of the High Court after
hearing the learned senior counsel appearing for the
advocates as well as learned counsel appearing for the
insurance companies disposed of the writ petition in
the following manner:-
       “The petition is accordingly disposed of
       and the Insurance Companies shall adhere
       to the three schedules framed by GIPSA
       i.e.     01.11.2004,     01.01.2009     and
       01.04.2014 and full fee wherever payable
       shall be paid and balance wherever
       payable shall be paid. The necessary due

                               6
           payments should be made to all the
           advocates to whom fee is due and payable
           as   expeditiously     as    possible     after
           necessary verification and preferably by
           30.06.2017 and in case the same is not
           paid, the amount payable shall entail
           payment of simple interest at 7 per cent
           per annum from 01.07.2017 onwards from
           08.04.2015,   when     this     Court    issued
           notices to the Insurance Companies.
           For the purpose of verification, the
           counsel shall give the orders disposing
           of the matters and list of cases.”
        All the four insurance companies - the appellants
   have filed separate appeal challenging the aforesaid
   judgment of Division Bench dated 09.12.2016.
4.       We have heard Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned senior
counsel  appearing   for  the    appellants    and   Shri  Neeraj
Kumar Jain, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of
some of the advocates, who were represented before the
High Court by Shri Akshay Bhan, learned senior counsel.
5.  Shri Jaideep Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing
for the appellants submits that the High Court erred in
suo moto invoking Public Interest Litigation jurisdiction
to  entertain,    adjudicate   and    determine     the   dispute
pertaining   to  payment  of  fee    by  a   client   to  his/her

                                 7
advocate.      The   PIL   is   initiated    to   ameliorate     the
condition of a class of persons whose constitutional or
lawful rights are affected or not adequately looked into.
The  payment     of   professional     fee    by    the    insurance
companies to their advocates is purely contractual matter
between a client and his/her advocate, which ought not to
have been gone in the proceeding before the High Court.
The Public Interest Litigation does not mean settling of
disputes   between    individual     parties,    i.e.,     advocates
empanelled by the national insurance companies and the
insurance   companies.       The   High   Court    held    that  the
decision   taken    by   GIPSA   is    binding    on    the   member
insurance   companies,    and  the   fees   schedule     decided  by
GIPSA could not have been readjusted.             GIPSA being an
informal non-statutory body consisting of representatives
of national insurance companies has been formed with the
object to form and bring unanimity in their actions and
decisions.    GIPSA is only a recommendatory body, whose
recommendations cannot be enforced in a Court of Law.
The High Court has issued direction with regard to mode
and manner of payment of fee to the empanelled advocates,
which was uncalled for.         It is submitted that in the
joint reply, all the four companies having stated that

                                  8
the fees schedule as issued by GIPSA in the year 2009 and
2014 is being followed by insurance companies,            there was
no   occasion     to    proceed    with    the   Public    Interest
Litigation and issue any directions.          The Schedule issued
by GIPSA, which was to be enforced w.e.f. 01.11.2004 was
considered    by   Inter    Company    Coordination     Committee’s
Meeting   dated    16.03.2005     of   the   Chandigarh    Regional
Officers   of   all   the  four   insurance    companies   and  the
Schedule was revised, which was to be enforced w.e.f.
01.04.2005.      The advocates always accepted the fee as
offered by the insurance companies without raising any
objection or protest at any point of time.            The Issue of
non-payment of fee as per Schedule issued by GIPSA w.e.f.
01.11.2004 was not required to be gone into especially
when   clear   statement    has   been   made   by   all  the  four
companies    that    Schedule    as   enforced     by  GIPSA   vide
circular dated 09.01.2009 w.e.f. 01.01.2009 and Circular
dated 18.03.2014 w.e.f. 01.04.2014 was being adhered to.
6.   Shri   Neeraj     Kumar   Jain,    learned    senior   counsel
appearing for some of the advocates opposing the appeals
submits that there was no error in the High Court taking
suo moto cognizance of the matter.           It is submitted that

                               9
by  taking   suo  moto   cognizance,   no   constitutional  or
legislative mandate has been violated.          It is further
submitted that the submission that writ jurisdiction is
not exercisable in the present case as it was purely
contractual dispute, is wholly untenable.       Administrative
decision taken by the appellants affect the relationship
between the appellants and empanelled advocates and any
arbitrary   exercise   by  the   appellants   was  subject  to
jurisdiction   of  High   Court   under   Article  226.    The
submission that decision taken by GIPSA are not binding
on member insurance companies, is wholly misconceived.
All insurance companies, i.e., the appellants voluntary
bind themselves to follow the various decisions taken by
GIPSA from time to time.       The appellants, which is to
adopt and implement the 2004, 2009 and 2014 GIPSA Fee
Schedules, there was no occasion to modify the Schedule
of  2004  by  the  appellants    by taking   another  decision
dated  16.03.2005,   by   modifying   the   fees  schedule  as
enforced by GIPSA, w.e.f. 01.11.2004. The High Court has
rightly quashed the decision of the appellants to reduce
the fee from Rs.7,500/- to Rs.5,000/-.        Direction to pay
fee lumpsum and also to pay fee in the matters before the
High Court, which are settled in Mediations/Lok Adalats

                             10
have also been rightly issued.       Learned counsel for the
parties have also relied on judgments of this Court, in
support of their respective submissions.
7.    We have considered the submissions of the learned
counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
8.   A perusal of the order passed by the learned Single
Judge of the High Court dated 12.09.2014 as extracted
above indicates that learned Single Judge directed for
suo moto registration of a Public Interest Litigation to
look into the matter so that much relief could come about
to the poor litigants, the reason, which mainly impelled
the learned Single Judge to direct for registration of a
Public Interest Litigation was a factum of non-appearance
of  empanelled  lawyers  of  the   insurance  companies  when
hearing of FAO No. 2604 of 2013 was fixed.       The counsel
representing   the  four  insurance    companies  before  the
learned Single Judge brought their plight to the notice
of  learned  Single  Judge.     From   the order  of  learned
Single Judge, following four reasons are decipherable,
which impelled the learned Single Judge to direct for suo
moto registration of Public Interest Litigation:-

                                 11
           “(i) ………….how the officers and officials
           of these Companies were circumventing the
           administration      of    justice    for   their
           personal ends and gains…………….
           (ii)    …………..    these     General    Insurance
           Companies     are     for     obvious    reasons
           manipulating          the        guidelines/fee
           structures approved by GIPSA…………
           (iii) …….. under that undue exercise the
           Counsel were being not properly assisted
           and thus, intentionally causing delay in
           the disposal of these matters before the
           Court…………….
           (iv)     ………….invariably were causing loss
           to the exchequer of these Companies which
           mostly are public undertakings……………………….”
9.  A   perusal   of   the  Division     Bench  judgment   of  the
Punjab   &  Haryana    High   Court    indicates    that  although
learned   Single   Judge   has  noticed    above   mentioned  four
reasons for directing for registration of Public Interest
Litigation    but  when   the   matter    was  heard   before  the
Division Bench, the only issue which was taken note and
gone into was the issue that “these general insurance
companies    are   for   obvious    reasons    manipulating    the
guidelines/fee structure approved by the GIPSA”.             Thus,
the only issue, on which the parties were heard, was
regarding the guidelines/fee structure approved by the
GIPSA.

                                12
10. Learned    senior    counsel     for   the    appellants   has
strenuously urged before us that the issue pertaining to
fee structure of the empanelled advocates, its alleged
non-payment,   and  mode   of   payment    are   all  the  issues,
which ought not to have been undertaken in the Public
Interest   Litigation.      He   submits     that   there  was  no
occasion for registration of a Public Interest Litigation
and the order of the learned Single Judge directing for
registration of Public Interest Litigation itself was not
appropriate.    The High Court exercises its extraordinary
jurisdiction under Article 226 when an element of public
law  exists.      When   learned     Single    Judge   found  that
empanelled advocates are not appearing in the court, the
learned Single Judge found that the said issue involved a
public    element,      which      ultimately       affects    the
administration of justice and hence the learned Single
Judge directed for registration of the Public Interest
Litigation   for  the   reasons    as   noticed   by  the  learned
Single Judge in his order dated 12.09.2014.            We, at this
stage, are not inclined to enter into the correctness or
otherwise   of  the   order   directing     for   registration  of
Public   Interest   Litigation.       The   judgment    challenged

                              13
before us is the Division Bench judgment of Punjab &
Haryana High Court dated 09.12.2016, which was passed in
the  Public  Interest   Litigation disposing    of  the writ
petition.   We, thus, confine our discussions only to the
said  order,   leaving  the  question   of  registration  of
Public Interest Litigation open, in facts of the present
case.
11. Insurance companies have filed a joint reply placing
on record the fees schedule, copy of which joint reply
dated 05.05.2016 is filed as Annexure P-8.     In the reply,
it is useful to refer to Paragraph 1 to 6 of the reply,
which is to the following effect:-
          “1. That the applicants have placed on
          record 3 fee schedules. That insofar as
          the fee schedules at Ann A-2 (2009) and
          A-3 (2014) are concerned, the same as
          proposed by GIPSA have been adopted in
          its entirety by the 4 Public General
          Insurance companies and the fees are
          being raised by the respected lawyers and
          the payments are being made in accordance
          with them. However in certain cases where
          the matters are referred to the Lok
          Adalat and the lawyer so assigned is not
          present    to   conduct   the    proceedings
          thereof and to assist the company, no
          further fees may have been released to
          the assigned lawyers.
          2. That in respect of the fees schedule
          annexed at Annexure it is submitted that

                    14
the same (like at A-2 and A-3), were
proposed fees as suggested by GIPSA,
however unlike the complete adoption of
the proposed fee structures as suggested
by GIPSA in the year 2009/2014, the fee
schedule as suggested by GIPSA in 2005
was not adopted in toto by the companies
and based on a ICC (Inter Company
Coordination Committee) meeting dated
16.3.2015 of the Chandigarh Regional
Officers of all the 4 public sector
insurance companies, held at the regional
level   Chandigarh,     the   revised    fees
schedule    as    discussed      were    made
applicable. That there was increase in
the   existing   fees     schedule   as   was
prevalent, however the complete fees as
suggested in the GIPSA schedule were not
adopted.
3. That GIPSA is a non statutory body.
That, in the year 2000 the insurance
sector was completely deregulated. That,
after opening of the insurance sector and
&linking from the GIC General Insurance
Corporation of India, in the year 2000,
the   4   state-run,     general    insurance
companies    namely     National    Insurance
Company Ltd, New India Assurance company
limited, Oriental Insurance Company Ltd,
and United India Insurance Company Ltd,
started functioning independently.
4 That the said insurance companies
formed an informal association known as
the General Insurers' (Public Sector)
Association of India, with headquarters
at Delhi.
5. GIPSA was set up simply as a forum for
facilitating         consultations        and
deliberations     amongst      its     member
companies on matters of common interest
mandated to it by them without having any
administrative, supervisory, controlling

                                  15
           or statutory authority over the public
           sector insurance companies.
           6. That the GIPSA is not                a public
           authority      and    neither     is    the    same
           statutory authority/body.”
12. The   High   Court   in   its    judgment   has   noticed   three
schedules     of    fee     issued      by    GIPSA,     they    are:
(i)  Circular    dated   21.02.2005     noticing    that   GIPSA  had
approved       the       revised         fees       schedule       of
advocates/investigators                w.e.f.            01.11.2004;
(ii)  Circular    dated   09.01.2009     issued   in   pursuance   of
approved   and    revised    fees     schedule   by    GIPSA   w.e.f.
01.01.2009; and (iii) Circular dated 18.03.2014 issued by
GIPSA   approving   the    advocates/investigators       fee   w.e.f.
01.04.2014.
     The High Court itself has noticed that there are no
issues with regard to Circulars issued with regard to fee
structure enforced from 2009 and 2014.               The High Court
noticed that the only issue is with regard to Circular
dated   21.02.2005    of   GIPSA    regarding    the   revised   fees
schedule   of   advocates/investigators        w.e.f.    01.11.2004.
It has come on the record that w.e.f. 01.11.2004, the fee
was fixed as Rs.7,500/-, which was not adopted in toto by
the  companies    and  based    on    Inter  Company    Coordination

                             16
Committee   meeting   dated 16.03.2005   of   the  Chandigarh
Regional    Officers,   fee  was   revised    reducing   from
Rs.7,500/- to Rs.5,000/- for appeals filed by claimants
against the MACT awards and Rs. 6,000/- for appeals filed
on behalf of companies against MACT, which was to be
enforced w.e.f. 01.04.2005.     The High Court has noticed
the said fact in Page 15 of the judgment.      The High Court
itself at Page 16 noticed following:-
           “The    dispute,   therefore,    that    now
           survives is with respect to the first
           Circular that was issued and according to
           the advocates, they are liable to be paid
           Rs.7500/- for each case irrespective of
           the fact whether the appeal had been
           filed   by   the  claimants   or    by   the
           companies; besides, there is no concept
           of half fee being paid at the time of
           filing the appeal and the balance fee at
           the time of disposal of the appeal even
           as per the Schedule of the Insurance
           Companies. Moreover, fee is also liable
           to be paid to the advocates who put in
           appearances      before       the        Lok
           Adalats/Mediation Centers as also in
           cases where notices are accepted on the
           asking of the Court.”
13. From the above, it is clear that in so far as the
payment of fee as per Circular issued of 2009 and 2014 is
concerned,   there  was  no issue  raised.     The  companies
themselves in the reply had stated that they are adhering

                               17
to  the  said  circulars   and    there  was   no  complaint  on
behalf    of    the     empanelled       advocates     regarding
non-adherence of Circulars of 2009 and 2014. The Public
Interest Litigation was registered suo moto by the High
Court in 2015.   At the time of registration of the Public
Interest  Litigation   or   when    the  order   passed  by  the
learned Single Judge on 12.09.2014, the fees schedule as
enforced from circulars of 2009 and 2014 was very much in
vogue and being adhered to.      At that point of time, there
was  no  occasion  for   the   High   Court  to   entertain  the
dispute as to whether the fee structure as enforced by
GIPSA  w.e.f.  01.11.2004    should   have  been   followed  and
advocates should have been paid accordingly or advocates
were rightly paid the fee as per the modified decision
dated 16.03.2005, which decision was taken in the meeting
of all the four insurance companies at regional level.
The issue relating to non-payment of fee of empanelled
advocates as per Circular dated 01.11.2004 could not have
been undertaken in the Public Interest Litigation, more
so, when the same was replaced by subsequent circulars of
2009 and 2014, which circulars were adhered to by the
insurance companies.    Adjudicating the said issue by the
High Court was wholly uncalled for in the suo moto Public

                                 18
Interest Litigation, which cannot be in any manner held
to be affecting the case of the “poor litigants”, which
was  the   main  reason   for   the     learned   Single   Judge  to
direct   for   suo  moto   registration       of   Public   Interest
Litigation.
14. We, thus, are of the view that entertainment of the
issue  regarding    payment   of    fee    as per   circular   dated
21.02.2005    by    GIPSA    or     subsequently       modified   by
proceeding dated 16.03.2005 w.e.f. 01.04.2005 ought not
to have been gone in the writ petition and directions by
the learned Single Judge in the above regard deserves to
be set aside.
15. We may notice that although various issues relating
to  entertainability     of   the     suo   moto   Public   Interest
Litigation by the High Court, enforceable by circulars
issued  by   GIPSA,   the  issue     of   payment   of  fee  to  the
empanelled advocates, has been raised before us.             Learned
counsel for the parties have also in support of their
submissions relied on various judgments of this Court,
but for the purpose of this case, we need not go into the
above issues and we leave the said questions open to be

                               19
considered  in  appropriate    case.    As  we  have  observed
above that the writ petition, which was entertained as a
Public  Interest    Litigation,   the   stand   taken   by   the
insurance companies that they are adhering with the fee
structure enforced from 2009 and 2014, which was not even
objected by the learned counsel, who was appearing on
behalf of the advocates, was sufficient enough to close
the  writ   petition    without   entering   into   the    issue
pertaining to the earlier circular issued regarding fee
structure  w.e.f.    01.11.2004.     We  have   decided    these
appeals on its own facts, which may not be referred to
and relied as a precedent since, we have expressly left
questions open.
16. In result, the appeals are partly allowed and the
judgment of the High Court dated 09.12.2016 is modified
in the following manner:-
                 (i)      The   direction    of   High     Court
                          directing  insurance   companies    to
                          adhere to fees schedule issued by
                          GIPSA   dated    21.02.2005    w.e.f.
                          01.11.2004 is set aside.
           We, however, make it clear that any payment of

                             20
           fee made as per said Circular dated 21.02.2005
           shall   be  treated   as   final  and   not  to  be
           re-opened.
                 (ii)   The    insurance    companies    shall
                        adhere to the schedule framed by
                        GIPSA,      i.e.    01.01.2009     and
                        01.04.2014      and    fee    wherever
                        payable shall be paid and balance
                        wherever payable shall be paid as
                        admitted    by   insurance   companies
                        themselves before the High Court.
                 (iii)  The direction issued by the High
                        Court         regarding    payment  of
                        interest is set aside.
                                ..........................J.
                               ( A.K. SIKRI )
                                ..........................J.
                               ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
NEW DELHI,
JULY 02, 2018.


