                                                     1
                                                                   NON-REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1690 OF 2015
      SUBHASH MAHTO                                                         ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                    VERSUS
        THE STATE OF BIHAR                                                 ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                            J U D G M E N T
      R.BANUMATHI,J.
              1.           The appellant has preferred this appeal being aggrieved
              by       the  judgment   of  the  High   Court   whereby   the   High  Court
              confirmed the conviction of the appellant under Section 302 IPC
              and sentence of life imprisonment imposed upon him.
              2.           On  01.10.1988    at  about   10.00   p.m.   the   complainant
              -Suresh Kumar while proceeding towards his home took deceased
              Ramanand Mahto on the scooter along with Ram Briksh Mahto. All
              of them proceeded to their house. At about 10.30 p.m. to 11.45
              p.m., when they reached in front of the tea stall of Lalan
              Mahto        situated    at   Begampur    Mandai    Mohalla,    accused   -
              Ramachandra        Gareri   and   his   father   Lachhu    Gareri   started
              attacking        deceased   Ramanand    Mahto   with    Bhujali    and  Dab
Signature Not Verified
              respectively. The appellant - Subhash Mahto and others namely,
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.09.26
16:54:29 IST
Reason:
              Asmani       Mahto,   Rishi  Mahto,   Uma  Nath   Mahto,   Subhash   Mahto,
              Rameshwar Mahto, Bijendra Mahto, Ramroop Mahto, Dukhit Mahto

                                  2
are alleged to have caught hold of the deceased- Ramanand
Mahto  and,  thereafter,   Lachhu   Gareri   and  Ramchandra   Gareri
chopped the head of the deceased by their weapons. On seeing
PW-2 (Ram Briksh Mahto) and PW-1 (Santosh Kumar) coming to the
spot of occurrence. The accused persons dragged the headless
body  and   threw   nearby  ditch.    The   appellant-accused    viz.
Subhash Mahto is said to have packed the severed head in a
plastic  bag   and  ran  away  with    the  accused   -   Ramachandra
Gareri.
3.      Based upon evidence of eye witnesses Suresh Kumar (PW-
5) and Ram Brikesh Mahto (PW-2), the Trial Court convicted
Ramachandra Gareri and Lachhu Gareri under Section 302 IPC and
others under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC and under
Section   201   IPC   and   sentenced     them   to    undergo   life
imprisonment. In appeal, the High Court gave benefit of doubt
to Anant Lal Mahto, Rishi Mahto and Asmani Mahto and confirmed
the conviction of the other accused.
4.      We   have  heard   Mr.  Subhro     Sanyal,   learned   amicus
appointed through the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee
and Ms. Abha R. Sharma, learned counsel for the respondent-
state and also perused the impugned judgment and materials on
record.
5.      The overt-act attributed to the appellant - Subhash
Mahto is that he caught hold of deceased- Ramanand Mahto and
that he put severed head of the deceased in a plastic bag and
ran away with the accused - Ramachandra Gareri.

                                      3
6.       Learned counsel appearing for the appellant has made
meticulous    submission     contending    that   the   case   of  Subhash
Mahto stood on different footing than the other accused who
were   alleged    to   have    caught    hold   of   the   deceased   and,
therefore, the case of the Subhash Mahto ought to have been
considered differently.        In our view, the above contention of
the  appellant    does    not   merit   acceptance.    The   name  of  the
appellant - Subhash Mahto and the overt-act attributed to him
that he caught hold of the deceased has been specifically
mentioned in the FIR.
7.       In   this   regard,    learned    counsel    appearing   for  the
State   has   drawn   our   attention    that  the   similarly    situated
accused,   namely,    Mundrika    Mahto,   Uma   Nath   Mahto,   Rameshwar
Mahto,   Bijendra    Mahto,   Ramroop    Mahto,   Dukhit   Mahto,   Lachhu
Gareri and Ramachandra Gareri who also caught hold of the
deceased have preferred the appeal viz. Criminal Appeal No.701
of 1993 before the Supreme Court and the same was dismissed by
this  Court    by   a  reasoned    order.    Learned    counsel   for  the
appellant has submitted that Anant Lal Mahto, Rishi Mahto and
Asmani Mahto were acquitted by the High Court even though
specific    overt-act   were    attributed    to   them  and   the  appeal
preferred by the State of Bihar was dismissed for default by
this Court. It was further submitted that when one batch of
appeals preferred by one set of accused in which conviction
was confirmed and appeals preferred by another set of accused
similarly    situated   were    allowed   acquitting    them,   the  Court
should lean in favour of the accused.            We are not inclined to

                                  4
  accept the submissions since criminal appeal preferred by the
  similarly  situated  accused   was  already  dismissed   by  this
  Court, as noted above.
  8.      In the result, the appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.
  9.      We   express   our    appreciation    towards    valuable
  assistance  rendered  by  Mr.   Subhro  Sanyal,  learned   amicus
  appearing for the appellant.
                                         ….......................J.
                                         [ R. BANUMATHI]
                                         …......................J.
                                         [INDIRA BANERJEE]
NEW DELHI
19TH SEPTEMBER, 2018


