                                                                                         1
                                                                          REPORTABLE
                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                             ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                             SUO MOTU CONTEMPT PETITION (CRL.) NO.5 OF 2017
                       IN RE : MOHIT CHAUDHARY, ADVOCATE
                                                  JUDGMENT
                       SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
                       1.       A Noble     Profession.   An   Officer of  the  Court. An
                           Advocate-on-Record having the privilege conferred in that behalf
                           under the Supreme Court Rules, 2013. And a painful task of the
                           Court to look into the conduct of such an advocate arrayed as a
                           contemnor in the contempt proceedings.
                       2.      On 07.04.2017 right in the morning at 10.30 a.m., we were
Signature Not Verified
                           confronted by Mr. Mohit Chaudhary, Advocate-on-Record, making
Digitally signed by
SATISH KUMAR YADAV
Date: 2017.08.17
12:13:01 TLT
Reason:
                           the first mentioning in an extremely agitated and aggressive
                           manner. He sought to contend that a great manipulation had

                                                                 2
occurred in the Registry of this Court in order to favour the
opposite party with the objective of “Bench Hunt”. He sought to
produce before the Court a letter dated 07.04.2017, during
mentioning, which was taken on record as Annexure ‘A’. In order to
appreciate the said letter, we reproduce the same as under :
“To
The Hon’ble Chief Justice of India
Supreme Court, New Delhi
Reference : Contempt Petition (Civil) No.785 of 2015 & SLP
(C) No.31520 of 2013.
            Along with connected matters
Sub : Enquiry into the act of unnatural and hasty listing of
voluminous matter with sole aim of bench hunting.
My lord,
An unfortunate, anti-institutional and manipulative trend set
up by unscrupulous litigants with aim to bench hunt has led
this complaint.
The above matters concern SRA project on a 33 Acre Land
at South Mumbai at Colaba, conservative valuation of the
dispute would be around Rs.5000 Crores. Despite interim
orders passed by this Court senior officers of the department
playing in hands of big corporate, indulge in act of deliberate
contempt. All matters are pending.
Certain alarming detail of the events have cropped up last
evening (around 18.30 hrs.), when in Supplementary List the
voluminous matter (approximately 12000 pages with

                                                                    3
    reports/studies etc.) was shown to be listed today in a
    special bench (comprising of HMJ. Arun Misra and HMJ. S.
    Abdul Nazeer) despite the matter not being part-heard or
    otherwise marked to the said bench. Matter in usual course
    of business should have gone to a regular bench.
    In deviation from normal rule of listing the matter before
    regular bench and indulging in constituting a special bench,
    at eleventh hour is non-conventional and mischievous act on
    part of Registry. This gets further worse, as vide ‘Elimination
    List’ dated 03.04.2017 issued at 18.28 hrs this matter was
    shown to be deleted from the advance cause list dated
    07.04.2017. Thus, putting a matter on board an evening
    before is virtually giving no time to a party situated at
    Mumbai and counsel at Delhi to prepare.
    An enquiry be made and practice direction be issued
    specially concerning all such voluminous and high stake
    matters where the parties are from distant places and need
    sufficient notice of listing.
    In present matter, serious issues arise
- Why this matter is listed in unnatural haste and without
  constituting enough notice to parties/lawyers and that also
  before a special bench, deviating from the regular bench, in
  violation of judicial propriety and decorum?
- Could any lawyer/party or any of the Hon’ble Judge made a
  request, without notice to other parties, for putting the matter
  on board despite its’ deletion?
    In set of disturbing facts given above, it is requested that
    subject matter be placed before regular bench or before the
    Court of Hon’ble Chief Justice and stringent practice
    directions be issued, as not only in present case, but registry
    in past has also indulged in such malpractice in past
    (reference is made to CIDCO and H.D. Sudhakar Vs.
    Metropolis Hotel matters).

                                                                           4
                                                  Submitted By :
                                                        Sd/-
                                                 Mohit Chaudhary
                                       Advocate-on-Record for the
                                                 Petitioner-in-person
     Dated: 04.07.2017
     New Delhi
                                                         Sd/-
                                                    PETITIONER”
                                               (Emphasis supplied)
3.     The allegation thus is clear and unequivocal – the Registry had
colluded with the opposite litigant to hastily list the matter with the aim
of bench hunting. It was categorized as “an unfortunate and
anti-institutional and manipulative trend” which seems to indicate that
the matter was stated to have suddenly appeared in the evening list
prior to the date as the supplementary matter before the special bench,
despite the matter not being ‘part heard’ or otherwise marked to the
bench. This was alleged to be in violation of the normal rule of listing
before a regular bench and indulging in constituting a Special Bench at
the eleventh hour as a non-conventional and mischievous act on the
part of the Registry. This was so despite the fact that the matter had
been earlier deleted from the Advance Cause list of 07.04.2017.
4.      We may note that the contemnor is an Advocate-on-Record
practicing in that capacity since the year 2009 – not a novice in the

                                                                          5
field. He has been representing prestigious institutions, State
Government and Authorities and is obviously quite familiar with the
practices of this Court. He cannot be said to be oblivious to the fact
that no bench is constituted by the Registry, but by the Chief Justice of
this Court. Thus, in an indirect manner, an imputation was impliedly
made even against the Chief Justice though in the garb of a virulent
attack on the Registry.
5.     The prayer made in the letter in view of the “disturbing facts” was,
to place the matter before a regular bench, and for issuance of
“stringent practice directions” so as to prevent the Registry in indulging
in such malpractices, as “the registry in past has also indulged in such
malpractices”.
6.      To say the least, we were taken aback, not only by the contents
of the letter, but by the manner of presentation in the Court. Our
exploration showed that the averments in the letter were palpably false
as on 31.3.2017, specific directions had been issued for the matter to
be listed on 7.4.2017, “to be heard finally.” Thus, if inadvertently the
matter was deleted from the Advance List but had re-appeared in the
list, nobody could have been taken by surprise in view of the last order.
It was not also a case where an Advocate-on-Record was expressing

                                                                       6
some difficulty in seeking to make a representation of the case on
account of being unaware of the listing, in which case, a request would
be made before the concerned bench for some accommodation. The
intent was clear i.e. the bench before which the case was listed could
not hear the matter for reasons best known to the petitioner and the
Advocate-on-Record.      The shoe was thus on the other foot i.e. an
endeavor of bench hunting by the litigant mentioning before us and the
Advocate-on-Record lending his shoulder to that endeavor.
7.    The order produced in the Court dated 31.3.2017 incidentally was
passed by the same bench before which the matter was listed on
7.4.2017, and thus, there was no change even in the bench, nor had
the case been placed before a special bench. It was listed before the
regular bench. It was not listed before any special bench. The letter of
the contemnor was also accompanied by certain articles relating to
“bench hunting” leaving nothing in doubt about the direction of the
attack of the contemnor.
8.     We did not consider it a matter to let go. The listing had been
based on a judicial direction and had not been determined at the hands
of the Registry of the Court. The allegations sought to be made against
the Registry with insinuations directed even against the Judges, led to

                                                                          7
our prima facie satisfaction, that the Advocate-on-Record had
committed contempt in the face of the Court, by making such
insinuations and allegations, and thus notice of contempt was issued
then and there, with liberty granted to Mr. Mohit Chaudhary to file an
affidavit, in this behalf. The matter was posted for 10 th April, 2017.
9.     The contemnor, faced with the proceedings of contempt on the
face of the Court, sought to back track, by seeking to file an affidavit on
the same date before the Court. In the affidavit verified by the
contemnor as “true and correct to my knowledge and belief”, it was
affirmed, that while representing the interest of the client he had made
a mention before the Court which, according to him, was to the best of
his judgment, the only course available. We reproduce the affidavit as
under:-
     “To
     The Hon’ble Chief Justice of India,
     And his companion judges
     Supreme Court, New Delhi
                               AFFIDAVIT
     I Mohit Chaudhary S/o Late Sh R.K. Chaudhary Resident of
     B-180, East of Kailash, New Delhi, aged 40 years, do hereby
     solemnly affirm as under:

                                                                8
1. At the outset, I say that I have highest regards for the
   judicial system of India and for this Hon’ble Court. I am an
   Advocate on Record of this Court. Whatever I am today
   (in terms of my identity) is because of being an officer of
   the Court, so I can never even dare or attempt to defy the
   dignity and majesty of Court, even in my wildest dream.
2. However, being an officer of the Court and representing
   the interest of my client (without anything being personal
   in it), I made a mentioning before this Hon’ble Court,
   which according to my judgment was the only course
   available. In order to request this Court to issue practice
   directions (for listing the matter where enough notice
   could have been given to parties), I also handed over
   grievance to the Hon’ble Court. The copy of the said
   grievance is only with me and with the Hon’ble Court.
3. However, it appears that the approach of mine was not
   proper and thus in order to put my point across, I feel to
   place on record that :
A. I profusely apologise towards the said act of mine which
   gave an impression to this Hon’ble Court that I have
   indulged in an act of contempt. I even tendered my
   apology in the open Court, the moment Hon’ble Court
   took a prima facie view of issuing contempt notice to me.
B. In this Court I have worked for Union of India, PSUs and
   variety of clients and even I was being appointed as
   Additional Advocate General for the State of J & K,
   nowhere there is a complaint of mine.
4. Towards the end, I again wish to submit my unconditional
   apology for my unintentional act. Your lordship may take a
   lenient view in the matter and pardon me.
                                                 Deponent
                         VERIFICATION

                                                                        9
           I say that the above contents of my affidavit are true
      and correct to my knowledge and belief.
           Verified on 07.04.2017 at New Delhi.
                                                         Deponent”
10.          The position adopted in the affidavit, could hardly be
categorized as an unconditional apology, as it was a justification of
what the contemnor had done in past and what was stated was “the
approach of mine was not proper”. This position expressed in the
affidavit could hardly have been accepted as a justification of the
actions of the contemnor. Liberty was sought and granted, to file a
further explanation. The second affidavit filed by the contemnor, was
affirmed on 10.4.2017. The contents of the said affidavit are as under:
       “AFFIDAVIT OF SINCERE, UNCONDITIONAL APOLOGY AND
       UNCONDITIONAL WITHDRAWAL OF THE SUBMISSIONS &
       LETTER DATED 07.04.2017.
           I Mohit Chaudhary S/o Late Sh. R.K.Chaudhary
       Resident of B-180, East of Kailash, New Delhi, aged 40
       years, do hereby solemnly affirm as under:
           1. I with folded hands unconditionally tender my
              apology to this Hon’ble Court and withdraw each
              and every word spoken or written in the letter dated
              7th April, 2017 submitted before this Hon’ble Court at
              the time of mentioning on 7.4.2017.

                                                          10
2. I reiterate that there was no intent on my part to in
   any manner or anyways to bring any disrespect to
   the dignity of this Hon’ble Court. I strongly believe
   that I would have no dignity in the absence of
   dignity of this Hon’ble Court.
3. I have always held this Hon’ble Court in the highest
   esteem and not done anything which might tend or
   cause to be seen as bringing any disrespect to this
   great institution dispensing justice to one and all.
4. I assure this Hon’ble Court that I shall not do or
   cause to do or tend to do anything ever as a result
   of impromptu reaction to such situations. I state that
   the few years that I have spent at the Bar I have
   made all endeavours to uphold the rule and majesty
   of law. The dignity, the respect of this Hon’ble Court
   or for that matter every Court established by law is
   extremely dear to me and pray my apology be
   accepted.
5. Not abiding to the discipline of this Hon’ble Court
   has taught me a lesson that merely listing of a
   matter and that too under the directions of the
   Hon’ble Court can never be manipulated as stated
   by me and the direction of this Hon’ble Court was
   not only binding on all concerned but equally on the
   Registry of this Hon’ble Court

                                                                    11
          6. The lesson learnt by my mistakes and errors on 7 th
             April, 2017 would help me in future to take care
             before forming any opinion and acting on the same.
             The magnanimity of this Hon’ble Court is boundless
             and I pray that Your Lordships would show the said
             magnanimity on the young officer of this Hon’ble
             Court.
          7. I beseech the indulgence of this Hon’ble Court to
             very kindly accept my unconditional apology.
          8. To err is human and the error committed by me on
             7th April, 2017 is one such human error. I once again
             withdraw each word spoken and written on 7.4.2017
             and tender my unconditional apology to this Hon’ble
             Court.
                                                      DEPONENT
          VERIFICATION
                 I the above named Deponent do hereby verify
         that the contents of the above affidavit are true to my
         knowledge.
                Verified on this the 10th day of April, 2017 at New
         Delhi
                                                      DEPONENT”
11.     The contemnor now sought to place an unconditional apology,
admitting not to be abiding by the discipline of the Court. He

                                                                      12
acknowledged that listing of a matter, under the direction of the Court,
could never be manipulated as stated by him! If we may say so, it does
not require much imagination and knowledge to know of this fact. The
contemnor beseeched the indulgence of the Court and claimed to have
erred, seeking to withdraw each word spoken and written on 7.4.2017,
and tendered an unqualified apology.
12.     On 10.4.2017, the affidavit filed in Court was taken on record,
and the matter was posted for further consideration on 17.4.2017, with
the direction to also place the “SLP file” before the Court. On
17.4.2017, a battery of counsel was present to represent the
contemnor, led by Mr.K.K.Venugopal, learned senior counsel. It was
his contention that the contemnor had thrown himself at the mercy of
the court, and there was little else he could do. He submitted that the
contemnor had erred grievously, but what he had done, could not be
recalled. Thus he could only plead for the indulgence of mercy. The
order sheet also records the presence of the learned Attorney General,
President of the Supreme Court Bar Association, and the President of
the Advocate-on-Record Association, amongst others.
13.    We are faced with the question, as to what should be the rightful
thing to do, in such a situation. Is the second apology, which is

                                                                     13
unconditional, enough to absolve the contemnor of all that has been
done by him? Whether some consequences must follow on the
contemnor for his conduct, even if there is ultimately an unconditional
apology tendered by him?
14.      In determining this issue, in the conspectus of the aforesaid
affidavit, one more important fact has to be taken into account. The
records of the case show, that the original writ petition was filed
through one Puja Sharma, Advocate-on-Record, but the contemnor
appeared on the first date of hearing on 01.10.2013. The
“vakalatnama” (power of attorney) then changed to one Mr. Gautam
Narayan on 29.01.2014 after obtaining No Objection by Puja Sharma,
but soon thereafter, the contemnor filed the “vakalatnama” on
11.11.2014 with No Objection from Mr. Gautam Narayan. However, on
16.02.2015 Mr. Nirnimesh Dube entered as an Advocate-on-Record, in
place of the respondent contemnor. Mr. Nirnimesh Dube was
succeeded by Mr. Jinendra Jain on 22.01.2016, and continued to be
the Advocate-on-Record upto 04.04.2017, when the respondent
re-enters the case by filing a fresh “vakalatnama”. Thus, it is quite
obvious that the petitioner engaged the contemnor who came into the
picture on the anvil of mentioning after having remained away from the

                                                                        14
scene for all this period of time. The prior Advocate-on-Record
remained so on 31.03.2017 when the matter was directed to be listed
for final disposal on 07.04.2017. Even on 07.04.2017 the presence of
Mr. Jinendra Jain, Advocate is recorded apart from Mr. Mohit
Chaudhary when the matter was taken up by the Bench and the
petitions were dismissed.
15.       It is thus quite obvious to us that the scenario was that the
existing Advocate-on-Record refused to oblige the litigant petitioner for
making the unreasonable mentioning before the Court, as was
endeavoured by the contemnor, seeking to shift the matter out of an
existing Bench. It is the contemnor who utilized the opportunity to
re-enter the scene, with the object of assisting the petitioner, in the
endeavour of such bench hunting, under the garb of allegations and
insinuations, made against the Registry, and for that matter, even the
court. The contemnor thus took a conscious decision to be a pawn in
the hands of the litigant, to scandalize the Court and the Registry of the
Court, with the sole objective of achieving a bench shifting. It was
clearly a “commercial decision” to sub-serve the interest of his client,
even though, it would amount to false allegations and be unbecoming
of an advocate.

                                                                         15
16.      We consider it appropriate to review some of the judicial
precedents and texts in respect of the conduct of an advocate. We
recognize the duty of an advocate to put his best case for the litigant
before the Court. This, however, does not absolve him of the
responsibility as an officer of the Court. It is a dual responsibility. The
right of an Advocate-on-Record in the Supreme Court, is not an
automatic right coming from the enrollment at the Bar. Something more
has to be done. The rigors of an examination have to be gone through,
which tests the advocate, not only on his legal ability of drafting and
knowledge of law, but on ethical practices. It is only after going through
the   rigorous    exercise  that   an    advocate   is   enlisted   as   an
Advocate-on-Record, giving him the right to act and file pleadings
before this Court, in accordance with the Supreme Court Rules, 2013.
17.     A perusal of the relevant Rule contained in Order IV, Rule 5
requires,   inter   alia,  even    training   for  one    year    with   an
Advocate-on-Record, who has been approved by the Court, prior to the
appearance in the test, so that the prospective Advocate-on-Record is
well grounded in the various professional aspects. The requirements
regarding the Advocate-on-Record examination, held under the
general policy of the Committee of Judges appointed by the Chief

                                                                         16
Justice, requires testing in the practice and procedure of Supreme
Court, drafting, advocacy and professional ethics and leading cases.
The contemnor has been an Advocate-on-Record for 8 years.
18.   To borrow the words of P.B.Sawant, J. in Vinay Chandra Mishra,
In re,1
          “Brazenness is not outspokenness and arrogance is not
          fearlessness. Use of intemperate language is not
          assertion of right nor is a threat an argument. Humility
          is not servility and Courtesy and politeness are not lack
          of dignity. Self-restraint and respectful attitude towards
          the Court, presentation of correct facts and law with a
          balanced mind and without overstatement, suppression,
          distortion or embellishment are requisites of good
          advocacy. A lawyer has to be a gentleman first. His
          most valuable asset is the respect and goodwill he
          enjoys among his colleagues and in the Court.”
19.     That the practice of law is not akin to any other business or
profession as it involves a dual duty – nay a primary duty to the Court
and then a duty to the litigant with the privilege to address the Court for
the client is best enunciated in the words of Justice Mookerjee in
Emperor vs. Rajanikantha Bose2 -
1
                                     (1995) 2 SCC 584
2
                                     49 CAL. 732 ; 71 Ind Cas 81

                                                                       17
          “The Practice of Law is not a business open to all who
          wish to engage in it. It is a personal right or privilege…
          It is in the nature of a Franchise from the State – That
          you are a member of the legal profession is your
          privilege; That you can represent your client is your
          privilege; that you can in that capacity claim audience
          in Court is your privilege. Yours is an exalted
          profession in which your privilege is your duty and your
          duty is your privilege. They both coincide.”
20.     Warvelle’s Legal Ethics, 2 nd Edition at page 182 sets out the
obligation of a lawyer as:
           “A lawyer is under obligation to do nothing that shall
         detract from the dignity of the court, of which he is
         himself a sworn officer and assistant. He should at all
         times pay deferential respect to the Judge, and
         scrupulously observe the decorum of the courtroom”.
21.    The contempt jurisdiction is not only to protect the reputation
of the concerned Judge so that he can administer Justice fearlessly
and fairly, but also to protect “the fair name of the judiciary”. The
protection in a manner of speaking, extends even to the Registry in
the performance of its task and false and unfair allegations which
seek to impede the working of the Registry and thus the

                                                                          18
  administration of Justice, made with oblique motives cannot be
  tolerated. In such a situation in order to uphold the honor and
  dignity of the institution, the Court has to perform the painful duties
  which we are faced with in the present proceedings. Not to do so in
  the words of P.B.Sawant, J. in Sanjiv Dutta, Dy. Secy., Ministry
  of Information & Broadcasting, In re,3 would –
          “The present trend unless checked is likely to lead to
          a stage when the system will be found wrecked from
          within before it is wrecked from outside. It is for the
          members of the profession to introspect and take the
          corrective steps in time and also spare the Courts the
          unpleasant duty. We say no more.”
  22.      Now turning to the “Standards of Professional Conduct and
  Etiquette” of the Bar Council of India Rules contained in Section I of
  Chapter II, Part VI, the duties of an advocate towards the Court
  have been specified. We extract the 4thduty set out as under:
            “An advocate shall use his best efforts to restrain
            and prevent his client from resorting to sharp or
            unfair practices or from doing anything in relation
            to the Court, opposing counsel or parties which
            the advocate himself ought not to do. An advocate
3
                                     (1995) 3 SCC 619

                                                                       19
           shall refuse to represent the client who persists in
           such improper conduct. He shall not consider
           himself a mere mouthpiece of the client, and shall
           exercise his own judgment in the use of restrained
           language in correspondence, avoiding scurrilous
           attacks in pleadings, and using intemperate
           language during arguments in Court.”
  23.    In the aforesaid context the aforesaid principle in different
  words was set out by Justice Crampton in R. vs. O’Connell4as
  under:
         “The advocate is a representative but not a delegate.
         He gives to his client the benefit of his learning, his
         talents and his judgment; but all through he never
         forgets what he owes to himself and to others. He will
         not knowingly misstate the law, he will not willfully
         misstate the facts, though it be to gain the case for his
         client. He will ever bear in mind that if he be an
         advocate     of   an   individual       and     retained and
         remunerated often inadequately, for valuable services,
         yet he has a prior and perpetual retainer on behalf of
         truth and justice and there is no Crown or other license
         which in any case or for any party or purpose can
         discharge him from that primary and paramount
         retainer.”
4
                                     7 Irish Law Reports 313

                                                                                     20
  24.           The fundamentals of the profession thus require an
  advocate not to be immersed in a blind quest of relief for his client.
  The dignity of the institution cannot be violated in this quest as “law
  is no trade, briefs no merchandise” as per Krishna Iyer, J in Bar
  Council of Maharashtra vs. M.V.Dabholkar5.
  25.     It is also pertinent to note at this point, the illuminating words
  of Vivian Bose, J. in ‘G’ a Senior Advocate of the Supreme
  Court, In re6, who elucidated:
              “To use the language of the Army, an Advocate of
              this Court is expected at all times to comport himself
              in a manner befitting his status as an “officer and a
              gentleman”.
  26.      It is as far back as in 1925 that an Article titled ‘The Lawyer
  as an Officer of the Court’7 published in the Virginia Law Review,
  lucidly set down what is expected from the lawyer which is best set
  out in its own words:
           “The duties of the lawyer to the Court spring directly
           from the relation that he sustains to the Court as an
5
                                       (1976) 2 SCC 291
6
                                       AIR 1954 SC 557
7
                                       Virginia Law Review, Vol.11, No.4 (Feb. 1925) pp.
263-277

                                                           21
officer in the administration of justice. The law is not a
mere private calling, but is a profession which has the
distinction of being an integral part of the State’s
judicial system. As an officer of the Court the lawyer
is, therefore, bound to uphold the dignity and integrity
of the Court; to exercise at all times respect for the
Court in both words and actions; to present all matters
relating to his client’s case openly, being careful to
avoid any attempt to exert private influence upon
either the judge or the jury; and to be frank and candid
in all dealings with the Court, “using no deceit,
imposition or evasion,” as by misreciting witnesses or
misquoting      precedents.    “It   must    always    be
understood,” says Mr.Christian Doerfler, in an address
before the Milwaukee County Bar Association, in
December, 1911, “that the profession of law is
instituted among men for the purpose of aiding the
administration of justice. A proper administration of
justice does not mean that a lawyer should succeed in
winning a lawsuit. It means that he should properly
being to the attention of the Court everything by way
of fact and law that is available and legitimate for the
purpose of properly presenting his client’s case.
           His duty as far as his client is concerned is
simply to legitimately present his side of the case. His
duty as far as the public is concerned and as far as he

                                                         22
is an officer of the Court is to aid and assist in the
administration of justice.”
           In this connection, the timely words of Mr.
Warvelle may also well be remembered:
       “But the lawyer is not alone a gentleman; he is a
sworn minister of justice. His office imposes high
moral duties and grave responsibilities, and he is held
to a strict fulfillment of all that these matters imply.
Interests of vast magnitude are entrusted to him;
confidence is imposed in him; life, liberty and property
are committed to his care. He must be equal to the
responsibilities which they create, and if he betrays
his trust, neglects his duties, practices deceit, or
panders to vice, then the most severe penalty should
be inflicted and his name stricken from the roll.”
            That the lawyer owes a high duty to his
profession and to his fellow members of the Bar is an
obvious truth. His profession should be his pride, and
to preserve its honor pure and unsullied should be
among his chief concerns. “Nothing should be higher
in the estimation of the advocate,” declares Mr.
Alexander H. Robbins, “next after those sacred
relations of home and country than his profession.
She should be to him the ‘fairest of ten thousand’
among the institutions of the earth. He must stand for

                                                                23
       her in all places and resent any attack on her honor –
       as he would if the same attack were to be made
       against his own fair name and reputation. He should
       enthrone her in the sacred places of his heart, and to
       her he should offer the incense of constant devotion.
       For she is a jealous mistress.”
               Again, it is to be borne in mind that the judges
       are selected from the ranks of lawyers. The purity of
       the Bench depends upon the purity of the Bar.
         “The very fact, then, that one of the co-ordinate
      departments of the government is administered by
      men selected only from one profession gives to that
      profession a certain pre-eminence which calls for a
      high standard of morals as well as intellectual
      attainments. The integrity of the judiciary is the
      safeguard of the nation, but the character of the judges
      is practically but the character of the lawyers. Like
      begets like. A degraded Bar will inevitably produce a
      degraded Bench, and just as certainly may we expect
      to find the highest excellence in a judiciary drawn from
      the ranks of an enlightened, learned and moral Bar.”
27. He ends his Article in the following words:
                  “No client, corporate or individual, however
      powerful, nor any cause civil or political, however
      important, is entitled to receive, nor should any lawyer

                                                                        24
       render, any service or advice involving disloyalty to the
       law whose ministers we are, or disrespect of the
       judicial office, which we are bound to uphold, or
       corruption of any person or persons exercising a public
       office or private trust, or deception or betrayal of the
       public. When rendering any such improper service or
       advice, the lawyer invites and merits stern and just
       condemnation. Correspondingly, he advances the
       honor of his profession and the best interests of his
       client when he renders service or gives advice tending
       to impress upon the client and his undertaking exact
       compliance with the strictest principles of moral law.
       He must also observe and advise his client to observe
       the statute law, though until a statute shall have been
       construed and interpreted by competent adjudication,
       he is free and is entitled to advise as to its validity and
       as to what he conscientiously believes to be its just
       meaning and extent. But, above all, a lawyer will find
       his highest honor in a deserved reputation for fidelity to
       private trust and to public duty, as an honest man and
       as a patriotic and loyal citizen.”
28.    On examination of the legal principles an important issue
emerges: what should be the end of what the contemnor had
started    but  has    culminated     in  an  impassioned       plea of

                                                                      25
Mr. K.K.Venugopal, learned senior advocate supported by the
representatives of the Bar present in Court, marking their
appearance for the contemnor. We are inclined to give due
consideration to such a plea, but are unable to persuade ourselves
to let the contemnor go scot-free, without any consequences. We
are thus not inclined to proceed further in the contempt jurisdiction
except to caution the contemnor that this should be the first and the
last time of such a misadventure. But the matter cannot rest only at
that.
29.       It was not an innocent act, an innocuous endeavor but a
well thought out decision to tread an unfortunate path which the
existing Advocate-on-Record was unwilling to do. The objective
was only to assist the client by somehow seeking shifting of the
Bench. The allegations made against the Registry were false and
there were innuendoes against the Court. The endeavor failed.
Every action has to have an outcome. The contemnor thus must
face some consequences of his conduct.
30.          We are of the view that the privilege of being an
Advocate-on-Record under the Rules has clearly been abused by

                                                                      26
the contemnor. The conduct was not becoming of an advocate
much less an advocate-on-record in the Supreme Court.
31.    In this context, we would like to refer to Rule 10 of Order IV
of the said Rules which reads as under:
       “10. When, on the complaint of any person or
       otherwise, the Court is of the opinion that an
       advocate-on-record has been guilty of misconduct or of
       conduct unbecoming of an advocate-on-record, the
       Court may make an order removing his name from the
       register of advocates on record either permanently or
       for such period as the Court may think fit and the
       Registrar shall thereupon report the said fact to the Bar
       Council of India and to State Bar Council concerned:
              Provided that the Court shall, before making such
        order, issue to such advocate-on-record a summons
        returnable before the Court or before a Special Bench
        to be constituted by the Chief Justice, requiring the
        advocate-on-record to show cause against the matters
        alleged in the summons, and the summons shall, if
        practicable, be served personally upon him with copies
        of any affidavit or statement before the Court at the
        time of the issue of the summons.
        Explanation – For the purpose of these rules,
        misconduct       or     conduct    unbecoming     of   an
        advocate-on-record shall include –
        (a) Mere    name lending by an advocate-on-record
            without any further participation in the proceedings
            of the case;
        (b) Absence of the advocate-on-record from the Court
            without any justifiable cause when the case is taken
            up for hearing; and

                                                                   27
    (c) Failure to submit appearance slip duly signed by the
        advocate-on-record of actual appearances in the
        Court.”
The aforesaid Rule makes it clear, that whether on the
complaint of any person or otherwise, in case of misconduct or
a conduct unbecoming of an advocate-on-record, the Court
may make an order removing his name from the register of
Advocate-on-Record permanently, or for a specified period. We
are not referring to the right to practice as an advocate, and the
name entered on the rolls of any State Bar Council, which is a
necessary requirement, before a person takes the examination
of Advocate-on-Record. The present case is clearly one where
this Court is of the opinion that the conduct of the contemnor is
unbecoming of an Advocate-on-Record. The pre-requisites of
the proviso are met, by the reason of the Bench being
constituted itself by the Chief Justice, and the contemnor being
aware of the far more serious consequences, which could have
flowed to him. The learned senior counsel representing the
petitioner has thrown him at the mercy of the Court. We have

                                                                        28
     substantively accepted the request but lesser consequences
     have been imposed on the contemnor.
     32.    We are thus of the view that the appropriate course of
     action would be that the contemnor is not permitted to practice
     as an Advocate-on-Record, for a period of one month from the
     date of the order. A painful task had to be performed and is
     performed.
     33.    We hope that both for the petitioner and other advocates
     who may consider the interest of the client paramount even to
     breach the ethical practice of the court, this would be a caution.
     We say no more.
                                           .…..………………………CJI.
                                              (Jagdish Singh Khehar)
                                           …….….…………………….J.
                                               (Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud)
                                           ...……………………………J.
                                                  (Sanjay Kishan Kaul)
New Delhi;
August 17, 2017.

29

