                                                    1
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                   CIVIL APPEAL NO.11887 Of 2018
                             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 8249 of 2018)
      K. LAKSHMINARAYANAN                                   ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                VERSUS
      UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                                ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                                  WITH
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.11888    Of 2018
                             (arising out of SLP (C) No. 8224 of 2018)
      S. DHANALAKSHMI                                      ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                VERSUS
      UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                                ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                           J U D G M E N T
      ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.07
15:33:26 IST
Reason:
                       Leave granted.
                       These  two  appeals   have  been filed  against the  common

                                   2
judgment of Madras High Court dated 22.03.2018 by which the
writ    petitions   filed   by   the   appellants    questioning    the
nominations made by the Central Government in exercise of
power    under   Section   3(3)    of   the    Government    of   Union
Territories    Act,   1963   (hereinafter     referred   to  as   “Act,
1963”), to the Legislative Assembly of Union Territory of
Puducherry has been dismissed.
2.   The   background   facts    leading    to  filing   of  the   writ
petitions giving rise to these appeals are as follows:­
     2.1   Part VIII of the Constitution of India dealing with
           the Union Territories was amended by Constitution
           (Fourteenth    Amendment)     Act,    1962   by   inserting
           Article 239A, which provides for “creation of local
           Legislatures   or   Council   of   Ministers   or  both  for
           certain Union Territories.”         Article 239A provided
           that Parliament, may by law, create for the Union
           Territory of Pondicherry, a body, whether elected or
           partly nominated and partly elected, to function as
           a Legislature for the Union Territory, or a Council
           of Ministers, or both with such constitution, powers
           and functions, in each case, as may be specified in
           the law.    After the above Constitutional amendment

                           3
    inserting   Article   239A,  the   Parliament   enacted
    Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 to provide
    for Legislative Assembly and Council of Ministers
    for certain Union Territories and for certain other
    matters.
2.2 At the time of commencement of Act, 1963, there were
    large number of Union Territories, which were to be
    governed by the Act, 1963.    Gradually, several Union
    Territories were upgraded to the status of a State
    and as on date, the definition of Union Territories
    under Section 2(h) defines “Union Territory” as the
    Union Territory of Puducherry.       Section 3 of the
    Act, 1963 provides for Legislative Assemblies for
    Union territories and their composition.      According
    to Section 3(2), the total number of seats in the
    Legislative Assembly of the Union territory to be
    filled by persons chosen by direct election shall be
    thirty   and  as   per   Section  3(3),   the   Central
    Government may nominate not more than three persons,
    not being persons in the service of Government, to
    be members of the Legislative Assembly of the Union
    territory.
2.3 Election for filling thirty seats in the Legislative

                          4
Assembly of Puducherry was held in the year 2016.
Indian National Congress, who bagged fifteen out of
thirty seats with support of DMK and one independent
candidate has formed the Government in Puducherry.
Writ   Petition     (C)     No.   16275    of    2017   as   K.
Lakshminarayanan Vs. Union of India & Anr. was filed
in  the   Madras   High    Court   praying    for  a   writ  of
mandamus   forbearing      the   respondents     from   in  any
manner nominating or filling up the nominated seats
of Members for the Puducherry Legislative Assembly
except   with  the     consultation     and   choice    of  the
elected Council of Ministers.         The writ petition was
filed   on  27.06.2017.         The  Government     of   India,
Ministry of Home Affairs had issued a notification
on 23.06.2017 nominating Shri V. Saminathan, Shri
K.G. Shankar and Shri S. Selvaganabathy as members
of the Legislative Assembly of the Union Territory
of  Puducherry.     An   application     for   amendment    was
filed in the writ petition praying for quashing the
notification     dated      23.06.2017.         Another    Writ
Petition (C) No. 18788 of 2017 – S. Dhanalakshmi Vs.
Union of India & Ors. was filed in the Madras High
Court praying for following reliefs:­

                             5
       “Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus calling for
       the records on the file of the third
       respondent     relating      to    the     impugned
       Notification         bearing        Ref.        No.
       F.No.U­11012/1/2014­UTL dated 23­06­2017 and
       quash the same and consequently direct the
       respondents 1 to 3 to nominate the members to
       the Puducherry Legislative Assembly only with
       the consultation and choice of the elected
       Council of Ministers and pass such further or
       other orders and thus render justice”.
2.4 On    13.11.2017,     the     Secretary    of    Puducherry
    Legislative   Assembly     communicated   the  decision  of
    the  Speaker   of  the   Legislative    Assembly  that  the
    nominated members could not be recognised as members
    of   the    Assembly,      having    been    appointed   in
    contravention of the Constitution and the Act, 1963.
    The communication dated 13.11.2017 was challenged by
    three   nominated   members    by  filing   three  separate
    writ petitions being Writ Petition Nos. 29591, 29592
    and 29593 of 2017.         All the writ petitions, i.e.
    Writ Petition No. 16275 of 2017, Writ Petition No.
    18788 of 2017 and Writ Petitions No. 29591, 29592
    and 29593 of 2017 were heard and decided by Division
    Bench of Madras High Court vide its judgment dated
    22.03.2018.     The Writ Petition Nos. 16275 of 2017
    and 18788 of 2017 challenging the notification dated

                           6
    23.06.2017   has  been   dismissed,     whereas   the  Writ
    Petition   Nos.  29591,   29592    and   29593   have  been
    allowed.   Two separate but concurring judgments have
    been  delivered   by  Division    Bench   of   Madras  High
    Court.   Operative portion of the judgment delivered
    by  Justice   M. Sundar,   with   which   judgment,   Chief
    Justice  expressed   absolute   agreement,     was  to  the
    following effect:­
       “W.P. No. 16275 of 2017 filed by the Whip and
       W.P. No. 18788 of 2017 filed by PIL
       petitioner are dismissed.        Writ petitions,
       being W.P. Nos. 29591 to 29593 of 2017 filed
       by nominated MLAs are allowed.         Considering
       the nature of the matter and in the light of
       the trajectory this litigation has taken,
       there shall be no order as to costs.
       Consequently,      connected         miscellaneous
       petitions are closed.”
2.5 Against  the   aforesaid   Division    Bench   judgment  of
    Madras High Court dated 22.03.2018, only two appeals
    have  been   filed,  one  by   K.   Lakshminarayanan    and
    other by S. Dhanalakshmi challenging the judgment of
    Division Bench by which Writ Petition No. 16275 of
    2017 has been dismissed and another appeal has been
    filed against the judgment of Division Bench in Writ
    Petition No. 18788 of 2017 by which writ petition
    was dismissed.     In so far as judgment of Division

                                    7
          Bench in Writ Petitions Nos. 29591, 29592 and 29593
          of  2017   filed   by   three  nominated    MLAs,  by   which
          their   writ   petitions     were   allowed    quashing   the
          decision of the Speaker dated 23.11.2017, no appeals
          have been filed.
3.   We have heard Shri Kapil Sibal and Shri Salman Khurshid,
learned senior counsel appearing for the appellants.           We have
heard Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for the
Union of India.    Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel has
been heard for the respondents.
4.   Shri Kapil Sibal challenging the nominations made by the
Central Government has raised various submissions.          Shri Sibal
submits that the Government of Puducherry has vital interest
in  the  constitution    of   the  Assembly,    since   it enjoys   the
confidence   of  Legislative     Assembly   and   accountable  to   the
people.   The Government of Puducherry cannot be a stranger in
the  nominations    made   to   the   Assembly.      He  submits   that
nominations of the members of the Assembly must emanate from
the Government of Puducherry and should have concurrence of
the Government.     It was open for the Central Government to
adopt any fair procedure for nominating the members.                The
nominees   could   have   been    originated     from   Government   of

                                    8
Puducherry.   The President could have asked the names from the
Government of Puducherry.         He submits that let this Court
decide on a valid procedure, which is to be adopted while
making nominations by Central Government in the Legislative
Assembly of Puducherry.        He further submits that there has
been  at   least   six   occasions      when   elected     Government   of
Puducherry was consulted before nominating the members in the
Legislative Assembly by the Central Government.                In the year
2001,   when   Lieutenant      Governor      without     consulting    the
Government of Puducherry forwarded the names for nomination to
the  Assembly,   objection     was    raised   by    the   Government   of
Puducherry and the proposed list of nominated members was
referred   back   to    the   Lieutenant      Governor      for   lack  of
consultation with the elected Government.               He submits that
earlier   incidents    when   the   Government      of    Puducherry   was
consulted    before     nomination       has     taken     shape    of   a
constitutional     convention,       which      is     nothing     but   a
constitutional   law    to  be   followed     by   all   concerned.     He
submits that while making nominations vide notification dated
23.06.2017, the above constitutional convention has not been
followed,    which     renders     the     nomination       illegal    and
unsustainable.      He   further    submits      that   in    the  counter
affidavit filed by the Union of India before the High Court,

                                   9
it  was   stated   that   Lieutenant  Governor     has   not  sent   any
nominations to the Central Government and Central Government
on its own has made nominations under Section 3(3) of the Act,
1963.    Shri Kapil Sibal submits that the expression “Central
Government” as occurring in Section 3(3) of the Act, 1963 has
not been correctly understood by the High Court.             He submits
that according to the definition given under Section 3(8) of
the General Clauses Act, 1897, the Central Government means
the President and include in relation to the administration of
a Union Territory, the administrator thereof.          It is submitted
that   the  President    has   framed  Rules    of   Business    of  the
Government   of   Puducherry,   1963,  Rule   4   of   which   Rules  is
relevant for the present case.        It is submitted that as per
the Business Rules, it is the administrator, who was required
to make nominations that too after consultation of Council of
Ministers.    Shri Sibal refers to Rule 4(2) and Rule 48 of the
Business Rules to buttress his submission.            It is submitted
that the nomination to Legislative Assembly is fully covered
by   expression    “remaining   business   of    the   Government”    as
occurring   in   Rule   4(2).    Therefore,   Rule    4(2)   read   with
Chapter IV of the Rules of Business, cover the entire gamut of
executive power exercisable by the President under Article 239
of the Constitution.        Since Section 3(3) of the Act, 1963

                                  10
refers to “Central Government”, thereby indicating exercise of
power in terms of Article 239 of the Constitution, Rule 4(2)
read   with  Chapter   IV   of  the  Rules   of  Business  of  the
Government of Puducherry would apply.      Therefore, the power to
nominate members under Section 3(3) of the Act, 1963 has to
necessarily   involve   the  administrator   acting  in accordance
with Chapter IV.
5.   Shri Sibal further submits that in event interpretation
is accepted that the Government of Puducherry has no role to
play in the nominations of members to Legislative Assembly, it
is de­establishing cooperative federalism.        It is submitted
that federalism has been recognised as a basic feature of the
Constitution and it is Government, which is democratically
formed and reflect the will of the people and responsible to
the Legislature, who has to initiate and concur in the members
to   be  nominated   in   the   Legislative   Assembly.    In  the
representative democracy, the Government is not a stranger to
the process of nomination. One more submission which has been
pressed by Shri Sibal is that even though nominated members
may have right to vote in the proceedings of Assembly there
are two exceptions to such right of vote, i.e., (i) voting on
budget, and (ii) voting on no­confidence motion against the
Government. He submits that nominated members shall have no

                                    11
right to vote in above two subjects. Shri Kapil Sibal has
further very candidly in his submission, stated that he is not
pursuing the challenge to Section 3(3) of the Act, 1963 nor he
is carrying further the submission made before the High Court
on  the  ground    of   eligibility      of   members,     who  have  been
nominated in the Legislative Assembly.            Shri Sibal has placed
reliance on various judgments of this Court, which shall be
referred to while considering the submissions in detail.
6.   Shri K. K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General replying
the submissions of Shri Sibal submits that the Union Territory
is a Territory of a Union in which Central Government can
nominate   unless   the   Constitution       or  law   provides   for  any
consultation    of   Government    of     Puducherry.        According  to
Article 239, it is the President, who has to administer Union
Territory.     Lieutenant     Governor,      who   is   an   administrator
appointed by the President to administer the Union Territory
of Puducherry, govern the Union Territory as per instructions
and directions of the President.           Neither Lieutenant Governor
nor Legislative Assembly can assert themselves in governing
the  Union   Territory.      The  Act,      1963   is   a  law  framed  by
Parliament in exercise of power under Article 239A of the
constitution.    The  powers    and    functions     of   the  Legislative
Assembly   are   such   as  specified       in   the   Act,   1963.    The

                                  12
provision empowering nominations in the Legislative Assembly
by the Central Government in no manner affect the principle of
federalism or cooperative federalism.          The Act, 1963 or any
Constitutional provision does not provide for any consultation
of  Government   of  Puducherry    for   making    nomination   in  the
Legislative Assembly by the Central Government.             There are
large number of Constitutional provisions, which provide for
consultation, whereas no Constitutional provision provide for
consultation of Government of Puducherry in making nomination
by Central Government nor any such right of consultation, is
decipherable from the Act, 1963.           Reading consultation in
nomination shall upset the Constitutional balance.          Appellants
want to read the word “consultation” in Section 3(3) of Act,
1963,   which   has   been   consciously      withheld.      When   the
provisions   of   Act,   1963   indicate     a   primacy  of   Central
Government, the submission that nomination should be made with
the   concurrence   of   Government     of    Puducherry   is    wholly
unfounded.     The  Union   Territory     of   Puducherry   is   wholly
subservient to the President.
7.   Shri K.K.   Venugopal    further    submits    that  Council    of
Ministers of Government of Puducherry is a Agency devised by
President of India. Section 50 of Act, 1963 gives absolute
power   to  the   President    to   issue    any   direction   to   the

                                 13
Administrator and his Council of Ministers. It is submitted
that there is no kind of any limit in the extent of power as
envisaged under Section 50. Shri Venugopal referred to various
other   statutes    where   provisions     envisaged     for   issuing
directions   by  Central   Government   or   other   authorities.   He
submits that in various statutory provisions, directions are
hedged   by  several  conditions   and  in   some   of   the  statutes
consultation is also envisaged.
8.   Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel appearing for
nominated MLAs submits that the Constitution itself provides
that Legislative Assembly of Union Territory of Puducherry
shall be partly elected and partly nominated and Parliament
enacted   Act,  1963,   for  both   the  elected     and   non­elected
members. He further submits that Section 14 of the Act, 1963
which   deals   with   disqualification     of  members,     does  not
contemplate that if nomination is made without consultation of
Legislative Assembly, the members will be disqualified. Hence,
non­consultation    with  Council   of  Ministers     of   Legislative
Assembly cannot be treated to be as any disqualification.
9.   Shri   Ranjit   Kumar   further   submits     that   Section   33
provides that the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
may make rules for regulating and conducting its business.

                               14
Similarly, Section 46 provides that the President shall make
the rules for allocation of business to the Ministers and for
the more convenient transaction of business. He submits that
in both the rules framed under Act, 1963 as well as Section
36, there is  no rule providing consultation of the Council of
Ministers or Chief Minister before making any nomination    in
the Legislative Assembly by the Central Government.
10. He further submits that Legislative Assembly has no power
to make any law to regulate nomination to be made in the
Assembly. It is only the Parliament who is empowered to make
law  under   Article   239A  regulating  constitution  of  the
Legislative Assembly. When the legislative power is not there
with the Union Territory of Puducherry, no executive power can
be exercised by the Legislative Assembly of the Puducherry. He
further submits that power of nomination which shall flow from
law making power unless Article 239A and legislative power
will be co­extensive with the executive power.
11. Shri Kapil Sibal in his rejoinder submission replying the
submissions of learned Attorney General as well as Shri Ranjit
Kumar,  submits   that   the appellants  are  questioning  the
procedure adopted by Central Government for nomination. He
further reiterates that Central Government under Section 3(3)

                                  15
of Act, 1963 is     to mean the President who in turn delegated
his  power  to   its   Administrator,    thus,    nomination   has  to
emanate from Administrator who is to Act on the advise of the
Council of Ministers. He submits that the Rules of Business
framed  by  the   President   are  Rules   of  Business    both  under
Article 239 as well as under Section 44 and under Section 46
of the Act, 1963, hence, the Rules of Business relate to
entire executive functions of the Government of Puducherry.
12. Learned   counsel    for  the   parties   in   support   of  their
respective submissions have relied on various judgments of
this Court which shall be referred to while considering the
submission in detail.
13. From   the   submissions    raised  by    the   learned   for  the
parties and the materials on record following are the main
issues which arise for consideration in these appeals:
    (1)  Whether     the   expression   “Central      Government”   as
    occurring   in  Section   3(3)   of  the   1963    Act  means  the
    Administrator, hence, it is the Administrator who has to
    exercise the power of nomination that too on the aid and
    advise of the Council of Ministers of the Union Territory
    of Puducherry?
    (2)  Whether the nomination in the Legislative Assembly of
    the Puducherry is the business of the Government which has

                               16
to be transacted in accordance with Rule 4 sub­Rule (2)
read   with  Rule   48   of  the     Rules   of   Business    of  the
Government   of  Puducherry,     1963.   As   per   which   Rule  the
Administrator was required to consult either Council of
Ministers   or   Chief     Minister     before     discharging    his
functions under Rule 4(2)?
(3)   Whether   nomination    by     Central   Government     in  the
Legislative Assembly without concurrence of Government of
Union   Territory   of   Puducherry      violates    principles    of
Federalism and co­operative Federalism?
(4)   Whether   there   is   a    constitutional      convention   to
consult the Government of Puducherry before making any
nomination by the Central Government on the strength of
the   fact   that   on    six    earlier     occasions     when   the
nominations    were    made,    the     Central     Government    has
consulted   the   Government      of   Puducherry    before    making
nominations?
(5)   Whether the Central Government while exercising its
power of nomination under Section 3(3) of 1963 Act is
obliged to consult the Council of Ministers/Chief Minister
of Government of Union Territory of Puducherry and the
nomination by Central Government can only be made with the
concurrence of the Government of Puducherry?

                                  17
    (6)   Whether recommendations made by the Madras High Court
    in so far as recommendations made in paragraph 5(iv) of
    the impugned judgment is concerned, are unsustainable and
    not in accordance with law?
    (7)   Whether   the  nominated    members in   the  Legislative
    Assembly shall have no voting right in two matters, i.e.,
    (i)  budget   and  (ii)  no­   confidence  motion  against  the
    Government?
Issue No.1
14. The submission made by Shri Sibal is that the expression
“Central Government” used under Section 3(3) of the Act, 1963
means the administrator.     In consequence, he contends that the
power of nomination in the Legislative Assembly of Puducherry
is to be exercised by the administrator on the aid and advise
of the Council of Ministers of Union Territory of Puducherry.
The   Act,  1963   does   not   define   the  expression   “Central
Government”.    The provision of General Clauses Act, 1897 had
to be looked into to find out the definition of the expression
“Central Government”.      Section 3(8) of the General Clauses
Act, 1897 defines the expression “Central Government”.          The

                                 18
relevant portion of Section 3(8) is as follows:­
    “3(8) “Central Government” shall,­­
    (a)   …………
    (b) in relation to anything done or to be done
    after the commencement of the Constitution, mean the
    President; and shall include,­­
        (i)    ……………
        (ii)   ……………
        (iii) in relation to the administration of a
        Union territory, the administrator thereof
        acting within scope of the authority given to
        him under article 239 of the Constitution;
15. In Section 3(8)(b) Central Government has been defined as
to “mean the President”.        The next phrase used after the
semi­colon is “and shall include”. The definition of Central
Government   given   in  Section    3(8)   is   a   restrictive    and
exhaustive definition.       When the definition uses the word
“mean the President”, the clear intention is that Central
Government   is  the  President,    the   next   phrase   “and   shall
include   in   relation   to   the   administration     of   a   Union
territory, the administrator thereof acting within the scope
of  the  authority   given   to  him   under   article   239   of  the
Constitution”   has  been   added   with   a  purpose    and   object.
Article 239 of the Constitution provide that save as otherwise
provided by Parliament by law, every Union territory shall be

                                  19
administered by the President acting, to such extent as he
thinks fit, through an administrator to be appointed by him
with such designation as he may specify.        As per definition of
Section   3(8)(b)(iii)    administrator     shall    include    in   the
definition   of  Central   Government    when   in   relation   to   the
administration of a Union territory, the administrator thereof
acting within the scope of the authority given to him under
article 239 of the Constitution.       Thus, the administrator will
be Central Government when he acts within the scope of the
authority given to him under article 239.          Under Article 239,
Rules of Business have been framed as noticed above, which has
been brought on record as Annexure P1 to Civil Appeal of K.
Lakshminarayanan.    Executive functions of the administrator as
contemplated by Rule 4(2) read with Rule 48 shall include a
variety of the executive functions, which he is authorised to
discharge.     The  executive   functions    may    include:   (i)   the
business of executive functions in relation to the subjects on
which   Legislative    Assembly    of    the   Union     Territory    of
Puducherry   is   entitled   to   make   law;   (ii)    the   executive
functions entrusted to the Government of Puducherry, to be
exercised     in     the      name      of    the       administrator,
entrusted/delegated     under    any    Parliamentary      law;    (iii)
functions to be discharged by administrator under any special

                                   20
or  general   order   issued   by   the   President   of   India;   (iv)
functions    to   be   discharged     by   administrator     under   the
instructions issued by the Central Government from time to
time.   A perusal of the Rules of Business, which have been
framed under Article 239 as well as Section 46 of the Act,
1963 does not expressly indicate that in so far as power of
nomination to be exercised by the Central government under
Section 3(3), the administrator or Government of Puducherry
has been authorised or delegated any function in the above
regard.   No order of the President or Central Government has
been brought on the record on the basis of which it can be
concluded that with regard to right of a nomination to be
exercised by the Central Government under Section 3(3) of Act,
1963,   any    function    has   been    delegated,    authorised     or
instructed to the administrator.          The definition of Central
Government given under Section 3(8)(b)(iii), which means the
President   cannot   be  given   a   go  bye   to  rely   on   the  next
expression “shall include” the administrator.           The context of
subject has to be looked into while finding out as to whether
in context of Section 3(3), the Central government shall mean
the President or the administrator.
16. This    Court   had  occasion     to  interpret    the   definition
clause  in   Jagir   Singh   and  Others    Vs.  State   of   Bihar  and

                                 21
Others, (1976) 2 SCC 942.      In the above case, the Court was
considering the definition of expression        “owner” as defined
in Bihar Taxation on Passengers and Goods (Carried by Public
Service   Motor   Vehicles)  Act,   1961.    In   para  11  of  the
judgment, the definition has been extracted, which is to the
following effect:­
    “11. The expression “owner” is defined in the Bihar
    Act in Section 2(d) thereof as follows:
           “ ‘Owner’ means the owner of a public
        service motor vehicle in respect of which a
        permit has been granted by a Regional or State
        Transport Authority under the provisions of
        the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939 and includes the
        holder of a permit under the said Act in
        respect of a public service motor vehicle or
        any person for the time being in charge of
        such vehicle or responsible for the management
        of the place of business of such owner.”
17. The definition of owner in the Bihar Act also used two
expression, first ‘Owner’ means the owner of a public service
motor vehicle and second it includes the holder of a permit
under  the   said  Act  in  respect   of  a public   service  motor
vehicle or any person for the time being in charge of such
vehicle or responsible for the management of the place of
business of such owner.     The provisions of Maharashtra Tax on
Goods (Carried by Road) Act, 1962 and other Acts were also
under consideration.    In Maharashtra Act, the “operator” means

                                22
any person whose name is entered in the permit as the permit
holder or any person having the possession or control of such
vehicle.  It was contended before the Court that words “or any
person for the time being in charge of such vehicle” in the
definition of “owner” indicate that the transport or booking
agencies which would take the public service motor vehicle on
hire would be owners within the definition of the word without
being permit holders in respect of these public service motor
vehicles.  The  contention  to   read  definition  in particular
manner was rejected by this Court.      In paragraph Nos. 19 and
21, following has been held:­
    “19.   The   definition    of    “owner”   repels   the
    interpretation submitted by the petitioners that the
    definition means not only the owner who is the permit
    holder but also a booking agency which may be in
    charge of the vehicle without being a permit holder.
    The entire accent in the definition of owner is on
    the holder of a permit in respect of the public
    service motor vehicle. It is the permit which
    entitles the holder to ply the vehicle. It is because
    the vehicle is being plied that the passengers and
    consignors of goods carried by that vehicle become
    liable to pay not only fare and freight to the owner
    but also tax thereon to the owner. The words “or any
    person for the time being in charge of such vehicle
    or responsible for the management of the place of
    business of such owner” indicate that the permit
    holder will include any person who is in charge of
    such vehicle of the permit holder or any person who
    is responsible for the management of the place of
    business of such owner. The owner cannot escape the
    liability by stating that any person is for the time
    being in charge of such vehicles, and, therefore,
    such person is the owner and not the permit holder.

                               23
    21. The definition of the term “owner” is exhaustive
    and intended to extend the meaning of the term by
    including within its sweep bailee of a public carrier
    vehicle or any manager acting on behalf of the owner.
    The intention of the legislature to extend the
    meaning of the term by the definition given by it
    will be frustrated if what is intended to be
    inclusive is interpreted to exclude the actual
    owner.”
18. It is further relevant to notice that definition clause
in Section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 begins with the
expression  “In   this  Act,  and   in  all   Central  Acts   and
Regulations made after the commencement of this Act, unless
there is anything repugnant in the subject or context”. Thus,
all definitions given under Section 3 are subject “unless
there is anything repugnant in the subject or context”.     Thus,
the subject or context has to be looked into to apply the
definition given in Section 3(8)(b).       This Court in Jagir
Singh  (supra)  has  also  held   that  while  interpreting   the
definition clause, the context, the collocation and the object
of words relating to such matter has to be kept in mind while
interpreting the meaning intended to be conveyed by the use of
the word under a circumstance.    In paragraph No. 20 following
has been laid down:­
    “20. The general rule of construction is not only to
    look at the words but to look at the context, the
    collocation and the object of such words relating to
    such matter and interpret the meaning according to

                                 24
    what would appear to be the meaning intended to be
    conveyed by the use of the words under the
    circumstances. Sometimes definition clauses create
    qualification by expressions like “unless the context
    otherwise    requires”;    or    “unless    the   contrary
    intention appears”; or “if not inconsistent with the
    context    or    subject­matter”.     “Parliament    would
    legislate to little purpose,” said Lord Macnaghten in
    Netherseal Co. v. Bourne (1889) 14 AC 228, “if the
    objects of its care might supplement or undo the work
    of legislation by making a definition clause of their
    own. People cannot escape from the obligation of a
    statute by putting a private interpretation on its
    language.” The courts will always examine the real
    nature of the transaction by which it is sought to
    evade the tax.”
19. Another judgment of this Court in Black Diamond Beverages
and  Another   Vs.   Commercial   Tax  Officer,   Central  Section,
Assessment Wing, Calcutta and Others, (1998) 1 SCC 458 is also
relevant in the present context.         In the above case, this
Court had occasion to consider the definition of “Sale price”
as occurring in Section 2(d) of West Bengal Sales Tax Act,
1954.  The definition has been quoted in paragraph No.5 of the
judgment, which is to the following effect:­
    “5. The 1954 Act generally provides for levy of a
    single­point tax at the first stage on commodities
    notified under Section 25 of that Act. On the other
    hand, the 1941 Act is a general statute providing for
    multipoint levy of sales tax on commodities not
    covered by the 1954 Act. Sub­clause (d) of Section 2
    of the 1954 Act reads as follows:
        “2. (d) ‘sale­price’ used in relation to a
        dealer    means   the   amount    of   the   money
        consideration    for   the    sale   of   notified
        commodities manufactured, made or processed by

                               25
        him in West Bengal, or brought by him into
        West Bengal from any place outside West
        Bengal, for the purpose of sale in West
        Bengal, less any sum allowed as cash discount
        according to trade practice, but includes any
        sum charged for containers or other materials
        for the packaging of notified commodities;”
20. The above definition also contain two expression means
and includes.    The first part of the definition defines the
meaning of the word ‘sale­price’ as the amount of the money
consideration    for  the   sale.     This   Court    held   that
interpretation of the first part of the definition in no way
control or affect the other part of the definition and include
other part.    In paragraph Nos. 7 and 8, following has been
laid down:­
    “7. It is clear that the definition of “sale price”
    in   Section   2(d)   uses  the   words   “means”    and
    “includes”. The first part of the definition defines
    the meaning of the word “sale price” and must, in our
    view, be given its ordinary, popular or natural
    meaning. The interpretation thereof is in no way
    controlled or affected by the second part which
    “includes” certain other things in the definition.
    This is a well­settled principle of construction.
    Craies on Statute Law (7th Edn., 1.214) says:
        “An interpretation clause which extends the
        meaning of a word does not take away its
        ordinary meaning…. Lord Selborne said in
        Robinson v. Barton­Eccles Local Board AC at p.
        801:
            ‘An interpretation clause of this kind
            is not meant to prevent the word

                                  26
            receiving its ordinary, popular, and
            natural sense whenever that would be
            properly applicable, but to enable the
            word as used in the Act … to be
            applied to something to which it would
            not ordinarily be applicable.’ ”
                                   (emphasis supplied)
    Therefore, the inclusive part of the definition
    cannot prevent the main provision from receiving its
    natural meaning.
    8. In view of the above principle of construction,
    the first part of the definition of sale price in
    Section 2(d) of the 1954 Act must be given its own
    meaning and the respondent’s counsel is therefore
    right in urging that the first part of Section 2(d)
    which is similar to the first part of Section 2(p) in
    the Rajasthan Sales Tax Act, 1954, must be given the
    same meaning given to similar words in Hindustan
    Sugar Mills v. State of Rajasthan, (1978) 4 SCC 271.
    What   the    said   meaning     is   we   shall   consider
    separately. If, therefore, by virtue of Hindustan
    Sugar Mills case the first part is to be interpreted
    as bringing within its natural meaning the “freight
    charges” then the contention for the appellants that
    like “packaging charges” these “freight charges” must
    have also been specifically included in Section 2(d)
    cannot be accepted.”
21. Thus,    it   is   clear   that   the   definition   of  Central
Government, which means the President is not controlled by the
second expression “and shall include the administrator”.         The
ordinary  or    popular   meaning   of  the   word  “the  President”
occurring in Section 3(8)(b) has to be given and the second
part of the definition shall not in any way control or affect
the first part of the definition as observed above.           In the

                                 27
definition of Central Government, an administrator shall be
read when he has been authorised or delegated a particular
function   under  the   circumstances   as  indicated  above.  No
statutory rules or any delegation has been referred to or
brought on record under which the administrator is entitled or
authorised to make nomination in the Legislative Assembly of
the Union Territory of Puducherry.     Thus, in the present case,
the definition of Central Government, as occurring in Section
3(3) of the Act, 1963 has to be read as to mean the President
and not the administrator.    The issue is answered accordingly.
Issue No.2
22. Relying on Rule 4(2) of the Rules of Business of the
Government of Puducherry, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as
“Rules of Business”) read with Rule 48 it is contended that
business of Government in the nominations in the Legislative
Assembly is covered by Rule 4(2), hence, Administrator is
required to consult Council of Ministers or the Chief Minister
before taking any decision. The Rules of Business have been
framed by the President in exercise of the powers conferred by
Article  239    and   the   proviso   to   Article  309   of  the
Constitution, Section 46 of the Act, 1963 and all other powers

                                28
enabling  the  President  in   this  regard.  In   the   Rules of
Business, Rule 2(f) means: “the Government of Puducherry”.
Rule 3 provides that the business of the Government shall be
transacted in accordance with these Rules. Rule 4 on which
reliance has been placed by     Kapil Sibal is to the following
effect:
    “4. (1) The business of the Government in relation to
    matters with respect to which the Council is required
    under section 44 of the Act to aid and advise the
    Administrator in the exercise of his functions shall
    be transacted and disposed in accordance with the
    provisions of Chapter III.
    (2) The remaining business of the Government shall be
    transacted and disposed of in accordance with the
    provisions of Chapter IV.
    (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­rule
    (1) and sub­rule (2), prior reference in respect of
    the matters specified in chapter V shall be made to
    the Central Government in accordance with the
    provisions of that Chapter.”
23. Rule 4(1) refers to the business of the Government in
relation  to  matters with   respect  to  which  the   Council is
required under Section 44 of the Act to aid and advise the
Administrator in exercise of his functions. Section 44(1) of
the Act, 1963 is as follows:
    “44. Council of Ministers.―(1) There shall be a
    Council of Ministers in each Union territory with the
    Chief Minister at the head to aid and advise the
    Administrator in the exercise of his functions in
    relation to matters with respect to which the
    Legislative Assembly of the Union territory has power
    to make laws except in so far as he is required by or

                                 29
    under this Act to act in his discretion or by or
    under   any    law   to   exercise    any    judicial   or
    quasi­judicial functions:
          Provided that, in case of difference of opinion
    between the Administrator and his Ministers on any
    matter, the Administrator shall refer it to the
    President for decision and act according to the
    decision given thereon by the President, and pending
    such decision it shall be competent for the
    Administrator in any case where the matter is in his
    opinion so urgent that it is necessary for him to
    take immediate action, to take such action or to give
    such direction in the matter as he deems necessary.
          a[ x x x x]
          b[ x x x x]”
24. Section    44(1)   relates  to   functions    “in  relation to
matters with respect to which the Legislative Assembly of the
Union Territory has power to make laws. There may be other
functions of the Government of Puducherry which do not pertain
to functions in relation to matters with respect to which
Legislative Assembly of Puducherry has power to make laws. For
example, under any Parliamentary law with respect to which
Legislative Assembly of Union Territory has no power to make
laws,   any   power   delegated   to  the    State   Government is
authorised   or   delegated  under   the   Parliamentary   laws to
exercise any function.
25. Rule 4(2) obviously refers to “the remaining business of
the Government”, which is not covered by Rule 4(1). Rule 48 of
the Rules of Business refers to sub­(2) of Rule 4. Rule 48 is
as follows:

                                    30
    “48. In regard to any matter referred to in sub­rule
    (2) of rule 4 and in respect of which no specific
    provisions has been made in the foregoing rules in
    this Chapter, the Administrator may, if he deems fit
    either consult his Council or the Chief Minister,
    before exercising his powers or discharging his
    functions in respect of that matter.”
26. As per Rule 48 with regard to matters referred to in
sub­rule (2) of Rule 4, the Administrator may, if he deems
fit, either consult his Council or the Chief Minister, before
exercising   of   his   powers   or   discharging    his   functions  in
respect of that matter. But the question which needs to be
answered for the present case is as to whether the nomination
of  a  member   in  the   Legislative     Assembly   of   Puducherry  is
covered by expression “remaining business of the Government”.
The   Government    has   been   defined     in  Rule    2(f)   as  “the
Government of Puducherry”. The Government occurring in Rule
4(2)   cannot   be  stretched    to    be  Central    Government.   When
Section 3(3) of Act, 1963 empowers the Central Government to
nominate   not   more   than   three    persons   to   the   Legislative
Assembly of the Union Territory, it is the business of the
Central Government to make nominations as per Parliamentary
law.
27. The business of the Government as occurring in Rule 4 has
to be business which under any law is to be performed by the

                                   31
Government of Puducherry. Article 239A of the Constitution
provides that Parliament may by law create a body, whether
elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to function as
a Legislature for the Union Territory or Council of Ministers
or both with such Constitution, powers and functions, in each
case, as may be specified in the law.
28. The   expression     'law'   used    in  Article     239A(1)   is  a
Parliamentary law. When the Constitution expressly provides
that  it   is   the    Parliament     which   may   provide     by  law,
constitution of Legislature for the Union Territory, it is the
Parliament   alone    which    can   provide    for  constitution     of
Legislative Assembly for Union Territory under the Act, 1963.
Section  3    does   provide    for    constitution    of    Legislative
Assembly for Union Territory with thirty members to be elected
members  and   three   members   to   be  nominated    by   the  Central
Government.   When   the   Parliamentary    law      as    envisaged  by
Article  239A   provides    for   the   constitution    of   Legislative
Assembly   of    the    Union    Territory     which    also    includes
nomination,    the    said    constitution     which    also    includes
nomination   can   not   be  the   business   of   the   Government   of
Puducherry. The nominations of the members to the Legislative
Assembly of Puducherry thus can never be covered by expression
'remaining business of the Government' as occurring in Rule

                                  32
4(2). When Rule 4(2) itself is not attracted in reference to
the  nomination   in   the  Legislative    Assembly,    there  is  no
occasion of applicability of Rule 48 that is consultation with
the  Council   of   Ministers   or   the  Chief    Minister   by  the
Administrator. We, thus, do not find any substance in the
submission   of   Shri   Kapil   Sibal   that   nomination    in  the
Legislative Assembly in the Puducherry is the business of the
Government of Puducherry and is to be exercised in accordance
with  Rule  4(2)   read  with  Rule   48.   The  nomination   in  the
Legislative Assembly in the Puducherry is to be made by the
Central Government by virtue of Article 239A read with Section
3(3) of the Act, 1963.
29. Article 77 of the Constitution deals with “conduct of
business of the Government of India”. Article 77 sub­clause
(3) provides that “The President shall make rules for the more
convenient transaction of the business of the Government of
India, and for the allocation among Ministers of the said
business”. In exercise of the power under Article 77(3) the
President  has    made   Government    of    India   (Allocation   of
Business) Rules, 1961 and the Government of India (Transaction
of Business) Rules, 1961. Rule 2 and Rule 3 sub­rule (1) of
Allocation of Business Rules which are relevant for this case
are to the following effect:

                                33
    "2. Allocation of Business – The business of the
    Government of India shall be transacted in the
    Ministries, Departments, Secretaries and Officers
    specified in the First Schedule to these rules (all
    of    which    are   hereinafter     referred     to    as
    “departments”).
    3. Distribution of Subjects ­
        (1)The   distribution    of   subjects    among    the
        departments shall be as specified in the Second
        Schedule to these Rules and shall include all
        attached and subordinate       offices     or    other
        organisations      including       Public      Sector
        Undertakings concerned with their        subjects
        and Sub­rules (2), (3) and (4) of this Rule.
               xxx      xxx       xxx       xxx
               xxx      xxx       xxx       xxx
               xxx      xxx       xxx       xxx
               xxx      xxx       xxx       xxx.”
30. The Second Schedule includes “Ministry of Home Affairs
(Grih Mantralaya), which has several departments from A to E.
B is “Department of States (Rajya Vibhag). Under heading (III)
Union Territories have been mentioned. Under Para 7 sub­clause
(b) Union of Territory of Pondicherry is mentioned. Relevant
extract of Second Schedule under the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Department of States is as follows:
    "(III) Union Territories
    7. Union of Territories with legislature:
          (a) xxx       xxx       xxx       xxx
          (b) Union Territory of Pondicherry:
          All matters falling within the purview of the

                                34
    Central Government in terms of provisions contained
    in Part VIII of the Constitution in so far as these
    relate to the Union Territory of Pondicherry and the
    Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 except all
    such matters as have been under these rules
    specifically been assigned to any other Ministry or
    Department of the Government of India.”
31. Para 7(b) expressly provides that all matters falling
within  the  purview of   the  Central   Government   in terms of
provisions contained in Part VIII of the Constitution in so
far as these relate to the Union Territory of Puducherry and
the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 are assigned to
the Department of States.       Thus, under the Act, 1963 all
matters falling within the purview of the Central Government
including power of nomination given to the Central Government
under  Section  3(3)  are   assigned   under  the   Allocation of
Business Rules by the President of India to Ministry of Home
Affairs, Department of States. Thus, power under Section 3(3)
of Act, 1963 has to be transacted in the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Department of States. For Transaction of Business,
the President has framed Government of India (Transaction of
Business) Rules, 1961. Rule 3 of (Transaction of Business)
Rules, 1961 which is relevant is as follows:
    "3. Disposal of Business by Ministries. ­ Subject
    to the provisions of these Rules in regard to
    consultation with other departments and submission of
    cases to the Prime Minister, the Cabinet and its
    Committees and the President, all business allotted
    to a department under the Government of India

                                  35
    (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, shall be
    disposed of by, or under the general or special
    directions of, the Minister­in­charge.”
32. Thus, as per Transaction of Business Rules, the matter of
nomination in the Legislative Assembly of Puducherry not being
a matter in regard to consultation with other departments and
submission of the cases to the Prime Minister, the Cabinet and
its Committees and the President, the above business is to be
disposed of by or under the general or special orders or the
directions of the Minister­in­charge that is Home Minister.
33. In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the clear
opinion   that   nomination    in   the  Legislative    Assembly  of
Puducherry    is  not   the    Business    of   the   Government  of
Puducherry. It is a business of Central Government as per
Section 3(3) of Act, 1963 which is to be carried out in
accordance   with   the  Government     of   India   (Allocation  of
Business) Rules, 1961 and Government of India (Transaction of
Business) Rules, 1961. The issue is answered accordingly.
Issue No. 3
Whether Principles of Federalism or Cooperative Federalism has
been violated in the present case?
34. The   Constitution   of   India   is  a   written  Constitution,
which came into being after long deliberations by the men of
eminence   representing   the   aspirations    and  culture   of our

                                   36
ancient    nation.        Before    Constitution     makers,     various
Constitutions    of  the   world  were    there  to   be  looked   into,
incorporated and relied on.           Our Constitution makers have
taken best part of the Constitution of different countries
including USA, Australia, Germany, Canada and Others.               When
the draft Constitution was being debated in the Constituent
Assembly,    one  of    the  relevant     issue  to   be   deliberated,
pondered    upon    and   decided     was    the   nature    of   Indian
Constitution.     Whether Constitution should be one, which is
being followed in Federal countries like USA or it should be a
Unitary Constitution, was deliberated and pondered.             Dr. B.R.
Ambedkar, Chairman of the Drafting Committee after noticing
the   characteristics     of   Unitary     Constitution    and   Federal
Constitution categorically stated that draft Constitution is a
Federal Constitution.      In the deliberation of 04.11.1948, Vol.
VII Page 33, following was said by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar;­
    “Two principal forms of the Constitution are known to
    history ­ one is called Unitary and the other
    Federal. The two essential characteristics of a
    Unitary Constitution are:(1) the supremacy of the
    Central Polity and (2) the absence of subsidiary
    Sovereign      polities.     Contrariwise,       a     Federal
    Constitution is marked: (1) by the existence of a
    Central polity and subsidiary polities side by side,
    and (2) by each being sovereign in the field assigned
    to it. In other words. Federation means the
    establishment      of    a   Dual      Polity.    The    Draft
    Constitution is, Federal Constitution inasmuch as it
    establishes what may be called a Dual Polity. This
    Dual Polity under the proposed Constitution will
    consist of the Union at the Centre and the States at

                                37
    the periphery each endowed with sovereign powers to
    be   exercised   in   the   field   assigned    to   them
    respectively by the Constitution………..”
35. Dr.    Ambedkar   further   said   that   there    are  marked
differences with the American Federation. He said that all
federal systems including the American are placed in a tight
mould of federalism.    It cannot change its form and shape no
matter what are the circumstances.    Our draft Constitution can
be both Unitary as well as Federal according to time and
circumstances.   Dealing with the essential characteristics of
the Federal Constitution, Dr. Ambedkar Said:­
    “…………………. A Federal Constitution cannot but be a
    written Constitution and a written Constitution must
    necessarily be a rigid Constitution. A Federal
    Constitution means division of Sovereignty by no less
    a sanction than that of the law of the Constitution
    between the Federal Government and the States, with
    two necessary consequences (1) that any invasion by
    the Federal Government in the field assigned to the
    States and vice versa is a breach of the Constitution
    and (2) such breach is a justiciable matter to be
    determined by the Judiciary only………………….”
36. It is also relevant to notice that before the Constituent
Assembly, complaint was raised by the members that there is
too much of centralisation in the Union.       Replying the above
complaint,   Dr.   Ambedkar   clarified   that   legislative   and
executive authority, is partitioned between the Centre and the
States.
37. Dr. Ambedkar in deliberations dated 25.11.1949, Vol. XI

                                 38
Page 976 said:­
     “There is only one point of constitutional import to
    which I propose to make a reference. A serious
    complaint is made on the ground that there is too
    much of centralization and that the States have been
    reduced to Municipalities. It is clear that this view
    is not only an exaggeration, but is also founded on a
    misunderstanding of what exactly the Constitution
    contrives to do. As to the relation between the
    Centre and the States, it is necessary to bear in
    mind the fundamental principle on which it rests. The
    basic principle of Federalism is that the Legislative
    and Executive authority is partitioned between the
    Centre and the States not by any law to be made by
    the Centre but by the Constitution itself. This is
    what   Constitution   does.     The  States   under   our
    Constitution are in no way dependent upon the Centre
    for their legislative or executive authority. The
    Centre and the States are co­equal in this matter. It
    is difficult to see how such a Constitution can be
    called centralism. It may be that the Constitution
    assigns to the Centre too large field for the
    operation of its legislative and executive authority
    than   is   to   be   found     in  any   other   federal
    Constitution. It may be that the residuary powers are
    given to the Centre and not to the States. But these
    features do not form the essence of federalism. The
    chief mark of federalism as I said lies in the
    partition of the legislative and executive authority
    between the Centre and the Units by the Constitution.
    This is the principle embodied in our constitution.
    There can be no mistake about it.
38. The nature and character of the Constitution came for
consideration   before   this   Court   in  several   Constitution
Benches, where this Court noted the fundamental feature of the
Constitution of India.     A seven­Judge Constitution Bench of
this Court in Special Reference No.1 of 1964, AIR 1965 SC 745
held  that   essential  characteristics    of  federalism  is  the

                                   39
distribution     of    executive,      legislative      and   judicial
authorities among bodies, which are independent of each other.
In paragraph 39, following has been laid down:­
    “39. Our legislatures have undoubtedly plenary
    powers, but these powers are controlled by the basic
    concepts of the written Constitution itself and can
    be exercised within the legislative fields allotted
    to their jurisdiction by the three Lists under the
    Seventh    Schedule;     but    beyond    the   Lists,    the
    legislatures cannot travel. They can no doubt
    exercise their plenary legislative authority and
    discharge their legislative functions by virtue of
    the powers conferred on them by the relevant
    provisions of the Constitution; but the basis of the
    power is the Constitution itself. Besides, the
    legislative supremacy of our legislatures including
    the   Parliament     is   normally     controlled     by  the
    provisions contained in Part III of the Constitution.
    If the legislatures step beyond the legislative
    fields assigned to them, or acting within their
    respective fields, they trespass on the fundamental
    rights of the citizens in a manner not justified by
    the   relevant     articles     dealing    with    the   said
    fundamental rights, their legislative actions are
    liable to be struck down by courts in India.
    Therefore, it is necessary to remember that though
    our legislatures have plenary powers, they function
    within the limits prescribed by the material and
    relevant provisions of the Constitution.”
39. In the landmark judgment of this Court in Kesavananda
Bharati v. State of Kerala, (1973) 4 SCC 225 a new dimension
was given to the constitutional principles. This Court by
majority   judgment   declared    that  the   basic   feature  of  the
Constitution    could    not   be   amended    by   a   constitutional
amendment. Sikri, C.J. while delivering the majority judgment
had held that federal character of the Constitution is one of

                                 40
the basic structures of the Constitution.
40. Shelat    and   Grover,  JJ.    while   delivering   concurring
opinion   had  also   stated   that   our   Constitution   has   all
essential elements of federal structure. In para 486 following
was stated: (Kesavananda Bharati case, SCC pp. 408­09)
    “486. The Constitution has all the essential elements
    of a federal structure as was the case in the
    Government of India Act, 1935, the essence of
    federalism being the distribution of powers between
    the federation or the Union and the States or the
    provinces. All the legislatures have plenary powers
    but these are controlled by the basic concepts of the
    Constitution itself and they function within the
    limits laid down in it (Per Gajendragadkar, C.J. in
    Special Reference No. 1 of 196435). All the
    functionaries, be they legislators, members of the
    executive or the judiciary take oath of allegiance to
    the Constitution and derive their authority and
    jurisdiction from its provisions. The Constitution
    has entrusted to the judicature in this country the
    task of construing the provisions of the Constitution
    and of safeguarding the fundamental rights (SCR at p.
    446). It is a written and controlled Constitution.”
41. Again a seven­Judge Bench in State of Rajasthan v. Union
of India, (1977) 3 SCC 592 had an occasion to consider the
nature  of  the   Indian  Constitution.    M.H.  Beg,  C.J.,   while
delivering majority decision, in para 57 states: (SCC p. 622)
    “57. The two conditions Dicey postulated for the
    existence of federalism were: firstly, ‘a body of
    countries such as the Cantons of Switzerland, the
    Colonies of America, or the Provinces of Canada, so
    closely connected by locality, by history, by race,
    or the like, as to be capable of bearing, in the eyes
    of   their    inhabitants,    an    impress   of    common
    nationality’; and, secondly, absolutely essential to
    the founding of a federal system is the ‘existence of
    a very peculiar state of sentiment among the

                                41
    inhabitants of the countries’. He pointed out that,
    without the desire to unite there could be no basis
    for federalism. But, if the desire to unite goes to
    the extent of forming an integrated whole in all
    substantial matters of Government, it produces a
    unitary rather than a federal Constitution. Hence, he
    said, a federal State “is a political contrivance
    intended to reconcile national unity with the
    maintenance of State rights”. The degree to which the
    State rights are separately preserved and safeguarded
    gives the extent to which expression is given to one
    of the two contradictory urges so that there is a
    union without a unity in matters of Government. In a
    sense, therefore, the Indian union is federal. But,
    the extent of federalism in it is largely watered
    down by the needs of progress and development of a
    country which has to be nationally integrated,
    politically   and    economically    coordinated,    and
    socially, intellectually and spiritually uplifted. In
    such a system, the States cannot stand in the way of
    legitimate and comprehensively planned development of
    the country in the manner directed by the Central
    Government.”
42. Further in para 60 referring to Dr Ambedkar following was
stated: (State of Rajasthan case, SCC p. 623)
    “60.   Although   Dr   Ambedkar    thought    that   our
    Constitution is federal “inasmuch as it establishes
    what may be called a Dual Polity”, he also said, in
    the      Constituent       Assembly,       that      our
    Constitution­makers had avoided the “tight mould of
    federalism” in which the American Constitution was
    forged. Dr Ambedkar, one of the principal architects
    of our Constitution, considered our Constitution to
    be ‘both unitary as well as federal according to the
    requirements of time and circumstances’.”
43. A nine­Judge Bench had occasion to elaborately consider
the nature of the Constitution of India in S.R. Bommai v.
Union   of India,  (1994)  3  SCC  1,  Ahmadi,   J. referring to

                                42
federal character of the Constitution in para 14 following was
stated: (SCC pp. 68­69)
    “14. In order to understand whether our Constitution
    is truly federal, it is essential to know the true
    concept of federalism. Dicey calls it a political
    contrivance for a body of States which desire Union
    but not unity. Federalism is, therefore, a concept
    which unites separate States into a Union without
    sacrificing    their    own     fundamental     political
    integrity. Separate States, therefore, desire to
    unite so that all the member States may share in
    formulation of the basic policies applicable to all
    and participate in the execution of decisions made in
    pursuance of such basic policies. Thus the essence of
    a federation is the existence of the Union and the
    States and the distribution of powers between them.
    Federalism,     therefore,       essentially      implies
    demarcation of powers in a federal compact.”
    Ahmadi, J. further stated that the Constitution of India
is    differently     described,      more    appropriately     as
“quasi­federal” because it is a mixture of the federal and
unitary elements, leaning more towards the latter.
44. B.P.   Jeevan Reddy,   J.  held   that  the  Founding  Fathers
wished to establish a strong Centre. In the light of the past
history of this Sub­Continent, this was probably a natural and
necessary decision. In paras 275 and 276 following was stated:
(S.R. Bommai case, SCC pp. 215­17)
    “275. A review of the provisions of the Constitution
    shows unmistakably that while creating a federation,
    the Founding Fathers wished to establish a strong
    Centre. In the light of the past history of this
    sub­continent, this was probably a natural and
    necessary decision. In a land as varied as India is,
    a strong Centre is perhaps a necessity. This bias
    towards Centre is reflected in the distribution of
    legislative heads between the Centre and States. All

                           43
the more important heads of legislation are placed in
List I. Even among the legislative heads mentioned in
List II, several of them, e.g., Entries 2, 13, 17,
23, 24, 26, 27, 32, 33, 50, 57 and 63 are either
limited by or made subject to certain entries in List
I to some or the other extent. Even in the Concurrent
List (List III), the parliamentary enactment is given
the primacy, irrespective of the fact whether such
enactment is earlier or later in point of time to a
State enactment on the same subject­matter. Residuary
powers are with the Centre. By the 42nd Amendment,
quite a few of the entries in List II were omitted
and/or transferred to other lists. Above all, Article
3 empowers Parliament to form new States out of
existing States either by merger or division as also
to increase, diminish or alter the boundaries of the
States. …
276. The fact that under the scheme of our
Constitution, greater power is conferred upon the
Centre vis­à­vis the States does not mean that States
are mere appendages of the Centre. Within the sphere
allotted to them, States are supreme. The Centre
cannot tamper with their powers. More particularly,
the courts should not adopt an approach, an
interpretation, which has the effect of or tends to
have the effect of whittling down the powers reserved
to the States. It is a matter of common knowledge
that over the last several decades, the trend the
world over is towards strengthening of Central
Governments — be it the result of advances in
technological/scientific fields or otherwise, and
that even in USA the Centre has become far more
powerful notwithstanding the obvious bias in that
Constitution in favour of the States. All this must
put the court on guard against any conscious
whittling down of the powers of the States. Let it be
said that the federalism in the Indian Constitution
is not a matter of administrative convenience, but
one of principle — the outcome of our own historical
process and a recognition of the ground realities.
This aspect has been dealt with elaborately by Shri
M.C. Setalvad in his Tagore Law Lectures “Union and
State Relations under the Indian Constitution”
(Eastern Law House, Calcutta, 1974). The nature of
the   Indian  federation    with  reference  to   its

                                44
    historical    background,      the     distribution     of
    legislative powers, financial and administrative
    relations, powers of taxation, provisions relating to
    trade, commerce and industry, have all been dealt
    with analytically. It is not possible — nor is it
    necessary — for the present purposes to refer to
    them. It is enough to note that our Constitution has
    certainly a bias towards Centre vis­à­vis the States
    [Automobile Transport (Rajasthan) Ltd. v. State of
    Rajasthan3, SCR p. 540]. It is equally necessary to
    emphasise that courts should be careful not to upset
    the delicately­crafted constitutional scheme by a
    process of interpretation.”
45. A Constitution Bench in Kuldip Nayar v. Union of India,
(2006) 7 SCC 1, held that India is not a federal State in the
traditional sense of the term and it is not a true federation
formed by agreement between various States and it has been
described as quasi­federation and similar other concepts.
46. A   nine­Judge  Constitution     Bench   in  Jindal   Stainless
Limited and Another Vs. State of Haryana and Others, (2017) 12
SCC 1 had occasion to consider the nature of federalism in the
Indian Constitution while considering the relations between
Union   and  States   in   reference     to   part  XIII   of   the
Constitution.   Dr. T.S. Thakur, Chief Justice of India, as he
then  was,  speaking  for   the   Court   noticed  the   nature  of
federalism as ingrained in the Constitution.          Constitution
Bench  held  that  even  though    our  Constitution   may  not  be
strictly federal in its character but the significant features
of federal Constitution are found in the Indian Constitution.

                                45
In Paragraph 32, Constitution Bench laid down as follows:­
    “32. Whether or not the Constitution provides a
    federal structure for the governance of the country
    has been the subject­matter of a long line of
    decisions of this Court, reference to all of which
    may be unnecessary but the legal position appears to
    be fairly well settled that the Constitution provides
    for a quasi­federal character with a strong bias
    towards the Centre. The pronouncements recognised the
    proposition that even when the Constitution may not
    be strictly federal in its character as the United
    States of America, where sovereign States came
    together to constitute a federal Union, where each
    State enjoins a privilege of having a Constitution of
    its own, the significant features of a federal
    Constitution are found in the Indian Constitution
    which makes it a quasi­federal Constitution, if not
    truly federal in character and in stricto sensu
    federal. The two decisions which stand out in the
    long line of pronouncements of this Court on the
    subject may, at this stage, be briefly mentioned. The
    first of these cases is the celebrated decision of
    this Court in Kesavananda Bharati case15, wherein a
    thirteen­Judge Bench of this Court, Sikri, C.J. (as
    his Lordship then was), being one of them talks about
    whether the Constitution of India was federal in
    character and if so whether federal character of the
    Constitution   formed   the    basic  feature   of   the
    Constitution. Sikri, C.J. summed up the basic feature
    of the Constitution in the following words: (SCC p.
    366, paras 292­94)
        “292. … The true position is that every
        provision of the Constitution can be amended
        provided in the result the basic foundation
        and structure of the Constitution remains the
        same. The basic structure may be said to
        consist of the following features:
        (1) Supremacy of the Constitution;
        (2)   Republican   and    Democratic   form   of
        Government;
        (3) Secular character of the Constitution;

                               46
        (4)   Separation   of   powers   between    the
        legislature, the executive and the judiciary;
        (5) Federal character of the Constitution.
        293. The above structure is built on the basic
        foundation i.e. the dignity and freedom of the
        individual. This is of supreme importance.
        This cannot by any form of amendment be
        destroyed.
        294. The above foundation and the above basic
        features are easily discernible not only from
        the Preamble but the whole scheme of the
        Constitution, which I have already discussed.”
      To the same effect are the views expressed by
    Shelat and Grover, JJ. who declared that the federal
    character of the Constitution is a part of its basic
    structure.”
47. In   Jindal  Stainless  Ltd.  (supra),  one  of   us (Ashok
Bhushan,J) has also expressed views on the form of the Indian
Constitution, which was the same as expressed by majority
opinion. In Paragraph 944, following was held:­
    “944. The law declared by this Court as noted above
    clearly indicates that the Indian Constitution is
    basically federal in form and has marked traditional
    characteristics   of   a   federal   system,   namely,
    supremacy of the Constitution, division of power
    between the Union and the States and existence of an
    independent judiciary. Federalism is one of the basic
    features of the Indian Constitution. However, the
    history of Constitution including the debates in the
    Constituent Assembly indicate that the distribution
    of powers was given shape with creating a strong
    Centre with the object of unity and integrity of
    India. The States are sovereign in the allotted
    fields. The Indian Constitution cannot be put in
    traditional mould of federalism. The traditional
    concept of federalism has been adopted with necessary
    modification in the framework of the Constitution to
    suit the country’s necessity and requirement. The sum

                                47
    total of above discussion is that federalism in the
    Constitution is limited and controlled by the
    Constitution and the exercise of powers of both the
    States and the Centre are controlled by express
    provisions of the Constitution.”
48. A recent Constitution Bench judgment, which needs to be
noticed is a judgment of this Court in State (NCT of Delhi)
Vs. Union of India & Another, (2018) 8 SCC 501.    Chief Justice
Dipak Misra, as he then was, speaking for the Constitution
Bench    elaborately   considered   the   concept   of   federal
Constitution and laid down following in Paragraph Nos. 95, 96
and 108:­
    “95. In common parlance, federalism is a type of
    governance in which the political power is divided
    into various units. These units are the Centre/Union,
    States and Municipalities. Traditional jurists like
    Prof. K.C. Wheare lay emphasis on the independent
    functioning of different governing units and, thus,
    define “federalism” as a method of dividing powers so
    that the general/Central and regional governments are
    each within a sphere coordinate and independent. As
    per Prof. Wheare:
        “the     systems    of     Government    embody
        predominantly on division of powers between
        Centre and regional authority each of which in
        its own sphere is coordinating with the other
        independent as of them, and if so, is that
        Government federal?”
    96. However, modern jurists lay emphasis on the idea
    of interdependence and define federalism as a form of
    Government in which there is division of powers
    between one general/central and several regional
    authorities, each within its sphere interdependent
    and coordinate with each other.
    108. From the foregoing discussion, it is clear as
    day that both the concepts, namely, democracy i.e.

                                 48
    rule by the people and federalism are firmly imbibed
    in our constitutional ethos. Whatever be the nature
    of federalism present in the Indian Constitution,
    whether absolutely federal or quasi­federal, the fact
    of the matter is that federalism is a part of the
    basic structure of our Constitution as every State is
    a constituent unit which has an exclusive Legislature
    and Executive elected and constituted by the same
    process as in the case of the Union Government. The
    resultant effect is that one can perceive the
    distinct aim to preserve and protect the unity and
    the territorial integrity of India. This is a special
    feature of our constitutional federalism.”
49. Constitution     Bench    also   noticed    the    concept of
cooperative federalism and referring to an earlier judgment of
this Court in State of Rajasthan Vs. Union of India, (1977) 3
SCC 592 laid down following in paragraph No. 121 and 122:­
    “121. In State of Rajasthan v. Union of India, the
    Court took cognizance of the concept of cooperative
    federalism as perceived by G. Austin and A.H. Birch
    when it observed: (SCC p. 622, para 58)
        “58. Mr Austin thought that our system, if it
        could be called federal, could be described as
        “cooperative federalism”. This term was used
        by   another   author,    Mr  A.H.   Birch    (see
        Federalism, Finance and Social Legislation in
        Canada, Australia and the United States, p.
        305), to describe a system in which:
            ‘… the practice of administrative
            cooperation     between    general    and
            regional    Governments,    the   partial
            dependence of the regional Governments
            upon   payments     from   the    general
            Governments and the fact that the
            general governments, by the use of
            conditional grants, frequently promote
            developments in matters which are
            constitutionally     assigned    to    the
            regions.’”

                               49
    122. We have dealt with the conceptual essentiality
    of federal cooperation as that has an affirmative
    role on the sustenance of constitutional philosophy.
    We may further add that though the authorities
    referred to hereinabove pertain to the Union of India
    and the State Governments in the constitutional sense
    of   the   term   “State”,    yet   the    concept   has
    applicability to the NCT of Delhi regard being had to
    its special status and language employed in Article
    239­AA and other articles.”
50. The concept of Collaborative federalism was also noticed
in paragraph Nos. 110 and 111 in the following words:­
    “110. The Constituent Assembly, while devising the
    federal character of our Constitution, could have
    never envisaged that the Union Government and the
    State Governments would work in tangent. It could
    never have been the Constituent Assembly’s intention
    that under the garb of quasi­federal tone of our
    Constitution, the Union Government would affect the
    interest of the States. Similarly, the States under
    our constitutional scheme were not carved as separate
    islands each having a distinct vision which would
    unnecessarily open the doors for a contrarian
    principle or gradually put a step to invite
    anarchism. Rather, the vision enshrined in the
    Preamble to our Constitution i.e. to achieve the
    golden goals of justice, liberty, equality and
    fraternity, beckons both the Union Government and the
    State Governments, alike. The ultimate aim is to have
    a holistic structure.
    111. The aforesaid idea, in turn, calls for
    coordination   amongst  the    Union   and   the   State
    Governments. The Union and the States need to embrace
    a collaborative/cooperative federal architecture for
    achieving this coordination.”
51. Another concept which was noticed and elaborated was the
concept of Pragmatic federalism.     Following was laid down in
Paragraph 123:­
    “123. In this context, we may also deal with          an
    ancillary issue, namely, pragmatic federalism.        To

                               50
    appreciate the said concept, we are required to
    analyse the nature of federalism that is conceived
    under the Constitution. Be it noted, the essential
    characteristics   of  federalism   like   duality  of
    governments, distribution of powers between the Union
    and   the  State   Governments,   supremacy   of  the
    Constitution, existence of a written Constitution and
    most importantly, authority of the courts as final
    interpreters of the Constitution are all present
    under our constitutional scheme. But at the same
    time, the Constitution has certain features which can
    very well be perceived as deviations from the federal
    character. We may, in brief, indicate some of these
    features to underscore the fact that though our
    Constitution broadly has a federal character, yet it
    still has certain striking unitary features too.
    Under Article 3 of the Constitution, Parliament can
    alter or change the areas, boundaries or names of the
    States. During emergency, the Union Parliament is
    empowered to make laws in relation to matters under
    the State List, give directions to the States and
    empower Union officers to execute matters in the
    State List. That apart, in case of inconsistency
    between the Union and the State laws, the Union Law
    shall prevail. Additionally, a Governor of a State is
    empowered to reserve the Bill passed by the State
    Legislature for consideration of the President and
    the President is not bound to give his assent to such
    a Bill. Further, a State Legislature can be dissolved
    and President’s rule can be imposed in a State either
    on the report of the Governor or otherwise when there
    is failure of the constitutional machinery in the
    State.”
52. It has been laid down by this Court in the above cases,
which is clear from above precedents that Indian Constitution
has adopted federal structure.    Although, it is not in the
strict mould of federalism as understood in theory.    That is
why, different Constitution Benches of this Court have termed
the Indian Constitution as a quasi­federal but the essential

                                   51
characteristics of the federal system are ingrained in the
Constitution     and     reflect    in    different    Constitutional
provisions which are (i) the distribution of legislative and
executive power between the Union and the States, (ii) the
distribution of such legislative and executive power is by the
Constitution itself, and (iii) an independent judiciary to
interpret the Constitutional provisions and lay down validly
in case of any dispute or doubt.
53. The    concepts    of  cooperative    federalism,    collaborative
federalism and pragmatic federalism as has been noticed by the
Constitution Bench in State (NCT Of Delhi) (supra) essentially
engraft   the  same    concept,   i.e.  faithful   discharge    of  the
functions, both Union and States have to follow Constitutional
principles and not to encroach in the field reserved to other
by the Constitution.
54. The     principle     of   federalism     as   adopted    in    the
constitution of India are well settled as noticed above.            The
submission, which needs to be answered in the present case is
as  to  whether    the  federal   principles   as   ingrained   in  the
Constitution are in any manner sacrificed in the present case,
i.e.,   by   nominations    made   by  Central    Government    without
concurrence     of   the    Government    of   Union    Territory    of
Puducherry.       Article    239A   by   which   creation    of   local

                                    52
Legislatures or Council of Ministers or both for certain Union
Territories    was  provided     by    the   Constitution    (Fourteenth
Amendment) Act, 1962 empowering the Parliament by law, to
create for the Union Territory of Puducherry, a body, whether
elected or partly nominated and partly elected, to function as
a  Legislature    for   the   Union    Territory,    or  a   Council  of
Ministers,    or   both   with    such     constitution,    powers   and
functions, in each case, as may be specified in the law.             The
Constitution,    thus,    by   Article      239A   has   empowered   the
Parliament to create Legislature for the Union Territory by
law with such constitution, powers and functions as may be
specified in the law.        Thus, it is the Constitution itself,
which   is   empowering     Parliament      to   provide   by   law  for
Constitution of Union Territory.          Further, the Legislature as
a body contemplated by Article 239A is a body, whether elected
or   partly    nominated     and   partly      elected.       Thus,  the
Constitution     provision     itself      contemplate    creation    of
Legislature whether elected or partly nominated and partly
elected.   When the Constitution itself empowers the Parliament
to frame law to create a body, which may be partly nominated
and partly elected and Section 3 of the Act, 1963, which
provide for thirty seats to be filled up by persons chosen by
direct election and three seats by nominations made by the

                                  53
Central Government, we fail to see that how the law made by
Parliament or nominations made by Central Government breaches
the principles of federalism.      The Constitution of Legislative
body for Union Territory being entrusted to the Parliament by
Constitution   and     there    being    no   indication     in   the
Constitutional provision or provisions of the Act, 1963 that
said nomination has to be made with concurrence of Government
of Union Territory of Puducherry, we fail to see any substance
in the argument of Shri Kapil Sibal that by nominations made
by  Central  Government,    federal   principles   or   principle  of
cooperative federalism has been violated.            The concept of
federalism  itself   envisages    distribution    of  power   between
Union and States.      It is further to be noticed that Union
Territories   are    not    States.    These    Union    Territories,
ordinarily, belong to the Union (i.e. the Central Government)
and therefore they are called 'Union Territories'. That is why
they are governed under the administrative control of the
President of India.     That is the clear purport behind Article
239. However,    to a limited extent, the power of the Union is
diluted with respect to Puducherry vide Article 239A. At the
same time, this constitutional provision, i.e. Article 239A.
With  regard  to   the   Union   Territory   of   Puducherry   itself
envisages the constitution of Legislative Council partly by

                                54
nomination and partly by election. Further, specific authority
to nominate in the Legislative Council has been conferred by
law i.e. under Section 3 to the Central Government. Thus no
breach of federal principles are made out and the submission
on the basis of breach of federal principles in nomination by
the Central Government is unfounded.
Issue No.4 and 5
55. Both the issues     being  interdependent  are  being   taken
together.   The expression “Constitutional convention” has been
coined by Professor A.V. Dicey.    In 1885, in his introduction
to the study of the “Law of the Constitution”, in Chapter
dealing with nature of conventions of Constitution, Professor
Dicey States:­
     “…………The conventions of the constitution are in
    short rules intended to regulate the exercise of the
    whole of the remaining discretionary powers of the
    Crown, whether these powers are exercised by the King
    himself or by the Ministry…………………..”
56. Elaborating further Prof. Dicey States:­
    “……………………The result follows, that the conventions of
    the constitution, looked at as a whole, are customs,
    or understandings, as to the mode in which the
    several members of the sovereign legislative body,
    which, as it will be remembered, is the "Queen in
    Parliament,” should     each     exercise    their
    discretionary authority, whether it be termed the
    prerogative of the Crown or the privileges of
    Parliament. Since, however, by far the most numerous
    and important of our constitutional understandings
    refer at bottom to the exercise of the prerogative,
    it will conduce to brevity and clearness if we treat
    the conventions of the constitution, as rules or
    customs    determining   the   mode    in  which    the
    discretionary power of the executive, or in technical

                                  55
    language the prerogative, ought (i.e. is expected by
    the nation) to be employed.”
57. Professor Dicey in his treatment of conventions of the
Constitution has held that conventions of the Constitution
constitutes customs, practices, maxims, and precepts which are
not enforced or recognised by the Courts, make up a body not
of  laws,   but  of   constitutional    or   political   ethics.    The
Dicey’s statement that Constitutional conventions are not a
body  of   laws   but   constitutional     or   political   ethics  was
subject to debate and discussion.          Sir Ivor Jennings in his
treatise    “The    Law   and   the    Constitution”      noticed   the
distinction between laws and conventions as made by Professor
Dicey, but opined that distinction appears to be plain and
unambiguous, it is by no means free from difficulty.
58. Professor Dicey’s statement that the convention is not a
binding   rule   was   departed  with    by   Sir   Kenneth  Wheare  in
“Modern Constitutions”, who wrote:­
    “By convention is meant a binding rule, a rule of
    behaviour accepted as obligatory by those concerned
    in the working of the constitution.”
59. Sir Ivor Jennings in his treatise has elaborately dealt
the  conventions     of  the  Constitution      while   explaining  the
purpose of the convention, he states:­
    “The    short     explanation    of     the    constitutional
    conventions is that they provide the flesh which
    clothes the dry bones of the law; they make the legal

                                56
    constitution work; they keep it in touch with the
    growth of ideas. A constitution does not work itself;
    it has to be worked by men…………………..”
60. How   the  conventions   are   to  be  established  was  also
explained by Sir Ivor Jennings in following words:­
    “It is clear, in the first place, that mere practice
    is insufficient.     The fact that an authority has
    always behaved in a certain way is no warrant for
    saying that it ought to behave in that way. But if
    the authority itself and those connected with it
    believe that they ought to do so, then the convention
    does exist.    This is the ordinary rule applied to
    customary law.    Practice alone is not enough.       It
    must be normative………………….”
61. Further, he states that:­
    “………………………….For neither precedents nor dicta are
    conclusive. Something more must be added. As in the
    creation of law, the creation of a convention must be
    due to the reason of the thing because it accords
    with the prevailing political philosophy.       It helps
    to make the democratic system operate; it enables the
    machinery of State to run more smoothly; and if it
    were not there friction would result.        Thus, if a
    convention continues because it is desirable in the
    circumstances of the constitution, it must be created
    for the same reason…………………….”
62. The   test  to  find   out  as   to  whether  a  practice  or
precedent has become convention, Sir Ivor Jennings lays down
following tests:­
    “……………..We have to ask ourselves three questions:
    first,   what are the precedents; secondly, did the
    actors in the precedents believe that they were bound
    by a rule; and thirdly, is there a reason for the
    rule? A single precedent with a good reason may be
    enough to establish the rule.        A whole string of
    precedents without such a reason will be of no avail,
    unless it is perfectly certain that the persons
    concerned regarded them as bound by it. And then, as

                                  57
    we have seen,     the   convention     may   be   broken  with
    impunity.”
63. The above three tests laid down by Sir Ivor Jennings has
been approved by a Constitution Bench of this Court in Supreme
Court Advocates­On­Record Association and Others Vs. Union of
India, (1993) 4 SCC 441 (Para 346). The Constituent Assembly
while drafting the Constitution of India was well aware of the
British  convention.    Initially    on   17.07.1947    Hon'ble  Sardar
Vallabhbhai   Patel   while   moving    Clause   14   stated  that  the
Governor   shall  be   generally   guided    by   the   conventions  of
responsible, Government as set out in Schedule. A Schedule was
contemplated   to  be   framed   according     to   the  traditions  of
responsible Government. It is useful to notice what was said
by Hon'ble Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel:
     "The Hon'ble Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel : Sir, I move
     that:
         “In the appointment of his ministers; and his
     relations with them, the Governor shall be generally
     guided by the conventions of responsible, Government
     as set out in Schedule.....; but the validity of
     anything done by the Governor shall not be called in
     question on the ground that it was done otherwise
     than in accordance with these conventions.”
         Now a Schedule according to the traditions of
     responsible Government will be framed and put in.
     This also is a non­controversial thing and I move
     the proposition for the acceptance of the House.”
64. Although Schedule IIIA         was      contemplated      codifying

                                58
convention but at the later stage it was decided to drop
codifying the convenient. The reasons for not codifying the
convention  was  elaborated  by    Shri.  T.T. Krishnamachari  in
Constituent Assembly debate on 11.10.1949. Schedule IIIA which
was contemplated to be inserted by way of amendment was not
moved. Similarly, Schedule IV which was to describe relations
of the President and the Governor viz­a­viz the Ministers was
also moved to be deleted. On the questioning of deletion of
the Schedule, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar asked Shri Krishnamachari to
explain.  Shri  T.T.  Krishnamachari     while explaining  stated
following:
     "Shri T.T. Krishnamachari: ....Therefore, we have
     decided to drop Schedule IIIB which we proposed as
     an amendment and also Schedule IV which finds a
     place in the Draft Constitution, because it is felt
     to be entirely unnecessary and superfluous, to give
     such direction in the Constitution which really
     should arise out of conventions that grow up from
     time to time, and the President and the Governors in
     their respective spheres will be guided by those
     conventions....”
65. The above debates in the Constituent Assembly clearly
indicate that Constitutional conventions were very much in the
contemplation during the debates in the Constituent Assembly.
Conventions were expected to grow from time to time and the
President and Governors in their respective spheres were to be
guided by those conventions.

                                  59
66. The   American    jurisprudence    also  recognises   convention
including    the   constitutional    conventions.   John   Alexander
Jameson in 'A Treatise on Constitutional Conventions' while
explaining the constitutional convention states:
     "as its name implies, constitutional; not simply as
     having for its object the framing or amending of
     Constitutions, but as being within, rather than
     without, the pale of the fundamental law; as
     ancillary and subservient and not hostile and
     paramount to it. The species of Convention sustains
     an official relation to the state, considered as a
     political organization. It is charged with a
     definite,      and    not     a     discretionary     and
     indeterminate, function.”
67. Leonid Sirota in his Article 'Towards a Jurisprudence of
Constitutional Conventions' defines constitutional convention,
as:
     “those primary constitutional rules, limiting the
     powers of the several organs of government in a
     polity and governing the relations among them,
     which are not found in constitutional or ordinary
     statutes or the common law, and which reflect the
     'constitutional theory' or political values of the
     day.”
68.  The constitutional conventions are born and recognised in
working   of   the   Constitution.   The   purpose   and  object  of
constitutional     convention   is   to   ensure   that  the   legal
framework of the Constitution is operated in accordance with
constitutional     values   and    constitutional    morality.   The

                                60
constitutional   conventions   always   aims  to   achieve   higher
values  and  objectives   enshrined   in  the   Constitution.   The
conventions are not static but can change with the change in
constitutional values and constitutional interpretations. No
constitutional   convention  can   be recognised   or  implemented
which runs contrary to the expressed constitutional provisions
or contrary to the underlined constitutional objectives and
aims which Constitution sought to achieve.
69. There   have  been  several   pronouncements   by  this   Court
where  the  Constitutional   conventions   were  referred   to  and
relied. In U.N.R. Rao vs. Smt. Indira Gandhi, (1971) 2 SCC 63,
this Court while interpreting Article 75(3) held that while
interpreting the Constitution the conventions prevalent at the
time when Constitution was formed, have to be kept in mind. In
interpreting Article 75(3), this Court took support from the
conventions followed in United Kingdom and other countries. In
paragraphs 3 and 11 following was held:
        “3………It seems to us that a very narrow point
      arises on the facts of the present case. The House
      of the People was dissolved by the President on
      December 27, 1970. The respondent was the Prime
      Minister before the dissolution. Is there anything
      in the Constitution, and in particular in Article
      75(3), which renders her carrying on as Prime
      Minister contrary to the Constitution? It was said
      that we must interpret Article 75(3) according to
      its own terms regardless of the conventions that
      prevail in the United Kingdom. If the words of an
      Article are clear, notwithstanding any relevant

                                  61
      convention, effect will no doubt be given to the
      words. But it must be remembered that we are
      interpreting a Constitution and not an Act of
      Parliament, a Constitution which establishes a
      Parliamentary system of Government with a Cabinet.
      In trying to understand one may well keep in mind
      the   conventions     prevalent    at   the    time   the
      Constitution was framed.”
        “11.     We    are     grateful    to    the    learned
      Attorney­General     and   the   appellant   for   having
      supplied to us compilations containing extracts from
      various books on Constitutional Law and extracts
      from the debates in the Constituent Assembly. We
      need not burden this judgment with them. But on the
      whole we receive assurance from the learned authors
      and the speeches that the view we have taken is the
      right one, and is in accordance with conventions
      followed not only in the United Kingdom but in other
      countries following a similar system of responsible
      Government.”
70. The    most   elaborate     consideration  of    Constitutional
convention was undertaken by the Constitution Bench of this
Court  in  Supreme   Court   Advocates­on­record   Association  and
others vs. Union of India, (1993) 4 SCC 441, Justice Kuldip
Singh   in   his   judgment    has   elaborately   considered   the
Constitutional convention. This Court held that conventions
are found in all established Constitutions and soon develop
even in the newest. In paragraphs 340 and 341 following was
laid down:
          “340. The written Constitutions cannot provide
     for every eventuality. Constitutional institutions
     are often created by the provisions which are
     generally worded. Such provisions are interpreted

                            62
with the help of conventions which grow with the
passage of time. Conventions are vital insofar as
they fill up the gaps in the Constitution itself,
help solve problems of interpretation, and allow
for the future development of the constitutional
framework. Whatever the nature of the Constitution,
a great deal may be left unsaid in legal rules
allowing enormous discretion to the constitutional
functionaries. Conventions regulate the exercise of
that discretion. A power which, juridically, is
conferred upon a person or body of persons may be
transferred, guided, or canalised by the operation
of the conventional rule. K.C. Wheare in his book
Modern Constitutions (1967 Edn.) elaborates such a
rule as under:
       “What often happens is that powers granted in
     a Constitution are indeed exercised but that,
     while they are in law exercised by those to whom
     they are granted, they are in practice exercised
     by some other person or body of persons.
     Convention, in short, transfers powers granted
     in a Constitution from one person to another.”
   341. The primary role of conventions is to
 regulate the exercise of discretion — presumably to
 guard against the irresponsible abuse of powers.
 Colin   R.    Munro    in     his  book   Studies  in
 Constitutional Law (1987 Edn.) has summed up the
 field of operation of the conventions in the
 following words:
       “Some of the most important conventions,
     therefore, are, as Dicey said, concerned with
     ‘the discretionary powers of the Crown’ and how
     they should be exercised. But it is not only in
     connection    with    executive   government  and
     legislature­executive relations that we find
     such rules and practices in operation. They may
     be found in other spheres of constitutional
     activity too; for example, in relations between
     the Houses of Parliament and in the workings of
     each House, in the legislative process, in
     judicial administration and judicial behaviour,
     in the civil service, in local government, and
     in the relations with other members of the
     Commonwealth.””

                               63
71. This   Court  held  that  every  act  by  a  constitutional
authority is a 'precedent' in the sense of an example which
may or may not be followed in subsequent similar cases, but a
long series of precedents all pointing in the same direction
is very good evidence of a convention. On the requirements for
establishing the existence of a convention, this Court quoted
with approval the test laid down by Sir W. Ivor Jennings in
'The Law and the Constitution'. In paragraphs 345 and 346
following was laid down:
          “345. Every act by a constitutional authority
     is a ‘precedent’ in the sense of an example which
     may or may not be followed in subsequent similar
     cases, but a long series of precedents all pointing
     in the same direction is very good evidence of a
     convention.
        346. The requirements for establishing the
      existence of a convention have been succinctly laid
      down by Sir W. Ivor Jennings in The Law and the
      Constitution, Fifth Edn., (1959) as under:
          “We have to ask ourselves three questions:
          first, what are the precedents; secondly, did
          the actors in the precedents believe that they
          were bound by a rule; and thirdly, is there a
          reason for the rule? A single precedent with a
          good reason may be enough to establish the
          rule. A whole string of precedents without such
          a reason will be of no avail, unless it is
          perfectly certain that the persons concerned
          regarded them as bound by it.””
72. This Court after referring to several treatises on the

                                   64
constitutional law held that the constitutional functionaries
have to follow the same as a binding precedent. In paragraphs
351 and 353 following was held:
          “351. It is not necessary for us to delve into
     this subject any more. We agree that a convention
     while it is a convention is to be distinguished
     from the law. But this does not mean that what was
     formerly a convention cannot later become law. When
     customary rules are recognised and enforced by
     courts as law, there is no reason why a convention
     cannot be crystallized into a law and become
     enforceable. “Conventions can become law also by
     judicial recognition” stated K.C. Wheare in Modern
     Constitution (1966 Edn.). It is no doubt correct
     that the existence of a particular convention is to
     be established by evidence on the basis of
     historical events and expert factual submissions.
     But once it is established in the court of law that
     a    particular       convention     exists      and    the
     constitutional functionaries are following the same
     as   a     binding    precedent    then    there    is   no
     justification to deny such a convention the status
     of law.
        353. We are of the view that there is no
      distinction between the “constitutional law” and an
      established “constitutional convention” and both
      are binding in the field of their operation. Once
      it is established to the satisfaction of the Court
      that    a    particular   convention     exists    and   is
      operating then the convention becomes a part of the
      “constitutional law” of the land and can be
      enforced in the like manner.”
73. This    Court    in  the  above   case   has   clearly   held that
existence of a particular convention is to be established by
historical    and   factual   evidence   and   for   establishing  the
existence    of   convention   the   test  laid    down   by  Sir Ivor

                                    65
Jennings was also approved and applied in the following words
in paragraph 357:
           “357. We now proceed to consider whether an
     established constitutional convention can be read
     in Articles 124(2) and 217(1) of the Constitution
     of India to the effect that in the matter of
     appointment of the Judges of the High Courts and
     Supreme Court, the opinion of the judiciary
     expressed through the Chief Justice of India is
     primal and binding. For that purpose we adopt the
     test for the existence of a convention, laid down
     by Sir Ivor Jennings, based on three questions: (a)
     What are the precedents? (b) Did the actors in the
     precedents believe that they were bound by a rule?,
     and (c) Is there a reason for the rule?”
74. We now proceed to apply the tests for establishing a
convention in the facts of the present case. The submission of
Shri   Kapil   Sibal,   as   noted   above,    is  that  on  six  prior
occasions members were nominated to the Puducherry Legislative
Assembly    after   consultation       with   elected   Government   of
Puducherry. He has referred to nominations made in the year
1985, 1990, 1996, 2006 and 2011. With regard to year 2001, it
has   been    submitted    that   when    Lt.   Governor   unilaterally
forwarded the names        of the members, upon objection from the
then Chief Minister, the proceedings were dropped and proposed
list   was   referred   back   to  the    Administrator   for  lack  of
consultation.
75. Learned     counsel   appearing     for  the  Union  of  India  has

                                 66
replied the aforesaid submission. In the short note submitted
on behalf of the Union of India, details regarding nominations
made on the earlier occasions have been explained. Learned
counsel for the Union of India has also produced the original
files of the Central Government relating to the aforesaid
nominations as was orally directed on 20.11.2018. It relates
to the nominations made on earlier occasions, original records
duly flagged has been submitted by the Union of India. The
details submitted by the Union of India are in the following
tabular form:
      DETAILS REGARDING NOMINATIONS MADE ON EARLIER OCCASIONS
      Centre    Union      Remarks
                Territory
 1985 Congress  Congress   File not traceable
 1990 Congress  DMK        On the recommendations of   FLAG 1
                           LG                          FLAG 1A
 1995 Congress  Congress   CM directly recommended     FLAG 2
                           names to the Home Minister  FLAG 2A
                           out of which only one name
                           was accepted. The other
                           names were taken from
                           request made by President,
                           Puducherry Pradesh
                           Congress Committee and
                           another recommendation/
                           order of PMO. However,
                           the said notifications
                           were cancelled by a later
                           notification.
 1997           DMK        Out of 3 MLA’s, two on the  FLAG 3
                           recommendation of LG and    FLAG 3A
                           one on the recommendation   FLAG 3B
                           of CM
 2001 NDA       Congress   NO CM recommendation.       FLAG 4
                           Persons recommended by LG   FLAG 4A

                                 67
                           were holding office of       FLAG 4B
                           profit and hence             FLAG 4C
                           nominations not done.
 2005 UPA       Congress   All 3 MLA’s nominated on     FLAG 5
                           the recommendation of CM &   FLAG 5A
                           LG                           FLAG 5B
                                                        FLAG 5C
 2007 UPA       Congress   All 3 MLA’s nominated on     FLAG 6
                           the recommendation of CM     FLAG 6A
                           and LG                       FLAG 6B
 2011 UPA       NR         Recommendation sent by LG    FLAG 7
                Congress   & CM. However,               FLAG 7A
                           nominations not done.        FLAG 7B
 2014 UPA       NR         All 3 MLA’s nominated on     FLAG 8
                Congress   the recommendation of CM     FLAG 8A
                           and LG                       FLAG 8B
 2017 NDA       Congress   No recommendations           FLAG 8C
                           received either from LG or
                           CM
76. The above details indicate that in the year 1990, 1997,
2005,   2007    and   2014   nominations     were   made    on   the
recommendations of Chief Minister/LG. Original records fully
support the statement made in the above Chart. The position of
nomination is different in the year 1995, 2001 and 2011 which
needs to be specifically noted.
77. In   the  year   1995,  Chief   Minister   of  the  Pondicherry
suggested   three   names  for  nominations     whereas  President,
Puducherry   Pradesh  Congress  Committee    also  suggested   three
different names. The Prime Minister had approved three names
which consists one name suggested by Chief Minister, one name
suggested by   President, Puducherry Pradesh Congress Committee

                                   68
and   one   name   of   its   own.    Notification   was   issued  on
26.07.1995. A decision was subsequently taken to cancel the
notification by the Home Minister on 12.08.1995. No further
nominations were made in the said year.
78. Now we come to year 2001. In the year 2001, Lieutenant
Governor had forwarded names of 10 persons who had sought
nominations as members of the Legislative Assembly. The Chief
Minister, Pondicherry had sent representation that the Lt.
Governor   did   not  consult   him    in the  matter   of  proposing
nominations. The issue surfaced in the said year as to whether
the   consultation    of   Chief   Minister   is   necessary   before
nomination by the Central Government. The Home Minister by his
order dated 08.08.2001 directed for obtaining legal advise.
The Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser submitted a note dated
21.09.2001 in which in paragraph 9 he opined:
     "9. In the light of the above, we are of the view
     that consultation with the Chief Minister of
     Pondicherry is not necessary before the Central
     Government nominates a person to be a member of its
     Legislative Assembly under sub­section (3) of
     section 3 of the Act.”
No final nominations could be made in the year 2001, 2002 and
2003.

                                69
79. In the year 2011, although recommendations were sent by
the Lt. Governor and Chief Minister but no nominations were
made.  After  the   nominations   made  in  the year   2014, the
nominations have been made in the year 2017. A note dated
16.08.2016 was put up by Deputy Secretary that last nomination
was made vide notification dated 02.09.2014 with the approval
of Home Minister. The tenure of the Assembly got over and new
Assembly has been constituted, hence, new persons are to be
appointed as Nominated Members. A perusal of the original
records indicates that following four issues were outlined to
be referred to the Attorney General for his advice:
     "Issue  No.1:Whether the Central Govt. has got
                 absolute powers to appoint nominated
                 Members to the Legislative Assembly of
                 Puducherry?
     Issue No.2: Whether recommendation of LG, Puducherry
                 is mandatory for consideration of names
                 for appointment of nominated Members to
                 Puducherry Legislative Assembly by the
                 Central Government ?
     Issue No.3: If    the  reply    to   Issue 1    is   in
                 affirmative, is there any role of the
                 Chief Minister/Council of Ministers to
                 aid/advise the L.G. in the matter of
                 making such recommendation, and if so,
                 whether such aid and advice is binding
                 upon the LG?
     Issue No.4: Keeping in view that there is no laid
                 down procedure for such nomination,
                 whether any prescribed procedure is

                                70
                 required to be followed or any specific
                 condition to he imposed for making
                 nominations?”
80. The Attorney General on 15.11.2016 ordered the file “Be
put up before the S.G.”. In the records there is detailed
opinion given by the Solicitor General on 29.11.2016. The
Solicitor General with regard to Queries Nos.1,2,3 and 4   has
opined:
     "5. In light of the aforementioned observations,
     the Queries raised are answered accordingly:
     i.   Re:Query (I): Section 3(3) of the Government of
          Union Territories Act, 1963 empowers Central
          Government   to    nominate    members   of  the
          Legislative Assembly of Puducherry. Due to the
          operation of the word “may” in the said
          sub­section (3), the said power is to be
          exercised at the discretion of the Central
          Government. Hence, the Central Government may,
          or may not nominate three members to the
          Legislative Assembly of Puducherry. However, it
          is relevant to note the members nominated in
          the manner envisaged     in   sub­section (3) of
          Section 3, must comply with the criteria of
          qualification of members to the Legislative
          Assembly enumerated in Section 4 of the
          Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 and
          will be disqualified from being members of the
          Legislative Assembly if found within Section 14
          of the Government of Union Territories Act,
          1963.
     ii. Re: Query (iii):    The Central Government may in

                                  71
          its    wisdom    consult     the   Administrator    of
          Puducherry for consideration of names for
          appointment     of   nominated      members   to   the
          Puducherry Legislative Assembly especially when
          the Administrator is the nominee of the
          President.
     iii.Re: Query (iii): As stated in response to Query
          (ii), the recommendation of Administrator is
          not mandatory for consideration of names for
          appointment     of   nominated      members   to   the
          Puducherry Legislative Assembly but he/she may
          be consulted. Therefore, the role of Chief
          Minister/Council of Minister to aid/advice the
          L.G.     in    the    matter      of    making    such
          recommendation does not arise.
     iv. Re:     Query   (iv):    There    is    no   prescribed
          procedure     for   the     Central    Government   to
          nominate three members to the Legislative
          Assembly. In the absence of such procedure,
          only the criteria for eligibility of a member
          laid down in Section 4 supra and the criteria
          for disqualification in Section 14 supra must
          be followed.
               I have nothing further to add.”
81. The file processed thereafter and Home Minister approved
nominations   of   three  persons    to  the   Legislative  Assembly,
Puducherry on 20.06.2017. Draft notification was put up for
approval on 23.06.2016.
82. After having noticed the details of earlier nominations
from 1985 till 2017, now the question has to be answered as to

                                72
whether from the sequence of the events as noticed above a
Constitutional   convention   can   be  found  established   that
nominations to the Legislative Assembly has to emanate from
Chief Minister and can be made only with the concurrence of
Chief Minister. We have noticed the test formulated by     Sir W.
Ivor Jennings, as approved by this Court in        Supreme Court
Advocates­on­record   Association   case  for  establishing   the
existence   of a  convention.   The  relevant test,   as  noticed
above, is again reproduced for ready reference:
          “We have to ask ourselves three questions:
     first, what are the precedents; secondly, did the
     actors in the precedents believe that they were
     bound by a rule; and thirdly, is there a reason for
     the rule? A single precedent with a good reason may
     be enough to establish the rule. A whole string of
     precedents without such a reason will be of no
     avail, unless it is perfectly certain that the
     persons concerned regarded them as bound by it.”
83. We will take up the three questions which are to be posed
for deciding the question. First is “what are the precedents”.
From the facts noticed above, although it is indicated that on
several   occasions  on   the   recommendations   of  the   Chief
Minister/LG nominations were made by the Central Government,
one relevant fact cannot be lost sight that recommendations
made by CM/LG were readily accepted by the Central Government
when the Government of Puducherry and the Central Government

                                    73
were of the same political party or were of allies. But the
instance of year 1995       indicates that the recommendations made
by Chief Minister were not followed and the nominations were
made taking one name from Chief Minister's recommendation, one
name from Puducherry Pradesh Congress Committee            and one name
at   the    instance   of   the   Central   Government    itself   which
nominations, however, subsequently were cancelled. In the year
2001 recommendations made by Chief Minister and LG were not
accepted and no nominations were made. Similarly, in the year
2011 recommendations were made by Chief Minister and LG but no
nominations     were  made.    The  above  facts   does   not   indicate
uniform     precedent   in   making   nominations     by   the   Central
Government.
84. Now, we come to the second test that is “did the actors
in the precedents believed that they were bound by the rules”.
The said test is not satisfied in the present case since more
than    one   occasion   there   is  material   on  records    that  the
Central Government concluded that it is not bound by any rule
that recommendations made by Chief Minister is to be accepted
by the Central Government or recommendations of Chief Minister
is    a   condition     precedent    for   exercising     power    under
sub­section     (3)  of   Section   (3).  No   uniform   procedure   was
followed nor the Central Government was under the belief that

                                  74
it is bound under the Rule to accept the recommendations made
by the Chief Minister. It is true that there is no inhibition
in the Central Government considering the recommendations sent
by Chief Minister or LG or ask for suitable names from Chief
Minister/LG   or   even  suggests    suitable   names  to  the   Chief
Minister/LG   but   the  fact   that   the  Central   Government   can
consider the recommendations or call for names is not akin to
saying that there was any precedent or rule that unless the
names   are   recommended    by   Chief    Minister   the     Central
Government is incapacitated in exercising its powers under
sub­section (3) of Section 3 of the Act, 1963. The instance
where the Central Government readily accepted recommendations
made   by  LG   or   Chief  Minister     which   emanated   from   the
Government belonging to the same political party cannot be
said to be action of then Central Government by virtue of any
rule or convention rather the acts have to be treated as
convenient exercise of power. The Central Government               can
receive input from any quarter including the Chief Minister or
LG for nomination.
85. We may also refer to a judgment of this Court in Consumer
Education and Research Society vs. Union of India and others,
(2009)   9  SCC  648.   One   of  the    questions  which   came   for

                                  75
consideration    before   this   Court   in   the   above    case  was
violation of constitutional convention. In paragraph 37(ii)
following question was noticed:
     "37(ii) Whether of as many as fifty­five offices
     relating to statutory bodies/non­statutory bodies,
     without   referring    the    proposal    to    the   Joint
     Committee would render the amendment a colourable
     legislation    which    violated    any   “constitutional
     convention” or Article 14 of the Constitution.”
86. One   of  the   contentions   raised   in  the   above   case  for
assailing the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualification) Act,
1959 as amended by Act 31 of 2006 on the ground that for
exempting  particular    office   from  a  list   of  the   office  of
profit, opinion of Joint Committee was not obtained on Act 31
of  2006.   Repealing   the   contention   following    was   held  in
paragraph 79:
        “79. This brings us to the last question. It is
      not in serious dispute that ever since Bhargava
      Committee submitted its report in November 1955,
      whenever an office of profit had to be exempted the
      matter used to be referred to a Joint Committee and
      its opinion whether the office should be exempted
      or not, was being taken and only when there was a
      recommendation that a particular office should be
      exempted, the Act was being amended to add that
      office to the list of exemptions. However, this was
      merely   a   parliamentary     procedure    and    not    a
      constitutional    convention.     Once   Parliament      is
      recognised as having the power to exempt from
      disqualification and to do so with retrospective
      effect, any alleged violation of any norm or
      traditional procedure cannot denude the power of
      Parliament to make a law. Nor can such law which is

                                76
      otherwise valid be described as unconstitutional
      merely because a procedure which was followed on a
      few occasions was not followed for the particular
      amendment.”
87. The above judgment although was considering law made by
the Parliament where in the present case we are concerned with
the exercise of statutory power of the Central Government
under   sub­section  (3) of  Section   3   of   the   Act,  1963.  In
exercising    the  power  under    Section    3(3)    no   particular
statutory procedure having been prescribed except the exercise
of power as per Allocation of Business Rules and Transaction
of Business Rules, 1961 nominations made cannot be held to be
vitiated on the submission that a particular procedure which
was followed in some earlier cases was not followed.
88. We do not find any established practice or convention to
the   fact  that  names  for  nominations      to   members   of  the
Legislative Assembly has to emanate from Chief Minister and
can be made by the Central Government only after concurrence
by Chief Minister. Both the issues are answered accordingly.
Issue No. 6
89. Shri Kapil Sibal submits that High Court in Paragraph No.
5 has made certain recommendations.     He has taken exception to

                                      77
   the recommendation (iv), which is to the following effect:­
       “(iv) If the nominated MLA belongs to a political
       party on the date of nomination, it should be made
       clear that he shall become part of the legislature
       party of that political party. If there is no
       legislature party in the house on the date of
       nomination, the nominated MLA/s shall constitute the
       legislature party of that political party. This is
       inter­alia owing to Explanation (b) to paragraph 2(1)
       (b) of Tenth Schedule to COI using the term
       'political party' and not 'legislature party'.”
90. We have perused the recommendations made in Paragraph No. 5
of  the   judgment  of   Justice   M.    Sundar.    The   recommendations
contained in paragraph No. 5 are nothing but recommendations to
the   Parliament   to   frame   legislation    on   various   aspects   as
enumerated in the recommendation.           We have, in the foregoing
discussions, concluded that it is the Central Government, which
is  under   Section   3(3)   empowered    to  nominate   members  in   the
Legislative   Assembly    of  Union   Territory.      The  procedure   and
manner of taking decision by Central Government has already been
regulated by Rules of Business framed by President in exercise
of power under Article 77 of the Constitution of India.                The
Rules   framed  by  President    of  India    under   Article  77(3)   are
applicable to all executive actions of the Central Government
including    Constitutional     and    Statutory    functions.      In   a
Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in Samsher Singh Vs.
State of Punjab and Another, (1974) 2 SCC 831 following was laid

                                 78
down in Paragraph No. 29:­
      “29. The executive power is generally described as
      the   residue  which   does   not  fall  within   the
      legislative or judicial power. But executive power
      may also partake of legislative or judicial actions.
      All powers and functions of the President except his
      legislative powers as for example in Article 123 viz.
      ordinance making power and all powers and functions
      of the Governor except his legislative power as for
      example in Article 213 being ordinance making powers
      are executive powers of the Union vested in the
      President under Article 53(1) in one case and are
      executive powers of the State vested in the Governor
      under Article 154(1) in the other case. Clause (2) or
      clause (3) of Article 77 is not limited in its
      operation to the executive action of the Government
      of India under clause (1) of Article 77. Similarly,
      clause (2) or clause (3) of Article 166 is not
      limited in its operation to the executive action of
      the Government of the State under clause (1) of
      Article   166.  The   expression  “Business   of  the
      Government of India” in clause (3) of Article 77, and
      the expression “Business of the Government of the
      State” in clause (3) of Article 166 includes all
      executive business.”
  91. There being already Rules of Business for carrying out
  the functions by the Central Government as per Article 77(3)
  of the Constitution of India, we fail to see any justification
  for making recommendation in paragraph No. 5 of the impugned
  judgment. Furthermore, the power is to be exercised by Central
  Government and it is to be presumed that Central Government,
  in exercise of its power, shall be guided by objective and
  rational considerations. We, however, hasten to add that there
  is no inhibition in Central government or the Legislature to

                                 79
make Rules or a Statute for more convenient transaction of
business   regarding   nominations.       Recommendations     to   the
Legislature and the high Constitution authorities are not made
in a routine manner and we are of the view that High Court
ought  to  have  desisted   for   making   any  recommendations     as
contained   in  paragraph   No.    5.     The   qualifications     and
disqualifications   to  become  a    member  or  continue    to  be  a
member of a Legislative Assembly have already been provided in
the Act, 1963.    The qualifications and disqualifications for
members of Legislative Assembly are provided in the Act, 1963
and other relevant Statutes, which are always to be kept in
mind, while exercising any Statutory functions by the Central
Government.     We,   thus,  are    of  the   view   that   not   only
recommendation   made   in  paragraph    No.   5(iv)   but   all   the
recommendations made in Paragraph No. 5 deserves to be set
aside.   In result, all recommendations as made in Paragraph
No. 5 of the impugned judgment are set aside.
Issue No.7
92. One of the submissions, which has been pressed by Shri
Kapil Sibal is that even if the nominated members have right
to vote in the proceeding of Assembly, they have no right to
vote  in  two  circumstances,    i.e.   budget   and  no   confidence

                                     80
motion against the Government.           Article 239A which provides
for   composition     of   Union   Territory    of   Puducherry   itself
contemplated that the Parliament, may by law, create a body,
(i)  whether    elected    or;   (ii)   partly   nominated   and  partly
elected, to function as a Legislature for the Union Territory
of Puducherry.      Under Article 239, the Parliament has enacted
the law, i.e., the Government of Union Territory Act, 1963,
Section 3 of which provides that there shall be a Legislative
Assembly for each Union territory.          The total number of seats
in  the   Legislative    Assembly     of the   Union   territory  to  be
filled by persons chosen by direct election shall be thirty
and the Central Government may nominate not more than three
persons, to be members of the Legislative Assembly of the
Union   territory.        Thus,    the   composition     of  Legislative
Assembly itself consists of both persons chosen by direct
election    and   persons   nominated    by  the   Central   Government.
Both elected and nominated persons are part of Legislative
Assembly.     The provisions of Act, 1963 refers to members of
the Legislative Assembly.           Section 11 provides that every
member   of   the   Legislative    Assembly   of the    Union  territory
shall, before taking his seat, make and subscribe before the
Administrator, or some person appointed in that behalf by him,
an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the

                               81
purpose in the First Schedule.    The expression “every member
of the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory” shall
include both elected and nominated members.      It is further
clarified by First Schedule of the Act, 1963, which contains
the forms of oaths and affirmations, which expressly refers
both elected and nominated members.
93. Section 12 deals with the voting in the Assembly, which
is as follows:­
    12. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly      to act
    notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.
    (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all
    questions at any sitting of the Legislative Assembly
    of the Union territory shall be determined by a
    majority of votes of the members present and voting
    other than the Speaker or person acting as such.
    (2) The Speaker or person acting as such shall not
    vote in the first instance but shall have and
    exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of
    votes.
    (3) The Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
    shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy
    in the membership thereof, and any proceedings in the
    Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall be
    valid   notwithstanding   that   it   is   discovered
    subsequently that some person who was not entitled so
    to do, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the
    proceedings.
    (4) The quorum to constitute a meeting of the
    Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall be

                                  82
    one­third  of   the   total  number    of members  of  the
    Assembly.
    (5) If at any time during a meeting of the
    Legislative Assembly of the Union territory there is
    no quorum, it shall be the duty of the Speaker, or
    person acting as such, either to adjourn the Assembly
    or to suspend the meeting until there is a quorum.
94. Section 12(1) provides that all questions at any sitting
of the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory shall be
determined by a majority of votes of the members present and
voting other than the Speaker or person acting as such.        When
the expression used is votes of members present, obviously the
members of the Assembly both elected and nominated person has
to be counted, we cannot while interpreting Section 12(1)
exclude the nominated members.       Further Section 12(1) uses the
expression “all questions at any sitting of the Legislative
Assembly”, the expression “all questions” shall include all
matters,  which   are   to  be  decided    in  any sitting  of  the
Legislative Assembly.      The Statutory provision does not give
indication that nominated members have no right to vote on
budget and no confidence motion against the Government.          To
accept the submission of Shri Sibal shall be adding words to
provision of Section 12, which are clear and express. Further,
sub­section(1) provides that in the voting majority of the

                                83
votes of the members present and voting, the speaker shall not
be a person, who shall vote.    When provision of sub­section(1)
clearly provides no voting      by Speaker,       if intention of
Legislature was to exclude the votes of nominated members, the
said   expression   was   bound    to   find   included    in   the
sub­section(1).     The  conclusion    is  inescapable    that  all
members including the nominated members are entitled to vote
in the sitting of the Legislative Assembly and the submission
of Shri Sibal that nominated members cannot exercise vote in
budget and no confidence motion has to be rejected.           Other
provisions like sub­section (4) of Section 12, which provides
for quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative Assembly
used the word “one­third of the total number of members of the
Assembly”, members of the Assembly obviously will include both
elected and nominated members.      Thus, there is no basis for
submission raised by Shri Sibal that nominated members cannot
exercise their vote in budget and no confidence motion against
the Government.   The issue is answered accordingly.
95. In   view  of  the  foregoing   discussions,   we   uphold  the
impugned  judgment  of  the  Madras   High  Court   for  the  above
reasons except directions in paragraph 5 which are hereby
deleted. In the result, the appeals are dismissed subject to
the deletion of recommendations made in paragraph 5 of the

                              84
judgment. Parties shall bear their own costs.
                                  ..........................J.
                                ( A.K. SIKRI )
                                  ..........................J.
                               ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
                                  ..........................J.
                                ( S. ABDUL NAZEER )
NEW DELHI,
December 06 , 2018.


