                                                            REPORTABLE
                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                             CIVIL APPEAL No.7068 OF 2010
                       S.N.D.P. Sakhayogam                 ….Appellant(s)
                                           VERSUS
                       Kerala Atmavidya Sangham          …..Respondent(s)
                                      JUDGMENT
                       Abhay Manohar Sapre, J.
                       1)   This appeal is filed by the first defendant
                       against   the  final  judgment   and    order  dated
                       27.01.2005 passed by the High Court of Kerala at
                       Ernakulam in S.A. No.299 of 1987 whereby the
                       appeal filed by the respondent-plaintiff was allowed
                       and the judgment and decree passed by the Courts
Signature Not Verified below were set aside and the defendants were given
Digitally signed by
ASHA SUNDRIYAL
Date: 2017.09.22
15:33:11 IST
Reason:
                                                                  1

two months’ time to deliver the property to the
plaintiff failing which the plaintiff shall be entitled to
put the decree in execution.
2)     In order to appreciate the controversy involved
in the suit, which has now travelled up to this
Court, it is necessary to state the relevant facts
infra.
3)    The appellant herein is defendant No. 1
whereas respondent No. 1 is the plaintiff. So far as
respondent Nos. 2 to 8 are concerned, they were
made parties in appeal as legal representatives of
original defendant No. 2, who died pending this
appeal but later by order dated 14.01.2009 their
names were deleted from the array of the parties.
They are, therefore, no longer parties to the lis
arising in the case.
4)    Respondent No. 1 (plaintiff) is a Society
registered as such under the Travancore Cochin
                                                2

Literary Scientific and Charitable Societies Act
12/1955 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) having
their branches all over the State of Kerala. It is
claimed to be running charitable institutions all
over the State through their branches. It has its
own bye-laws to run the charitable institutions.
5)    The appellant (defendant no 1) is alleged to be
another body of persons known as "Panoor 47 Atma
Vidya Sabha" having their place of working at a
place called "Panoor" in the State of Kerala whereas
defendant No. 2 was one Kunju Panikan Narayanan
(since dead). He was alleged to be President of
defendant No. 1 (appellant).
6)    The dispute in this case relates to land bearing
Survey Number No. 991/1, situated in village
Thrikkunnapuzha, District Alappuzha as described
in detail with specifications in the Sale Deed,
registered     as    Document       No.     399-dated
                                             3

09.02.1978(Annexure-P) hereinafter referred to as
the "suit land".
7)    Respondent No. 1 (plaintiff) filed a civil suit
(O.S. No. 213/1978) against the appellant herein
(defendant    No.1)    and   one    Kunju     Panicken
Narayanan-defendant No. 2. The suit was for a
declaration that the sale deed (Document No.399)
dated 09.02.1978 executed by defendant No. 2 in
favour of defendant No. 1 in respect of the suit land
be cancelled as being void and bad in law.
8)    It was, inter alia, averred in the plaint that
respondent No. 1 (plaintiff) had purchased the suit
land by registered sale deed (Document No.2904) in
the year 1951 for running their charitable activities
through defendant No. 1 which, according to them,
was their branch of which defendant No. 2 was the
President at all relevant time. It was alleged that the
suit land was purchased by respondent No. 1 being
                                             4

the parent organization in the name of the appellant
(defendant No. 1) through defendant No. 2. It was
alleged that since the appellant (defendant No. 1),
after some time had stopped their activities due to
some reasons, all the properties stood in the name
of the appellant (defendant No. 1) was merged as
provided in the bye-laws with respondent No.
1(plaintiff), i.e., parent body. It was alleged that
defendant No. 2, who claimed to be the President of
defendant No.1, had no right, title and interest nor
had any authority to sell the suit land to anyone
much less to defendant No. 1 vide sale deed dated
09.02.1978. On these averments, the suit was filed
seeking declaration in the reliefs.
9)    The appellant (defendant No.1) denied the
claim set up in the plaint and defended the sale
deed executed in their favour by defendant No. 2. It
was contended that the sale deed dated 09.02.1978
                                            5

is legal and proper. According to defendant No.1,
both (plaintiff and defendant No. 1) were always
independent organizations having no connection
between them in any manner. Some more facts were
also averred in the written statement, which are not
necessary to mention here. The Trial Court framed
several issues on merits arising in the case.
10)   The plaintiff (respondent No. 1) then applied
under Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 (hereinafter referred to as “the Code”) and
sought permission of the Court to allow them to
prosecute   the   suit   as  a  representative  suit.
Defendant No. 1 (appellant) did not oppose the
prayer and hence sanction to prosecute the suit
seemed to have been granted to the plaintiff. (See-
Issue No. 1). Parties adduced evidence.
11)   The Trial Court, by judgment/decree dated
21.08.1980 dismissed the suit. The plaintiff, felt
                                            6

aggrieved,   filed first appeal being A.S. No.77 of
1981    before    the    Additional    District   Judge,
Mavelikkara.     The    first   Appellate    Court,    by
judgment/decree dated 02.09.1986, dismissed the
appeal and affirmed the judgment/decree of the
Trial Court. The plaintiff, felt aggrieved, filed Second
Appeal being S.A. No.299 of 1987 before the High
Court.
12)   By judgment/decree dated 29.05.1995,            the
High Court allowed the appeal and decreed the suit.
13)   Defendant No. 1, felt aggrieved, filed special
leave petition (SLP(c) No.24439 of 1995) before this
Court. This Court by order dated 30.10.2003 after
granting leave, allowed the appeal, set aside the
order of the High Court and remanded the case to
the High Court for deciding the second appeal
afresh. This Court remanded the case to the High
Court essentially on the ground that it was noticed
                                                7

that the High Court allowed the second appeal
without framing any substantial question(s) of law
arising in the case.
14)   On remand, the High Court framed three
substantial questions and, by impugned order
27.01.2005, again allowed the appeal and decreed
the plaintiff's suit. Against this order, defendant No.
1 felt aggrieved and filed this appeal by way of
special leave before this Court.
15)   We have heard Mr. Jayanth Muth Raj, learned
counsel, for the appellant and Mr. C.S. Rajan,
learned senior counsel for the respondents.
16)   Having heard the learned counsel for the
parties and on perusal of the record of the case, we
are inclined to allow the appeal and while setting
aside all the judgment/decrees of the Courts below
remand the case to the Trial Court for disposal of
the suit afresh.
                                              8

17)   In our considered opinion, one question, which
goes to the root of the case affecting the very
jurisdiction of the Court to try the suit, was not
taken note and if taken note of, it was not decided
in its proper perspective by any of the Courts below.
May be due to the reason, instead of raising the
objection, the defendant appears to have conceded
it.
18)    Be that as it may, in our considered view, the
issue of jurisdiction which goes to the root of the
case, if found involved has to be tried at any stage of
the proceedings once brought to the notice of the
Court.
19)   As mentioned above, the plaintiff had sought
permission to prosecute the suit by taking recourse
to the provisions of Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code. In
other words, the plaintiff treated their suit to be in
the nature of a "representative suit" within the
                                             9

meaning of Order 1 Rule 8 and, therefore, applied to
the Trial Court under Rule 8 of the Code seeking
permission      to    prosecute    the      suit    in  the
representative capacity. This permission appears to
have been granted to the plaintiff by the Trial Court
(see discussion on issue No. 1) without any
objection from the side of the defendants and,
therefore, Issue No.1 was answered in plaintiff’s
favour.
20)   This is how issue no 1 was answered by the
Trial Court:
      “Issue No.1:- This is not pressed by the
      defendant’s counsel as sanction was obtained
      by the Plaintiff from Court to file the suit in a
      representative capacity under or Rule 8
      C.P.C.”
21)   In our considered opinion, while deciding Issue
No. 1, the Trial Court was expected to decide several
material questions, namely, whether the plaintiff,
who is a juristic person, i.e., “Society" is entitled to
                                                  10

invoke the provisions of Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code
for filing a suit in a "representative capacity“. In
other words, the Trial Court should have examined
the question as to whether the expression "person"
occurring in Rule 8 also includes “juristic person".
22)   Secondly, if the plaintiff is held entitled to file
such suit, whether the facts pleaded and the reliefs
claimed in the plaint can be said to be in the nature
of representative character so as to satisfy the
ingredients of Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code which are
meant essentially for the benefit of public at large
for grant of any relief and lastly, if the facts pleaded
and the reliefs claimed in the plaint do not satisfy
the requirements of Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code for
grant of relief to the public at large then whether
such suit is capable of being tried as a regular suit
on behalf of the plaintiff for granting reliefs in their
personal capacity because the suit relates to
                                               11

ownership of land, namely, who is the owner of the
suit land.
23)   Since there was neither any discussion much
less finding on any of the aforesaid issues by any of
the Courts below though these questions directly
and substantially arose in the case (Issue No. 1), we
are of the considered opinion that it would be just
and proper and in the interest of justice to remand
the case to the Trial Court to answer these issues
and then decide the suit depending upon the
answer in accordance with law.
24)   In the light of foregoing discussion, the appeal
succeeds     and    is   allowed.     Impugned       order,
judgment/decree passed by the first Appellate Court
and the Trial Court are set aside.
25)   The suit is restored to its file for trial to answer
the aforementioned issues and then decide it in
accordance with law.
                                                  12

26)   We have not expressed any opinion on any of
the issues on their respective merits, therefore, the
Trial Court would decide the issues uninfluenced by
any of our observations made herein.
27)   Parties to appear before the Trial Court on
03.10.2017 to enable the Trial Court to decide the
suit as directed within one year as an outer limit.
                     ………...................................J.
                           [R.K. AGRAWAL]
                                                              …...
                     ……..................................J.
                      [ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE]
New Delhi;
September 05, 2017
                                                    13


