                                                                           1
                                                                  REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO.3793 OF 2016
           VINOD KUMAR                                     … APPELLANT(S)
                                             VERSUS
           ASHOK KUMAR GANDHI                              … RESPONDENT(S)
           With
           C.A. No. 8972-8973/2017, C.A.No. 6063 of 2019(arising
           out of SLP(C) No. 19965/2017), C.A.No. 6064 of 2019
           (arising out of SLP(C) No. 20414/2017), C.A.Nos.
           6066-6072 of 2019 (arising out of SLP(C) No. 20735-
           20741/2017), C.A.No. 6073 of 2019 (arising out of
           SLP(C) No. 22383/2017), C.A. No. 16916/2017                   and
           C.A.No. 6075 of 2019 (arising out of SLP(C) No.
           28455/2017)
                                        J U D G M E N T
           ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
                       Leave granted.
           2.          These appeals, except one where leave to defend
           was granted, have been filed against the judgment of
           Delhi
Signature Not Verified
                          High    Court   dismissing    the   Rent   Control
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.08.05
17:05:49 IST
Reason:
           Revisions filed by the appellants in which the order
           passed          by    the    Rent   Controller    rejecting   the

                                                            2
application filed by the appellants-tenants seeking
leave to defend in a     petition under Section 14(1)(e)
of  the   Delhi   Rent   Control   Act,   1958    have   been
challenged.
3.  The    appellants    are    tenants    occupying     non-
residential   buildings   for   whose  eviction    petitions
have been filed by the landlord on the ground of
bonafide need of landlord. The appellants at the very
outset   challenge   the   maintainability     of   eviction
petitions filed by the landlord under 14(1)(e) on the
ground of bonafide need. The facts are being taken
from C.A.No.3793 of 2016 (Vinod Kumar vs. Ashok Kumar
Gandhi) for considering the issues which have been
raised by the learned counsel for the appellant at
the very beginning of the submission.
C.A.No.3793   of   2016(Vinod    Kumar   vs.   Ashok    Kumar
Gandhi)
4.  The appellant is a tenant of a shop bearing No.J-
3/188-B,   Nehru  Market,   Rajouri   Garden,   New    Delhi-
110027. The respondent-landlord of the premises filed
an   Eviction    Petition    on   03.01.2011     to    obtain

                                                            3
possession of the shop on the ground that son of the
landlord  was   without    any  job   and  the   premises  in
question are bonafide required by his son to start
business    of    sale    of    readymade     garments    and
accessories.     It    was    further     pleaded    in   the
application that the landlord has planned to make a
passage of around six feet wide throughout the length
of the property, from the front side, to have access
to the stairs case in the rear side of the property.
The  Rent    Controller     after   receipt    of   the  said
application issued notice to the appellant-tenant. On
25.01.2011,    the    appellant     filed   an    application
seeking   leave    to   defend    along   with    a  detailed
affidavit in support thereof. The landlord filed a
reply to the application alongwith counter-affidavit.
The  Additional     Rent   Controller    vide   order   dated
05.05.2015 rejected the application seeking leave to
defend filed by the appellant. Aggrieved by the order
of the Additional Rent Controller dated 05.05.2015
revision petition was filed by the appellant under
Section 25-B(8) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
challenging the order or Additional Rent Controller.

                                                            4
The  High Court    vide its    judgment dated      14.03.2016
dismissed    the   revision     petition    filed    by   the
appellant.   Aggrieved   by   the   judgment    of  the  High
Court, this appeal has been filed by the appellant.
5.   In C.A.No.3793 of 2016 various grounds have been
raised   in   support   of   the   appeal.    Other   appeals
included in this group also raise several grounds on
the merits questioning the refusal to grant leave to
defend   by   the  Rent    Controller.    However,    on  the
opening of the submissions, learned counsel for the
appellants   have   confined   their   submissions    on  the
judgment of this Court in Satyawati Sharma (Dead) by
LRs. Vs. Union of India and another, (2008) 5 SCC
287.    Questioning    the   correctness    of   judgment  of
Satyawati Sharma various grounds have been canvassed
before us. Learned counsel for the appellant submits
that the said judgment needs to be referred to a
larger Bench to examine its correctness. It is the
submission    of   the   appellant     that    the   Eviction
Petitions have been filed under 14(1)(e) for eviction
from   non-residential      premises    on   the    projected
bonafide   need   of  landlord    only   on   the   basis  of

                                                           5
judgment of Satyawati Sharma, which had, in fact, re-
written the provision of 14(1)(e). It is submitted
that as per provision of 14(1)(e) as contained in
Delhi  Rent   Control   Act,   1958,    the   landlord   was
precluded from filing application for eviction on the
ground  of   bonafide  need   regarding     non-residential
premises.  It   is  submitted    that   application    under
14(1)(e) was contemplated by the Act only with regard
to premises let for residential purposes.
6.  Learned counsel appearing for the landlord has
countered the submission of the appellant and submits
that the judgment of this Court in Satyawati Sharma
lays down the correct law and needs no reference to a
larger Bench.
7.  Learned   counsel  for   the  parties    have  confined
their submissions only on the question as to whether
judgment  of   this  Court  in   Satyawati    Sharma   needs
reference  to   larger   Bench   or   not.   We,  in   these
appeals, thus, proceed to consider limited submission
as to whether judgment of this Court in Satyawati
Sharma needs reference to larger bench or not. The
issues on merits of the order passed by the Rent

                                                    6
Controller rejecting leave to defend application are
not being examined as of now.
8.  Before we notice the respective submissions of
the learned counsel for the parties in detail, we may
first notice the provisions of Section 14 of Delhi
Rent Control Act, 1958 as enacted. The Delhi Rent
Control Act, 1958 had been enacted to provide for the
regulation  of  rents,  repairs  and  maintenance and
evictions relating to premises and of rates of hotels
and lodging houses in the National Capital Territory
of Delhi. The premises have been defined in Section
2(i) which is to the following effect:
         “2(i) "premises" means any building or
     part of a building which is, or is intended
     to be, let separately for use as a
     residence or for commercial use or for any
     other purpose, and includes—
         (i) the garden, grounds and outhouses,
     if any, appertaining to such building or
     part of the building;
         (ii) any furniture supplied by the
     landlord for use in such building or part
     of the building; but does not include a
     room in a hotel or lodging house;”
9.  Chapter III of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 deals
with control of eviction of tenants. Section 14(1)

                                                    7
which has arisen for consideration in these cases is
as follows:
         “Section   14.   Protection    of   tenant
     against   eviction.-    (1)   Notwithstanding
     anything to the contrary contained in any
     other law or contract, no order or decree
     for the recovery of possession of any
     premises shall be made by any court or
     Controller   in   favour   of   the   landlord
     against a tenant:
         Provided that the Controller may, on an
     application made to him in the prescribed
     manner, make an order for the recovery of
     possession of the premises on one or more
     of the following grounds only, namely:-
         (a) that the tenant has neither paid nor
     tendered the whole of the arrears of the
     rent legally recoverable from him within
     two months of the date on which a notice of
     demand for the arrears of rent has been
     served on him by the landlord in the manner
     provided in section 106 of the Transfer of
     Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882).
         (b) that the tenant has, on or after the
     9th day of June, 1952, sub-let, assigned or
     otherwise parted with the possession of the
     whole or any part of the premises without
     obtaining the consent in writing of the
     landlord;
         (c) that the tenant has used the
     premises for a purpose other than that for
     which they were let-
         (i) if the premises have been let on or
     after the 9th day of June, 1952, without
     obtaining the consent in writing of the
     landlord; or

                                                8
   (ii) if the premises have been let
before the said date without obtaining his
consent;
   (d) that the premises were let for use
as a residence and neither the tenant nor
any member of his family has been residing
therein   for   a   period   of   six    months
immediately before the date of the filing
of the application for the recovery of
possession thereof;
   (e)    that    the    premises    let    for
residential purposes are required bona fide
by the landlord for occupation as a
residence for himself or for any member of
his family dependent on him, if he is the
owner thereof, or for any person for whose
benefit the premises are held and that the
landlord or such person has no other
reasonably        suitable         residential
accommodation;
   Explanation.-For the purposes of this
clause,   "premises    let   for   residential
purposes" include any premises which having
been let for use as a residence are,
without the consent of the landlord, used
incidentally   for    commercial    or    other
purposes;
   (f) that the premises have become unsafe
or unfit for human habitation and are
required bona fide by the landlord for
carrying   out   repairs   which   cannot    be
carried out without the premises being
vacated;
   (g) that the premises are required bona
fide by the landlord for the purpose of
building or re-building or making thereto
any substantial additions or alterations
and that such building or re-building or
addition or alteration cannot be carried

                                                        9
     out without the premises being vacated;
         (h) that the tenant has, whether before
     or after the commencement of this Act,
     built, acquired vacant possession of, or
     been allotted, a residence:
         (i) that the premises were let to the
     tenant for use as a residence by reason of
     his being in the service or employment of
     the landlord, and that the tenant has
     ceased,   whether    before   or    after   the
     commencement of this Act, to be in such
     service or employment;
         (j) that the tenant has, whether before
     or after the commencement of this Act,
     caused    or    permitted   to    be     caused
     substantial damage to the premises;
         (k) that the tenant has, notwithstanding
     previous notice, used or dealt with the
     premises in a manner contrary to any
     condition imposed on the landlord by the
     Government    or    the   Delhi    Development
     Authority or the Municipal Corporation of
     Delhi while giving him a lease of the land
     on which the premises are situate;
         (l) that the landlord requires the
     premises in order to carry out any building
     work at the instance of the Government or
     the Delhi Development Authority or the
     Municipal Corporation of Delhi in pursuance
     of any improvement scheme or development
     scheme and that such building work cannot
     be carried out without the premises being
     vacated.”
10. A perusal of the various grounds available to a
landlord   to  recover   possession   of   any   premises

                                                         10
indicates that although several grounds are available
both for residential and non-residential premises but
few grounds are available only for premises let for
residential purposes. The provision of Section 14(1)
(e) which needs consideration confine to the premises
let for residential purposes which may be required
bonafide   by   the   landlord   for  occupation    as    a
residence for himself or for any member of his family
dependent   on   him.  The   explanation   explains  that
premises let for residential purposes which having
been let for use as a residence are, without the
consent   of   the   landlord,   used  incidentally    for
commercial   or other   purposes are   also included    in
residential premises.
11. The provisions of Section 14(1)(e) were resorted
by the landlord for seeking recovery of possession
only with regard to residential premises till part of
Section 14(1)(e) has been struck down in Satyawati
Sharma case. This Court held that Section 14(1)(e) of
Act, 1958 is violative of the doctrine        of equality
embodied in Article 14 of the Constitution in so far
as  it  discriminates    between  the  premises  let   for

                                                              11
residential    and    non-residential     purposes   when   the
same   are   required     bonafide    by   the   landlord   for
occupation    for   himself    or   for  any   member   of  his
family dependent on him and restricts the landlord’s
right   to   seek    eviction    of   the   tenant   from   the
premises   let    for   residential     purposes   only.   This
Court clarified that it is not totally striking down
of Section 14(1)(e) of the Act in its entirety but it
has struck down only the discriminatory portion of
Section   14(1)(e).     In  Satyawati    Sharma(AIR    2008  SC
3148)   this    Court     held    that   striking    down   the
discriminatory      portion     of   Section    14(1)(e)    the
remaining part of the Section 14(1)(e) shall be read
in the manner as extracted in paragraph 39 of the
judgment which is as follows:
        “39. However, the aforesaid declaration
      should    not    be    misunderstood     as   total
      striking down of Section 14(1)(e) of the
      1958 Act because it is neither the pleaded
      case of the parties nor the learned Counsel
      argued      that      Section       14(1)(e)      is
      unconstitutional in its entirety and we
      feel that ends of justice will be met by
      striking down the discriminatory portion of
      Section 14(1)(e) so that the remaining part
      thereof may read as under:

                                                           12
         “that the premises are required bona
       fide by the landlord for himself or for
       any member of his family dependent on him,
       if he is the owner thereof, or for any
       person for whose benefit the premises are
       held and that the landlord or such person
       has    no    other      reasonably     suitable
       accommodation.”
             ……………”
12. It is on the strength of the judgment of this
Court  in   Satyawati    Sharma    that  after    the   said
judgment landlords of non-residential premises have
also  filed  application     for  eviction  under   Section
14(1)(e) which are dealt with by the Rent Controller
as per procedure contained in Chapter III-A of the
Act, 1958. Chapter III-A contains ‘Summary Trial of
Certain Applications’. The Rent Controller treating
the said procedure applicable on applications filed
by the landlords under Section 14(1)(e) has issued
summons to the tenants in the form prescribed in the
Third Schedule and have passed order either rejecting
the  leave  to   defend   or   granting  leave   to   defend
which  orders,   were   challenged    in  the   High   Court
giving rise to these appeals.
13. After noticing the brief background of one of the

                                                             13
issues which has been pressed at the very outset, we
now  proceed   to   notice   the   submissions    of  learned
counsel for the parties in detail as canvassed before
us.
14. Shri   Uday   Gupta,   learned    counsel  who   led   the
submission on behalf of the appellant has very ably
and persuasively put forward his submissions. Shri
Gupta  submits    that   validity    of   the  provision    of
Section 14(1)(e) was challenged in Delhi High Court
more than once which challenge was repelled by the
High Court. Shri Gupta submits that Delhi High court
in H.C.Sharma vs. LIC of India,(1973) ILR 1 Del 90,
in                                                       which
restriction placed on the rights of landlord to evict
the   tenant     from     non-residential     premises      as
discriminatory and violative of Section 19 and           14(1)
(f) was considered and rejected. In Satyawati Sharma
appellant had filed an application for eviction of
the tenant which application was rejected by the Rent
Controller   on   the  ground    that   application    is  not
maintainable     under    Section     14(1)(e)     for    non-
residential     purposes.     Apart     from    a    revision

                                                              14
challenging the said order in the High court a writ
petition    was   also     filed     by     Satyawati    Sharma
challenging   the   constitutional      validity    of  Section
14(1)(e) which challenge was repelled by Delhi High
Court  in   Satyawati   Sharma    vs.   Union    of  India  and
others,   2002  (65)    SRJ   615   (    Full   Bench),   which
judgment   was  subject    matter    of    the   Civil  Appeals
before this Court giving rise to the judgment of this
Court in Satyawati Sharma (supra). Shri Gupta relying
on  the judgment     of Constitution       Bench judgment    in
Gian Devi Anand vs. Jeevan Kumar and others, (1985) 2
SCC  683,   submits   that   Gian   Devi    Anand   itself  has
noticed the distinction in provision of Section 14(1)
(e) which was confined to residential premises and
not available in case of commercial premises. It is
submitted    that   Gian    Devi    Anand      suggested   that
Legislature may consider the advisability of making
the bona fide requirement of the landlord a ground of
eviction in respect of commercial premises as well.
The  legislature having      not yet      enforced the    Delhi
Rent Act, 1995 it was not open for this Court in
Satyawati Sharma (supra) to read down the provision

                                                         15
of  Section  14(1)(e).   Shri  Gupta   submits   that  the
judgment  of  Satyawati   Sharma   is   contrary   to  the
Constitution  Bench judgment    in  Gian   Devi Anand.    A
Bench of two Hon’ble Judges could not have adopted
the course which was not adopted by the Constitution
Bench itself in Gian Devi Anand. Shri Gupta further
submits that Satyawati Sharma failed to take notice
of three-Judge Bench judgment of this Court in Gauri
Shanker and others vs. Union of India and others,
(1994) 6 SCC 349. It is submitted that view taken in
paragraph 41 of Satyawati Sharma is per incuriam in
view  of  the   judgment   already   rendered   in   Gauri
Shanker case. Alternatively, Shri Gupta submits that
even judgment of Satyawati Sharma is not held to be
per incuriam, the said judgment necessarily needs to
be revisited, in view of the fact that the Satyawati
Sharma did not consider several relevant provisions
of Act, 1958 including Section 25B and Section 19. It
is submitted that summary procedure which was brought
in the statute by inserting Chapter III-A by Act 18
of 1976 with effect from 01.12.1975 specially Section
25B which was special procedure for the disposal of

                                                          16
applications for eviction on the ground of bonafide
requirement under Section 14(1)(e) was meant only for
residential  premises.    Without   adverting   to  Section
25B, this Court in Satyawati Sharma could not have
held that Section 14(1)(e) should also be available
for  non-residential    premises.   The  very   premise  in
Satyawati Sharma that Rent Control legislation did
not  make  any   distinction   in  residential    and  non-
residential    purposes    was   erroneous,     which   led
Satyawati  Sharma   to   fall  in  error.   The   two-Judge
Bench  of  this   Court   in  Satyawati   Sharma   has  re-
written Section 14(1)(e) which could not have been
done by the Court and matter ought      to have been left
for legislature as was said by the Constitution Bench
in Gian Devi Anand case.       The Constitution Bench in
Gian Devi Anand itself has observed that there has
been distinction between residential and commercial
premises  in Delhi.    Satyawati   Sharma  has relied    on
judgment of this Court in Harbilas Rai Bansal vs.
State of Punjab and another, (1996) 1 SCC 1, and
Rakesh Vij vs. Raminder Pal Singh Seth and others,
(2005) 8 SCC 504, which were the judgments on East

                                                             17
Punjab Urban Rent Restriction Act, 1949, and could
not have been applied with regard to interpretation
of Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958. In East Punjab Urban
Rent  Restriction     Act   the  remedy    for   landlord  for
seeking eviction on the bonafide requirement both for
residential    and   non-residential     premises    was  very
much available from the very beginning and it was,
for the first time, sought to be taken away by 1956
Amendment   which amendment      was struck     down by   this
Court. Those cases were not relevant for Delhi Rent
Control   Act.   The   tenants   occupying    non-residential
premises are dependent on their livelihood. Applying
summary   procedure    as   prescribed   under    Section  25B
brings  hardship in      denying them     protection of    law
since they are not able to defend their cases on
merits.   Referring     to   statement   of   Minister,   Shri
H.K.L.   Bhagat    on    debate   in   the   House    on  1976
Amendment, it is submitted that statement was made
that Section 25B was not to apply to non-residential
premises since under Section 14(1)(e) eviction can be
sought only with regard to residential premises. It
is submitted that due to Explanation to Section 14(1)

                                                              18
(e) having held to be redundant the benefit given
under  Section    19   is   also    denied   to   the   tenant.
Section 19(2) has been rendered otiose. The principle
of  reading  down    was   not   attracted    in  the   present
case. It is submitted that reading down cannot be
used when the legislative intent is clear.
15. Satyawati Sharma even does not refer to Sections
14A to 14D which were also inserted by Act 18 of
1976.  There is    reasonable doubt       of correctness     of
Satyawati Sharma, hence, it needs to be referred to a
larger  Bench   for   final    opinion.    Legislature    never
intended to apply Section 25B to commercial tenancy.
Since, the procedure of Section 25B was harsh which
was  made looking     to bonafide      need for    residential
premises,   Section    25B    should    not   be   ipso   facto
applied  to commercial       tenancy. In    other case,     the
tenant has right to file written statement which is
now denied by applying procedure under Section 25B.
Section 25B having not referred to it is to be seen
as to whether Section 25B shall apply. In any view of
the  matter judgment      of   Satyawati   Sharma   should   be
applied  to   the   tenancy     coming   into   the  existence

                                                           19
after the judgment of this Court in Satyawati Sharma
case.
16. Shri   Neeraj  Krishan   Kaul,    senior   counsel,  led
arguments   on  behalf   of   the    landlord.    Shri  Kaul
submits  that this   Court in    Satyawati Sharma      found
Section 14(1)(e) to be ultra vires to Article 14 of
the Constitution. However, instead of striking down
the  provisions   altogether,   this    Court   removed  the
offending part of the legislation by obliterating the
classification     between     residential       and    non-
residential premises and holding that Section 14(1)
(e)  would   apply  equally   to    residential    and  non-
residential premises. Satyawati Sharma took notice of
Constitutional   Bench  judgment     in   Gian   Devi  Anand
(supra)which had suggested the Legislature to remove
the   discrimination   between     residential     and  non-
residential premises in the Delhi Rent Control Act,
1958 with regard to seeking eviction by landlord on
the ground of bona fide need. When the Legislation
had not acted in removing aforesaid classification,
this   Court   applying    the    doctrine     of   temporal
reasonableness held that a Legislation which may have

                                                            20
been reasonable and rational at the time of enactment
may   over    passage      of    time   become     arbitrary,
unreasonable and violative of Article 14. This Court
in Satyawati Sharma took judicial notice of the fact
that the Delhi Rent Act, 1995 which was a subsequent
Legislation, but yet to be notified by the Central
Government,    did      not    distinguish     between    the
residential and non-residential premises in sofaras
landlord’s right to seek eviction on bona fide need
is  concerned.    The   observations   made   in   Gian  Devi
Anand  were   in   the   background   of  a   discussion   in
relation   to    heritability     of  tenancies     vis-à-vis
Section  2(l)of    Delhi    Rent  Control   Act,   1958.  The
judgment of this Court in Satyawati Sharma has also
been  affirmed    by  a   three-Judge  Bench    in  State  of
Maharasthra and Anr. Vs. Super Max International (P)
Ltd. and Ors., (2009) 9 SCC 772.
17. This Court in Harbilas Rai Bansal (supra) and
Rakesh Vij (supra)had held no distinction can be made
with   regard     to    residential    tenancy     and   non-
residential tenancy in sofaras eviction is concerned
at the instance of the landlord on the ground of bona

                                                           21
fide need. The judgment of Satyawati Sharma cannot be
held to be any kind of judicial Legislation. What has
been done in Satyawati Sharma is to only strike down
the unconstitutional portion of Section 14(1)(e). The
part of Section 14(1)(e) which is severable has been
retained. The judgment of Satyawati Sharma cannot be
held to be per incuriam either Gian Devi Anand case
or  Gauri   Shanker    case.  The   observations   in Gauri
Shanker were in the background of Section 2(l)(iii)
of  Act,   1958   wherein    heritability   of  tenancy   is
provided.
18. There can be no distinction in sofaras bona fide
need   of    the    landlord     is   concerned   regarding
residential and commercial premises. The observations
of three-Judge Bench in Super Max International are
not obiter but are the judicial dicta which has re-
confirmed the principles in Satyawati Sharma case.
Replying the submission of the appellant in sofaras
Section   25B   of   the  Act   is   concerned,  Shri   Kaul
submits   that    procedure     for   eviction   cannot   be
different    in   sofaras    residential    and  commercial
tenancies     are     concerned.      Adopting    different

                                                              22
procedures for eviction in the above two cases itself
be   treated    as   discriminatory.    There    are    various
safeguards under Act, 1958 which amply protect the
tenant.   There    is  nothing   in   the   Satyawati    Sharma
judgment which can be said to be per incuriam. The
appellant is asking this Court to violate certainty
of law and comity of the Courts.          There is no ground
today to refer the judgment of Satyawati Sharma case
for consideration of a larger Bench. The judgment of
this    Court    in   Satyawati    Sharma    case    is   just,
reasonable and protects both landlord and tenant. The
provision of Section 14(1)(e) which was enacted at
the   time when     circumstances were     different can     no
longer be said to be reasonable and valid and has
rightly    done   away   with   the  unjust    classification
between     residential     and   commercial      in    sofaras
eviction    on  the   ground  of   bona   fide  need    of  the
landlord was concerned.
19. The Judgement of this Court in Satyawati Sharma
has stood test of time and at this distance of time
this Court cannot revive the unjust classification
between residential and non-residential premises in

                                                          23
sofaras landlord’s right of eviction is concerned on
the ground of bona fide need. Shri Kaul submits that
there   is  absolutely    no   reason   for  referring  the
Satyawati Sharma case for consideration of a larger
Bench. Shri Kaul further has referred to the order
dated   20.07.2015   passed   in   Special  Leave  Petition
(C)No.31687 of 2014, Jag Mohini Kaur vs. Tilak Raj
and   ors.,   where    this   Court   after   noticing  the
judgment of this Court in Satyawati Sharma dismissed
the petition of tenant wherein submission was sought
to be raised that landlord cannot file an application
under Section 14(1)(e) with regard to non-residential
premises. Satyawati Sharma has time and again relied
by this Court and the High Courts and there is no
occasion to have any re-look in these appeals. The
mere fact that the procedure under Section 25B is
applicable   with   regard   to   non-residential  premises
also  has no    bearing on    the unconstitutionality    of
part   of   the   provision    of   Section   14(1)(e).  No
distinction   can   be   made   with  regard  to  procedure
applicable regarding residential and non-residential
premises. Shri Kaul submits that the prayer of the

                                                       24
appellant to refer the judgment of Satyawati Sharma
to a larger Bench be rejected and the appeals be
heard and dismissed.
20. From the submissions of learned counsel for the
parties as noted above following two questions arise
for consideration by us:
     (1) Whether   the   judgment  of  this   Court   in
         Satyawati Sharma (supra) is per incuriam.
     (2) Whether there are any other grounds to refer
         the   judgment  of  this  Court  in   Satyawati
         Sharma for reconsideration by a larger Bench.
Question No.1
21. The submission of the learned counsel for the
appellant   is   that   Satyawati  Sharma   having   not
followed the binding Constitution Bench judgment in
Gian  Devi Anand   and  three-Judge Bench   judgment in
Gauri Shanker is a judgment rendered per incuriam.
Further, submission is that Satyawati Sharma ignores
provisions of Section 25B of the Delhi Rent Control
Act. Hence, the judgment in Satyawati Sharma is per

                                                        25
incuriam.
22. The principle of per incuriam has been developed
by the English Courts in relaxation of the rule of
stare   decisis.  In   practice   per   incuriam   is per
ignoratium. The above principle has been developed,
accepted, approved and adopted by this Court while
interpreting Article 141 of the Constitution which
embodies the doctrine of precedent as a matter of
law.   A Constitution Bench in Punjab Land Development
and   Reclamation   Corporation   Ltd.,   Chandigarh  vs.
Presiding   Officer,    Labour  Court,    Chandigarh  and
another, (1990) 3 SCC 682 dealing with question of
per incuriam laid down following in paragraph 40:
      “40. We now deal with the question of per
      incuriam by reason of allegedly not
      following     the     Constitution      Bench
      decisions.   The    Latin  expression     per
      incuriam means through inadvertence. A
      decision can be said generally to be
      given per incuriam when this Court has
      acted in ignorance of a previous decision
      of its own or when a High Court has acted
      in ignorance of a decision of this Court.
      It cannot be doubted that Article 141
      embodies, as a rule of law, the doctrine
      of precedents on which our judicial
      system is based. In Bengal Immunity
      Company Ltd. v. State of Bihar, AIR 1955
      SC 66, it was held that the words of
      Article 141, “binding on all courts

                                           26
within the territory of India”, though
wide enough to include the Supreme Court,
do not include the Supreme Court itself,
and it is not bound by its own judgments
but is free to reconsider them in
appropriate cases. This is necessary for
proper development of law and justice.
May be for the same reasons before
judgments were given in the House of
Lords and Re Dawson’s Settlement Lloyds
Bank Ltd. v. Dawson, (1966) 3 All ER 68,
on July 26, 1966 Lord Gardiner, L.C. made
the following statement on behalf of
himself and the Lords of Appeal in
Ordinary:
      “Their Lordships regard the use
   of precedent as an indispensable
   foundation upon which to decide
   what is the law and its application
   to individual cases. It provides at
   least some degree of certainty upon
   which individuals can rely in the
   conduct of their affairs, as well
   as a basis for orderly development
   of legal rules. Their Lordships
   nevertheless recognise that too
   rigid adherence to precedent may
   lead to injustice in a particular
   case and also unduly restrict the
   proper development of the law. They
   propose, therefore, to modify their
   present     practice      and,    while
   treating former decisions of this
   House    as   normally    binding,   to
   depart from a previous decision
   when it appears right to do so.
      In this connection they will
   bear    in    mind    the   danger   of
   disturbing      retrospectively     the
   basis      on      which     contracts,
   settlements of property and fiscal
   arrangements have been entered into

                                                          27
          and also the especial need for
          certainty as to the criminal law.”
23. In    V.Kishan   Rao   vs.  Nikhil    Super   Specially
Hospital   and another,    2010(5) SCC   513,   this Court
again   explaining the    concept of   per incuriam    laid
down following in paragraph 54:
          “54. When a judgment is rendered by
      ignoring the provisions of the governing
      statute and earlier larger Bench decision
      on the point such decisions are rendered
      per   incuriam.    This   concept     of   per
      incuriam has been explained in many
      decisions    of   this   Court.    Sabyasachi
      Mukharji, J. (as his Lordship then was)
      speaking for the majority in A.R. Antulay
      v.   R.S.   Nayak,    (1988)  2    SCC    602,
      explained the concept in the following
      words: (SCC p. 652, para 42)
          “42. … ‘Per incuriam’ are those
          decisions given in ignorance or
          forgetfulness of some inconsistent
          statutory provision or of some
          authority binding on the court
          concerned, so that in such cases
          some part of the decision or some
          step in the reasoning on which it
          is based, is found, on that account
          to be demonstrably wrong.”
          Subsequently also in the Constitution
      Bench judgment of this Court in Punjab
      Land Development and Reclamation Corpn.
      Ltd. v. Labour Court, (1990) 3 SCC 682,
      similar views were expressed in para 40
      at p. 705 of the report.”

                                                              28
24. When   a    Court    delivers    judgment    ignoring   the
binding precedent of a larger Bench, the judgment so
delivered   is    held   to  be  per   incuriam    and  has  no
precedential value. Whether the judgment of Satyawati
Sharma   can     be   said    to   be   per    incuriam.    The
Constitution    Bench judgment      of  Gian   Devi Anand    is
first to be examined. The Constitution Bench judgment
in Gian Devi Anand(supra) was delivered by Amarendra
Nath   Sen,    J.    with   which    opinion    Bhagwati,    J.
concurred. The question which arose for consideration
was noticed in paragraph 5 of the judgment.
         “Amarendra Nath Sen, J.- The question
     for consideration in this appeal by special
     leave is whether under the Delhi Rent
     Control Act, 1958 (for the sake of brevity
     hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’), the
     statutory tenancy, to use the popular
     phraseology,       in    respect    of    commercial
     premises is heritable or not. To state it
     more precisely, the question is whether the
     heirs      of     a    deceased     tenant      whose
     contractual        tenancy     in      respect     of
     commercial premises has been determined,
     are entitled to the same protection against
     eviction afforded by the Act to the
     tenant.”
25. In the above case landlord has determined tenancy
of the tenant and thereafter filed a petition under

                                                              29
Section   14   for  eviction   of   the  tenant    on  various
grounds. Tenancy was of a shop situate in New Market,
West   Patel   Nagar,   New  Delhi.    Rent   Controller    had
allowed the petition of the landlord on the ground of
default in payment of rent rejecting other grounds.
Landlord preferred an appeal to which tenant had also
filed cross-objection. During pendency of the appeal
tenant    died   on   05.09.1977     in    whose   place    the
appellant,     the   widow    of     deceased    tenant     was
impleaded.    Cross-objection     of   tenant   was   allowed.
Appellate   Court remanded     the matter      to decide    the
question of sub-letting. The widow of deceased tenant
filed   an   appeal   before   the    High   Court   to  which
landlord filed a cross-objection. The High Court held
that on the death of the statutory tenant, the heirs
of the statutory tenant had no right to remain in
possession of the premises, as statutory tenancy was
not   heritable    and   the  protection      afforded   to    a
statutory tenant by the Act is not available to the
heirs   and   legal   representatives     of   the   statutory
tenant. A decree for eviction was passed by the High
Court which judgment was challenged by the widow of

                                                       30
the  deceased tenant    before this  Court. This   Court
held that Act does not make any distinction between
‘so-called statutory tenant’ and ‘contractual tenant’
but seeks to restrict the right of the heirs of such
tenant in respect of residential premises. One more
submission was raised before this Court that in view
of  the  amendment   of  definition  of  ‘tenant’  under
Section 2(l)(iii) right of continuing in possession
in respect of residential premises only and not with
regard to so-called statutory tenant in respect of
commercial  premises,   rejecting  the  said  submission
the Court laid down following in paragraph 31:
         “31……..Section 2(1)(iii) of the Act does
     not create any additional or special right
     in favour of the heirs of the `so called
     statutory tenant' on his death, but seeks
     to restrict the right of the heirs of such
     tenant in respect of residential premises.
     As the status and rights of a contractual
     tenant even after determination of his
     tenancy when the tenant is at times
     described as the statutory tenant, are
     fully protected by the Act and the heirs of
     such tenants become entitled by virtue of
     the provisions of the Act to inherit the
     status and position of the statutory tenant
     on his death, the Legislature which has
     created this right has thought it fit in
     the case of residential premises to limit
     the rights of the heirs in the manner and
     to the extent provided in Section 2(1)
     (iii). It appears that the Legislature has

                                                        31
      not thought it fit to put any such
      restrictions with regard to tenants in
      respect of commercial premises in this
      Act.”
26. The Constitution Bench of this Court also noticed
Section 14(1)(e) which makes bona fide requirement of
the landlord of the premises let out to the tenant
for residential purposes a good ground for eviction
of the tenant from such premises. The        Constitution
Bench concluded that commercial tenancy is heritable
under   the   scheme  of   the   Act.  In   paragraph  34
following has been observed:
         “34…………It may be noticed that the
      Legislature    itself     treats    commercial
      tenancy    differently     from    residential
      tenancy in the matter of eviction of the
      tenant in the Delhi Rent Act and also in
      various other Rent Acts. All the grounds
      for eviction of a tenant of residential
      premises are not made grounds for eviction
      of a tenant in respect of commercial
      premises. S. 14(1)(d) of the Delhi Rent
      Act provides    that     non-user    of    the
      residential premises by the tenant for a
      period of six months immediately before the
      filing of the application for the recovery
      of possession of the premises will be a
      good ground for eviction, though in case of
      a commercial premises no such provision is
      made. Similarly, S. 14(1)(e) which makes
      bona fide requirement of the landlord of
      the premises let out to the tenant for
      residential purposes a ground for eviction
      of the tenant, is not made applicable to

                                              32
commercial   premises.   A   tenant   of  any
commercial premises has necessarily to use
the    premises   for    business   purposes.
Business carried on by a tenant of any
commercial premises may be and often is,
his only occupation and the source of
livelihood of the tenant and his family.
Out of the income earned by the tenant from
his business in the commercial premises,
the   tenant   maintains   himself  and   his
family; and the tenant, if he is residing
in a tenanted house, may also be paying his
rent out of the said income. Even if tenant
is evicted from his residential premises,
he may with the earnings out of the
business be in a position to arrange for
some other accommodation for his residence
with his family. When, however, a tenant is
thrown out of the commercial premises, his
business which enables him to maintain
himself and his family comes to a stand-
still. It is common knowledge that it is
much   more   difficult   to   find  suitable
business premises than to find suitable
premises for residence………
    We are of the opinion that in case of
commercial premises governed by the Delhi
Act, the Legislature has not thought it fit
in the light of the situation at Delhi to
place any kind of restriction on the
ordinary law of inheritance with regard to
succession. It may also be borne in mind
that in case of commercial premises the
heirs of the deceased tenant not only
succeed to the tenancy rights in the
premises but they succeed to the business
as a whole. It might have been open to the
Legislature to limit or restrict the right
of inheritance with regard to the tenancy
as the Legislature had done in the case of
the    tenancies    with   regard    to   the
residential houses but it would not have
been open to the Legislature to alter under

                                                   33
     the Rent    Act,   the   Law   of  Succession
     regarding the business which is a valuable
     heritable right and which must necessarily
     devolve on all the heirs in accordance with
     law.    The    absence   of   any   provision
     restricting the heritability of the tenancy
     in respect of the commercial premises only
     establishes     that   commercial   tenancies
     notwithstanding the determination of the
     contractual tenancies will devolve on the
     heirs in accordance with law and the heirs
     who step into the position of the deceased
     tenant    will    continue   to   enjoy   the
     protection afforded by the Act and they can
     only be evicted in accordance with the
     provisions of the Act……………”
27. After laying down above following was held in
paragraph 38:
         “38.We must, therefore, hold that Wasti
     Ram enjoyed the statute of the premises in
     dispute even after determination of the
     contractual tenancy and notwithstanding the
     termination of the contractual tenancy,
     Wasti Ram had an estate or interest in the
     demised premises; and tenancy rights of
     Wasti Ram did not come to an end with his
     death but they devolved on the heirs and
     legal representative of Wasti Ram. The
     heirs and legal representatives of Wasti
     Ram step into his position and they are
     entitled to the benefit and protection of
     the Act. We must, accordingly, hold that
     the High Court was not right in coming to
     the conclusion that the heirs of Wasti Ram,
     the so called statutory tenant, did not
     have any right to remain in possession of
     the tenanted premises and did not enjoy any
     protection under the Act. It appears that
     the High Court passed an order for eviction
     against the heirs of Wasti Ram only on this

                                                         34
     ground without going into the merits of the
     appeal filed by the appellant in the High
     Court against the order of remand and also
     without considering the cross-objections
     filed in the High Court by the landlord. We
     accordingly, set aside the judgment and
     order of the High Court and we remand the
     case to the High Court for decision of the
     appeal and the cross objection on merits.
     The appeal is accordingly allowed to the
     extent indicated above with no order as to
     costs.”
28. The    most    important    observations   which   are
relevant    in    present    case   were   made   by   the
Constitution Bench in paragraph 39 of the judgment.
The Constitution Bench observed the landlord who let
out commercial premises under circumstances may need
bona  fide   premises   for  his  own  use  under  changed
conditions.    The  Constitution    Bench  suggested  that
Legislature may consider the advisability of making
the bona fide requirement of the landlord a ground of
eviction in respect of commercial premises as well.
Following was observed in paragraph 39:
         “39.Before concluding, there is one
     aspect which we consider it desirable to
     make certain observations. The owner of any
     premises,        whether      residential     or
     commercial, let out to any tenant, is
     permitted by the Rent Control Acts to seek
     eviction of the tenant only on the ground
     specified     in    the   Act,   entitling   the

                                             35
landlord to evict the tenant from the
premises. The restrictions on the power of
the landlords in the matter of recovery of
possession of the premises let out by him
to a tenant have been imposed for the
benefit of the tenants. Inspite of various
restrictions put on the landlords right to
recover possession of the premises from a
tenant, the right of the landlord to
recover possession of the premises from the
tenant for the bona fide need of the
premises by the landlord is recognised by
the Act, in case of residential premises. A
landlord may let out the premises under
various circumstances. Usually a landlord
lets out the premises when he does not need
it for own use. Circumstances may change
and a situation may arise when the landlord
may require the premises let out by him for
his own use. It is just and proper that
when the landlord requires the premises
bona fide for his own use and occupation,
the landlord should be entitled to recover
the   possession   of  the  premises   which
continues to be his property inspite of his
letting out the same to a tenant. The
legislature in its wisdom did recognise
this fact and the Legislature has provided
that bona fide requirement of the landlord
for his own use will be a legitimate ground
under the Act for the eviction of his
tenant from any residential premises. This
ground is, however, confined to residential
premises and is not made available in case
of commercial premises. A landlord who lets
out commercial premises to a tenant under
certain circumstances may need bona fide
the premises for his own use under changed
conditions in some future date should not
in fairness be deprived of his right to
recover the commercial premises. Bona fide
need of the landlord will stand very much
on the same footing in regard to either
class    of    premises,   residential    or

                                                          36
     commercial. We therefore, suggest that
     Legislature may consider the advisability
     of making the bona fide requirement of the
     landlord a ground of eviction in respect of
     commercial premises as well.”
29. Now, we revert back to Satyawati Sharma’s case.
Satyawati  Sharma case    has  noticed   Gian Devi    Anand
case  in  paragraphs   20    and  21.   Satyawati    Sharma
extracted  the  entire   paragraph   39   of   Constitution
Bench judgment in paragraph 20. Satyawati Sharma in
paragraph 21 states following:
     “21. What is significant to be noted is
     that in para 34 of the aforementioned
     judgment,    the      distinction       between
     residential and non-residential tenancies
     was made in the context of the rights of
     the heirs of the tenant to continue to
     enjoy the protection envisaged under
     Section 14(1). The Court was of the view
     that the heirs of the tenants of the
     commercial premises cannot be deprived of
     the protection else the family of the
     tenant may be brought on road or deprived
     of the only source of livelihood. The
     Court also opined that if the heirs of
     the individual tenants of commercial
     tenancies are deprived of the protection,
     extremely   anomalous     consequences     will
     ensue because the companies, corporations
     and   juridical    entities     carrying     on
     business or commercial activities in
     rented premises will continue to enjoy
     the protection even after the change of
     management, but the heirs of individual
     tenants   will   be    denuded   of     similar

                                                      37
     protection. At the same time, the Court
     noted that the landlord of a premises let
     for residential purpose may bona fide
     require the same for his own use or the
     use of his dependent family members and
     observed that the legislature should
     remove apparent discrimination between
     residential and non-residential tenancies
     when the landlord bona fide requires the
     same. If the observations contained in
     para 34 are read in any other manner, the
     same would become totally incompatible
     with the observation contained in the
     penultimate paragraph of the judgment and
     we do not see any reason for adopting
     such course, more so, because the later
     part of the judgment has been relied in
     Harbilas Rai Bansal v. State of Punjab,
     (1996) 1 SCC 1 and Rakesh Vij v. Dr.
     Raminder Pal Singh Sethi, (2005) 8 SCC
     504.”
30. The submission which has been pressed by Shri
Uday Gupta is that the Constitution Bench in Gian
Devi  Anand   did not  declare  provisions  of  Section
14(1)(e)   unconstitutional  rather  left  it   to  the
Legislature to amend the law. When Gian Devi Anand
has itself not struck down Section 14(1)(e) Satyawati
Sharma doing the same is contrary to the judgment of
Gian Devi Anand. The observation in paragraph 39 of
Gian  Devi   Anand’s  case  itself  suggest   that  the
Constitution Bench was satisfied that a ground for
eviction  of tenant   of commercial  premises on   bona

                                                          38
fide requirement of landlord should also be provided
for. The basis for what has been done in Satyawati
Sharma was clearly laid down in Gian Devi Anand for
striking down the unconstitutional part in Section
14(1)(e).   We  fail  to   see  that   how  can  Satyawati
Sharma judgment be said as per incuriam. The ratio of
Gian   Devi  Anand  has  neither   been  ignored  nor   any
contrary view has been taken by Satyawati Sharma. We
may observe that Gian Devi Anand in paragraphs 32 and
34   has  noticed   the   provisions   of   Section   14(1)
specifically Section 14(1)(e) as existed in the Act,
1958. There was no challenge for the classification
in Section 14(1)(e) in the above case, hence neither
Gian   Devi  Anand  was  required   to  pronounce   on  the
classification in Section 14(1)(e) nor was required
to consider striking down of the provisions. In any
view of the matter, the observation in paragraph 39,
Gian Devi Ananad justified that there is ground to
seek   eviction  on  bona   fide  need.   Thus,  Satyadevi
Sharma seeks support of what has been done in Gian
Devi Anand’s case.
31. Now, we come to three-Judge Bench judgment of

                                                            39
Gauri Shanker which according to appellant is binding
precedent and Satyawati Sharma having not noticed the
said,    the  judgment    of   Satyawati     Sharma   is  per
incuriam. Gauri Shanker was a case where restriction
on rights of heir of statutory tenant of residential
premises placed by explanation to Section 2(l)(iii)
of Delhi Rent Control Act as introduced Act 18 of
1976 while no restrictions were placed on tenants of
commercial premises where challenge on the ground of
violation of Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution of
India. Gauri Shanker has noticed the Gian Devi Anand,
especially    paragraphs    32   and   34.   The   ground  of
distinction was repelled and following was laid down
in paragraph 12:
          “12. It is evident from the above
      decision of the Constitution Bench of
      this Court that a commercial tenancy is
      invaluable and has got distinct features
      and characteristics of its own different
      from that of a residential tenancy. None
      of   the   peculiar     or   unique     features
      present    in   the    case     of   commercial
      tenancies     exist     in    the     case    of
      residential    tenancies.      In   the    above
      background, if the legislature thought it
      fit to afford a greater and extended
      right or benefit to the heirs of the
      statutory tenants of commercial premises
      and not to extend such rights to the

                                                  40
heirs    of    the   statutory     tenants     of
residential premises, we should say that
it only stands to reason and reckons the
stark    realities     of     the     prevailing
situation. The protection afforded by the
Rent    Act    to   a    tenant     after     the
termination of the tenancy and to the
heirs of the tenant is only a creation of
the Act and it is open to the Legislature
to make appropriate provisions in that
behalf.     It   can    make     suitable     and
appropriate provisions in the Act with
regard to the nature and extent of the
benefit and protection to be so enjoyed
and the manner in which the same is to be
enjoyed. In the above perspective, we are
of the view that the provisions in
Section 2(l)(iii) of the Act, which seeks
to restrict or limit the right of the
heirs, insofar as the statutory tenants
of residential premises are concerned and
to the extent provided therein, are not
in any way discriminatory and do not
offend the guarantee under Article 14 of
the Constitution. This is not a case
where the residential tenancy and the
commercial tenancy are similarly placed.
They belong to two different categories
with        distinct         features         and
characteristics of their own. No question
of    discrimination      arises.      In   this
context, it is only proper to quote the
following observations in Sakhawat Ali v.
State of Orissa, AIR 1955 SC 166, which
is apposite:
   “… legislation enacted for the
   achievement of a particular object
   or    purpose     need    not    be    all
   embracing.      It      is     for     the
   Legislature     to     determine      what
   categories it would embrace within
   the scope of legislation and merely

                                                    41
        because certain categories which
        would stand on the same footing as
        those which are covered by the
        legislation are left out would not
        render legislation which has been
        enacted       in      any     manner
        discriminatory and violative of the
        fundamental right guaranteed by
        Article 14 of the Constitution.”
                         (emphasis supplied)
         Nor are we impressed by the plea that
     the right to shelter is a guarantee under
     Article 21 of the Constitution of India
     and so the abridgement or limitation
     placed on the rights of the legal heirs
     in the case of a statutory tenancy of
     residential premises makes an inroad into
     the rights of the tenant under Article 21
     of the Constitution of India. We hold
     that the statutory tenancies regarding
     residential premises are distinct and
     different    from    statutory    tenancies
     regarding commercial premises and the
     limitations or the restrictions placed by
     Section 2(l)(iii) of the Act on the
     rights of the heirs of the statutory
     tenants   of   residential   premises   are
     reasonable, fair and just in all the
     circumstances of the case. There is no
     violation of the guarantee enshrined in
     Article   14   or   Article   21   of   the
     Constitution of India.”
32. Gauri Shanker upheld Section 2(l)(iii) of the Act
holding it not violating Article 14 and 21 of the
Constitution. The observations in the judgment with
respect to residential tenancy and commercial tenancy

                                                            42
were made in reference to heritability. In the above
context,   this   Court  held   that  they    belong  to  two
different    categories    with   distinct     features   and
characteristics of their own. Gauri Shanker was not a
case in which provision of Section 14(1)(e) came for
consideration nor any observation has been made with
regard to ground of eviction available to landlord
with regard to commercial premises. Gauri Shanker had
dealt  with    entirely    different    provision,    certain
limitation which was attached to residential premises
itself  to heritability.      The case    of   Gauri Shanker
being on different provision and premise, it cannot
be said that Gauri Shanker was a binding precedent to
be  followed   by   Satyawati   Sharma.    The   judgment  of
Gauri Shanker being on different provision cannot be
said to be binding precedent in reference to what has
been dealt in Satyawati Sharma. We, thus, conclude
that the judgment of Satyawati Sharma cannot be held
to be per incuriam.
33. The   next   limb   of  attack   of   the   appellant  on
Satyawati Sharma is on the basis of non-consideration
of  Section   25B   of  the  Act,   1958.   Section   25A  to

                                                               43
Section 25C were inserted by Act 18 of 1976 w.e.f.
01.12.1975.     Section      25   B  provided      for   special
procedure     for   the    disposal   of     applications    for
eviction    on   the   ground   of  bona    fide   requirement.
Learned counsel for the appellant has also relied on
Parliamentary debate on Delhi Rent Control Amendment
Bill,   1976.    Learned    counsel   submits     that   Hon’ble
Minister    of   State    in   the  Ministry     of  Works   and
Housing    on   the    Floor    of  the    House    stated   the
following:
          “An apprehension was also expressed that
      commercial tenants would be evicted through
      summary procedure. First of all, this
      procedure      is    confined     to     residential
      premises and secondly, it is applicable
      only to Government servants and bona fide
      necessities. Nothing else. It does not
      apply      to     commercial      premises       and,
      therefore, there is no question of tenants
      being evicted from commercial premises.”
34. There cannot be any dispute to the submission of
the appellant that provision of Section 25B when it
was    inserted,      the    procedure     was    confined    to
residential     premises     as  has   been     stated   by  the
Hon’ble Minister on the Floor of the House. There
being no ground available to landlord for eviction of

                                                          44
a tenant of commercial premises on bona fide need,
there was no contemplation for applying the procedure
under Section 25B.
35. The question is as to whether non-consideration
of Section 25B by Satyawati Sharma renders judgment
of Satyawati Sharma per incuriam. Satyawati Sharma
was  considering    the   challenge   to   provisions    of
Section 14(1)(e) in sofaras the ground of bona fide
need  of landlord   is also    available for    commercial
premises. Section 25B being related to only procedure
for considering the application under Section 14(1)
(e)has no bearing on the issue which had propped up
before  this Court    in  Satyawati  Sharma.   Nothing in
Section 25B can be read which runs counter to what
has been laid down by Satyawati Sharma. Whether a
procedure   giving   more   flexibility   to   tenants   of
commercial premises should be provided for is another
subject but non-reference of Section 25B by Satyawati
Sharma does not render the judgment per incuriam.
36. We may also at this stage notice one submission
raised   by  the   counsel    for  the   respondent    that
judgment  of  Satyawati Sharma    has been    affirmed by

                                                      45
three-Judge Bench judgment in Super Max International
Pvt. Ltd. (supra).     The submission is countered by
the counsel for the appellant who contends that Super
Max was a case which was dealing entirely different
subject and it cannot be said that ratio of Satyawati
Sharma has been affirmed in Super Max.
37. We may now notice judgment of Super Max in some
detail. Super Max was a case where this Court had
occasion to consider Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging
House Rates Control Act, 1947. In the above case, the
Government of Maharashtra was in occupation of sixth
floor of a building which used for housing the Office
of   the    Registrar,   Cooperative   Societies.   The
appellant suffered a decree of ejectment passed by
the Court of Small Causes. The decree came to be
challenged by civil revision application where the
High Court stayed the execution of the decree subject
to   the   condition   that  the   shall   deposit  Rs.
5,40,000/- every month which amount was, however, not
allowed   to   be  withdrawn   by  the   appellant.  In
paragraph 8 this Court noticed:
         “8. Of late, orders are coming to this

                                                        46
     Court   where,   in   cases    arising   from
     ejectment proceedings, the High Courts,
     with a view to strike a balance between
     the competing interests of the landlord
     and the tenant, pass interim orders
     asking the tenant to pay to the landlord
     or deposit in Court, as monthly rent,
     certain sum fixed by it (that, according
     to   the   High   Court,    should   be   the
     reasonable market rent for the tenanted
     premises), far in excess of the existing
     monthly rent.”
38. Three-Judge Bench in the above case noticed both
the  judgments   in  Gian   Devi   Anand  and   Satyawati
Sharma. The judgment of Satyawati Sharma specifically
paragraphs  12,  29  and  32  have   been  considered  in
paragraphs 67 to 70 of the judgment which are as
follows:
         “67. The way this Court has been
     looking at the relationship between the
     landlord and the tenant in the past and
     the shift in the Court’s approach in
     recent times have been examined in some
     detail in the decision in Satyawati
     Sharma v. Union of India, (2008) 5 SCC
     287. In that decision one of us (Singhvi,
     J.) speaking for the Court referred to a
     number of earlier decisions of the Court
     and (in para 12 of the judgment) observed
     as follows: (SCC pp. 304-05)
         “12. Before  proceeding further we
         consider it   necessary to observe
         that there   has been a definite
         shift in the Court’s approach while

                                            47
   interpreting    the     rent     control
   legislations. An analysis of the
   judgments of 1950s to early 1990s
   would indicate that in majority of
   cases the courts heavily leaned in
   favour of an interpretation which
   would benefit the tenant—Mohinder
   Kumar v. State of Haryana, (1985)
   4 SCC 221, Prabhakaran Nair v.
   State of T.N. (1987) 4 SCC 238,
   D.C. Bhatia v. Union of India,
   (1995)    1  SCC     104     and    C.N.
   Rudramurthy   v.     K.    Barkathulla
   Khan, (1998) 8 SCC 275. In these
   and    other   cases,      the     Court
   consistently     held       that     the
   paramount object of every rent
   control legislation is to provide
   safeguards   for    tenants      against
   exploitation by landlords who seek
   to take undue advantage of the
   pressing need for accommodation of
   a large number of people looking
   for a house on rent for residence
   or business in the background of
   acute scarcity thereof. However, a
   different    trend       is      clearly
   discernible      in      the       later
   judgments.”
68. The learned Judge then referred to
some later decisions and (in para 14 at
SCC p. 306 of the judgment) quoted a
passage from the decision in Joginder Pal
v. Naval Kishore Behal, (2002) 5 SCC 397
to the following effect: (Joginder Pal
case, SCC p. 404, para 9)
   “14. … ‘9. … The courts have to
   adopt a reasonable and balanced
   approach while interpreting rent
   control legislations starting with
   an   assumption     that     an    equal
   treatment has been meted out to

                                             48
    both the sections of the society.
    In spite of the overall balance
    tilting in favour of the tenants,
    while interpreting such of the
    provisions as to take care of the
    interest of the landlord the court
    should not hesitate in leaning in
    favour of the landlords. Such
    provisions are engrafted in rent
    control legislations to take care
    of those situations where the
    landlords too are weak and feeble
    and feel humble.’ ”
                 (emphasis in original)
69.   Commenting   upon    the   Full  Bench
decision of the Delhi High Court that had
upheld the constitutional validity of
Section   14(1)(e)   of    the   Delhi  Rent
Control Act and that came under challenge
in Satyawati Sharma, Singhvi, J. (in para
29 of the judgment) observed as follows:
(SCC p. 318)
    “29. … It is significant to note
    that the Full Bench did not, at
    all, advert to the question whether
    the reason/cause which supplied
    rationale to the classification
    continued to subsist even after
    lapse of 44 years and whether the
    tenants of premises let for non-
    residential     purposes       should
    continue to avail the benefit of
    implicit exemption from eviction in
    the case of bona fide requirement
    of the landlord despite see-saw
    change in the housing scenario in
    Delhi and substantial increase in
    the availability of buildings and
    premises which could be let for
    non-residential     or     commercial
    purposes.”

                                                          49
      70. The decision in Satyawati Sharma then
      referred to the doctrine of temporal
      reasonableness and in para 32 observed as
      follows: (SCC p. 320)
          “32. It is trite to say that
          legislation which may be quite
          reasonable and rational at the time
          of its enactment may with the lapse
          of time and/or due to change of
          circumstances     become    arbitrary,
          unreasonable and violative of the
          doctrine of equality and even if
          the validity of such legislation
          may have been upheld at a given
          point of time, the Court may, in
          subsequent litigation, strike down
          the same if it is found that the
          rationale of classification has
          become non-existent.”
39. The ratio which was quoted by three-Judge Bench
from Satyawati Sharma was that which was laid down in
paragraph 32 of the Satyawati Sharma case. The ratio
in Satyawati Sharma that a Legislation which may be
quite   reasonable   and  rational  at   the  time  of  its
enactment    may  with  the  lapse  of   time  and  due  to
change      of     circumstances      become     arbitrary,
unreasonable     and   violative   of   the   doctrine   of
equality    has   been  affirmed   which   is  clear   from
paragraph 71 of the judgment. Paragraph 71 of three-

                                                     50
Judge Bench judgment is as follows:
         “71. We reaffirm the views expressed
     in Satyawati Sharma and emphasise the
     need for a more balanced and objective
     approach to the relationship between the
     landlord and tenant. This is not to say
     that the Court should lean in favour of
     the landlord but merely that there is no
     longer any room for the assumption that
     all tenants, as a class, are in dire
     circumstances and in desperate need of
     the    Court’s   protection    under    all
     circumstances. (The case of the present
     appellant who is in occupation of an area
     of 9000 sq ft in a building situate at
     Fort, Mumbai on a rental of Rs 5236.58,
     plus water charges at the rate of Rs
     515.35    per  month   more   than    amply
     highlights the point.)”
40. It is true that in the above three-Judge Bench
judgment, the Court was not directly concerned with
Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act. Thus,
three-Judge Bench had the basis of Satyawati Sharma
and on which basis Section 14(1)(e) was struck down
after working of the Act after more than 50 years.
We, thus, are of the view that three-Judge Bench in
Super Max approved limited ratio of Satyawati Sharma
as  extracted    by three-Judge   Bench   which  fully
supports the submission that basis and reasoning on
which Satyawati Sharma struck down Section 14(1)(e)

                                                             51
partly stood on firm footing.
Question No.2
41. We   having   rejected    the   submission    of  learned
counsel   for   the   appellant    that    the  judgment    of
Satyawati Sharma is per incuriam. Whether there is
any   ground   or   basis    on   which   the   judgment    of
Satyawati Sharma can be referred for re-consideration
is the next question to be answered.
42. Learned    counsel     for   the   appellant     has   not
referred   to  any   judgment   of   this   Court  which   has
sounded different note or which has taken a contrary
view to what has held in Satyawati Sharma case. What
is  emphasised     by   the    learned    counsel    for   the
appellant   is,   that   as   the   Legislature    has   never
intended   to   apply    Section    14(1)(e)for    commercial
premises which was clear from legislative intendment,
Satyawati Sharma could not have taken a view which is
contrary to the legislative intendment. By noticing
the three-Judge Bench judgment in Super Max, we have
already noticed that three-Bench has reaffirmed ratio
of Satyawati Sharma that the Legislation which was
quite   reasonable   and   rational   at   the  time   of  its

                                                             52
enactment   may   with   the  lapse  of    time   and  due  to
change     of      circumstances       become       arbitrary,
unreasonable     and   violative    of    the   doctrine    of
equality. Various judgment pertaining to Rent Control
Legislations    have   been  referred    to   and   relied  in
Satyawati Sharma itself. Satyawati Sharma also dealt
with the reasons which were given by the Delhi High
court in upholding Section 14(1)(e) in paragraph 31
of the judgment.     Satyawati Sharma observed following
in paragraph 31:
         “31. In H.C. Sharma vs. Life Insurance
     Corporation of India (supra), the Division
     Bench of the High Court, after taking
     cognizance of the acute problem of housing
     created due to partition of the country,
     upheld the classification by observing that
     the Government could legitimately restrict
     the right of the landlord to recover
     possession of only those premises which
     were let for residential purposes. The
     Court felt that if such restriction was not
     imposed, those up-rooted from Pakistan may
     not get settled in their life. As of now a
     period of almost 50 years has elapsed from
     the enactment of the 1958 Act. During this
     long span of time much water has flown down
     the Ganges. Those who came from West
     Pakistan as refugees and even their next
     generations have settled down in different
     parts of the country, more particularly in
     Punjab, Haryana, Delhi and surrounding
     areas. They are occupying prime positions
     in political and bureaucratic set up of the
     Government and have earned huge wealth in

                                                         53
      different trades, occupation, business and
      similar   ventures.   Not   only    this,   the
      availability of buildings and premises
      which can be let for non- residential or
      commercial    purposes    has    substantially
      increased.   Therefore,    the    reason/cause
      which prompted the Division Bench of the
      High      Court      to       sustain       the
      differentiation/classification       of     the
      premises with reference to the purpose of
      their user, is no longer available for
      negating the challenge to Section 14(1)
      (e) on the ground of violation of Article
      14 of the Constitution, and we cannot
      uphold    such    arbitrary     classification
      ignoring the ratio of Harbilas Rai Bansal
      vs. State of Punjab (supra), which was
      reiterated   in Joginder    Pal    vs.    Naval
      Kishore Behal(supra) and approved by three-
      Judges Bench in Rakesh Vij vs. Dr. Raminder
      Pal Singh Sethi (supra). In our considered
      view, the discrimination which was latent
      in Section    14(1)(e) at     the    time    of
      enactment of 1958 Act has, with the passage
      of time (almost 50 years) has become so
      pronounced that the impugned provision
      cannot be treated intra vires Article 14 of
      the Constitution by applying any rational
      criteria.”
43. The judgment of this Court with regard to Rent
Control   Legislation, namely,   1986 (3)    SCC 385   and
Malpe   Vishwanath  Acharya  and   others   vs.  State  of
Maharashtra and another, (1998) 2 SCC 1, has been
referred to and relied by Satyawati Sharma. In Malpe
Vishwanath Acharya, a three-Judge Bench of this Court
laid down following in paragraphs 8 and 31:

                                               54
    “8. There is considerable judicial
authority in support of the submission of
learned counsel for the appellants that
with the passage of time a legislation
which was justified when enacted may
become arbitrary and unreasonable with
the change in circumstances. In the State
of M.P. v. Bhopal Sugar Industries Ltd.,
AIR 1964 SC 1179, dealing with a question
whether geographical classification due
to historical reasons would be valid this
Court at SCR p. 853 observed as follows:
    “Differential treatment arising out
    of the application of the laws so
    continued in different regions of
    the same reorganised State, did not
    therefore immediately attract the
    clause    of     the     Constitution
    prohibiting discrimination. But by
    the passage of time, considerations
    of necessity and expediency would
    be obliterated, and the grounds
    which justified classification of
    geographical regions for historical
    reasons may cease to be valid. A
    purely temporary provision which
    because   of     compelling    forces
    justified   differential    treatment
    when the Reorganisation Act was
    enacted    cannot     obviously     be
    permitted to assume permanency, so
    as to perpetuate that treatment
    without a rational basis to support
    it after the initial expediency and
    necessity have disappeared.”
31.    Taking     all    the     facts     and
circumstances into consideration we have
no doubt that the existing provisions of
the Bombay Rent Act relating to the
determination    and    fixation     of    the
standard rent can no longer be considered

                                                          55
      to be reasonable. The said provisions
      would have been struck down as having now
      become unreasonable and arbitrary but we
      think it is not necessary to strike down
      the same in view of the fact that the
      present extended period of the Bombay
      Rent Act comes to an end on 31-3-1998.
      The Government’s thinking reflected in
      various documents itself shows that the
      existing   provisions     have   now    become
      unreasonable    and,    therefore,     require
      reconsideration. The new bill is under
      consideration and we leave it to the
      legislature to frame a just and fair law
      keeping in view the interests of all
      concerned    and     in     particular     the
      resolution of the State Ministers for
      Housing of 1992 and the National Model
      Law which has been circulated by the
      Central Government in 1992. We are not
      expressing any opinion on the provisions
      of the said Model Law but as the same has
      been drafted and circulated amongst all
      the States after due deliberation and
      thought, there will, perhaps, have to be
      very good and compelling reasons in
      departing from the said Model Law. Mr
      Nargolkar assured us that this Model Law
      will be taken into consideration in the
      framing of the proposed new Rent Control
      Act.”
44. The   above  principles    have   been   reiterated  in
following judgments:
    (i) Anuj Garg and Others Vs. Hotel Association of
India   and  Others,  (2008)   3   SCC  1   reiterated  the
principle   that a   statute although     could have   been

                                                     56
held to be a valid piece of legislation keeping in
view the societal condition of those times, but with
the changes occurring therein, such a law can also be
declared invalid.      In Paragraph Nos. 7, 8 and 9,
following has been laid down:-
     “7.    The   Act    is   a  pre-constitutional
     legislation. Although it is saved in terms
     of   Article     372   of  the   Constitution,
     challenge to its validity on the touchstone
     of   Articles     14,   15  and   19  of    the
     Constitution of India, is permissible in
     law. While embarking on the questions
     raised, it may be pertinent to know that a
     statute although could have been held to be
     a valid piece of legislation keeping in
     view the societal condition of those times,
     but with the changes occurring therein both
     in the domestic as also in international
     arena, such a law can also be declared
     invalid.
     8. In John Vallamattom v. Union of India,
     (2003) 6 SCC 611, this Court, while
     referring to an amendment made in UK in
     relation to a provision which was in pari
     materia with Section 118 of the Indian
     Succession Act, observed: (SCC p. 624, para
     28)
         “28. … The constitutionality of a
         provision, it is trite, will have to
         be   judged    keeping  in   view   the
         interpretative changes of the statute
         affected by passage of time.”
         Referring to the changing legal scenario
     and having regard to the Declaration on the
     Right to Development adopted by the World

                                                            57
      Conference on Human Rights as also Article
      18 of the United Nations Covenant on Civil
      and Political Rights, 1966, it was held:
      (John Vallamattom case, SCC p. 625, para
      33)
          “33. It is trite that having regard
          to Article 13(1) of the Constitution,
          the constitutionality of the impugned
          legislation      is     required   to    be
          considered on the basis of laws
          existing on 26-1-1950, but while
          doing so the court is not precluded
          from taking into consideration the
          subsequent events which have taken
          place thereafter. It is further trite
          that    the    law     although   may    be
          constitutional when enacted but with
          passage of time the same may be held
          to be unconstitutional in view of the
          changed situation.”
      9. Changed social psyche and expectations
      are important factors to be considered in
      the upkeep of law. Decision on relevance
      will be more often a function of time we
      are    operating      in.     Primacy   to    such
      transformation      in   constitutional     rights
      analysis      would       not     be    out     of
      place……………………………….
                    xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx”
    (ii) In Saradamani Kandappan Vs. S. Rajalakshmi &
Ors.,   (2011)   12   SCC    18,   Justice  R.V.   Raveendran
speaking for the Court reiterated the same principles
in paragraph Nos. 38 and 39 in the following words:-
      “38.  It   is   now   well    settled that   laws,

                                                58
which may be reasonable and valid when
made, can, with passage of time and
consequential    change    in    circumstances,
become   arbitrary    and   unreasonable.    In
Rattan Arya v. State of T.N.7 this Court
held: (SCC pp. 389-90, para 4)
   “4. … We must also observe here that
   whatever justification there may have
   been in 1973 when Section 30(ii) was
   amended by imposing a ceiling of Rs
   400 on rent payable by tenants of
   residential buildings to entitle them
   to seek the protection of the Act,
   the passage of time has made the
   ceiling    utterly    unreal.    We   are
   entitled to take judicial notice of
   the enormous multifold increase of
   rents    throughout      the     country,
   particularly in urban areas. It is
   common   knowledge    today    that   the
   accommodation which one could have
   possibly got for Rs 400 per month in
   1973 will today cost at least five
   times   more.    In    these    days   of
   universal, day-to-day escalation of
   rentals any ceiling such as that
   imposed by Section 30(ii) in 1973 can
   only be considered to be totally
   artificial and irrelevant today. As
   held by this Court in Motor General
   Traders    v.   State     of   A.P.8    a
   provision which was perfectly valid
   at the commencement of the Act could
   be challenged later on the ground of
   unconstitutionality and struck down
   on that basis. What was once a
   perfectly valid legislation, may in
   course       of       time,        become
   discriminatory      and     liable     to
   challenge on the ground of its being
   violative of Article 14.”
                       (emphasis supplied)

                                                  59
39. In Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v. State of
Maharashtra, (1998) 2 SCC 1, a three-Judge
Bench of this Court considered the validity
of   determination     of     standard   rent  by
freezing or pegging down the rent as on 1-
9-1940 or as on the date of first letting,
under Sections 5(10)(b), 7, 9(2)(b) and
12(3) of the Bombay Rents, Hotel and
Lodging House Rates Control Act, 1947. This
Court held that the said process of
determination under the Act, which was
reasonable when the law was made, became
arbitrary and unreasonable in view of
constant    escalation      of   prices   due  to
inflation and corresponding rise (sic fall)
in money value with the passage of time.
This Court held: (SCC pp. 22-23, paras 29 &
31)
    “29. Insofar as social legislation,
    like   the    Rent     Control   Act   is
    concerned, the law must strike a
    balance between rival interests and
    it should try to be just to all. The
    law ought not to be unjust to one
    and give a disproportionate benefit
    or protection to another section of
    the society. When there is shortage
    of accommodation it is desirable,
    nay, necessary that some protection
    should be given to the tenants in
    order to ensure that they are not
    exploited. At the same time such a
    law has to be revised periodically
    so    as     to     ensure      that    a
    disproportionately       larger   benefit
    than the one which was intended is
    not given to the tenants…….
                   *     *     *
    31.   Taking     all     the   facts   and
    circumstances into consideration we
    have no doubt that the existing
    provisions of the Bombay Rent Act

                                                           60
          relating to the determination and
          fixation of the standard rent can no
          longer     be      considered     to    be
          reasonable.”
     It is relevant to note that Justice Raveendran
has   placed   reliance    on  earlier   judgments   of this
Court in Rattan Arya Vs. State of Tamil Nadu (supra)
and Malpe Vishwanath Acharya (supra), which judgments
have   already   been   referred   to  and  relied   by this
Court    in   Satyawati     Sharma’s   case.      Thus,  the
proposition,     which    was   laid   down    in  Satyawati
Sharma’s    case relying     on above   two judgments   have
again   been reiterated      by this   Court in   Sardarmani
Kandappan (supra) in Paragraph Nos. 38 and 39, as
noted above.
     (iii) The Constitution Bench of this Court in
Modern Dental College and Research Centre and Others
Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and Others, (2016) 7 SCC
353,   speaking    through    Dr.  Justice   A.K.  Sikri  in
paragraph     Nos.   69   and    92,  following    has  been
observed:-
      “69. ………………………………………It is rightly said that
      the law is not an Eden of concepts but
      rather an everyday life of needs, interests

                                                          61
     and the values that a given society seeks
     to realise in a given time. The law is a
     tool which is intended to provide solutions
     for the problems of human being in a
     society.
     92. ………………………………Law is not static, it has
     to change with changing times and changing
     social/societal conditions.”
45. Much   emphasis   has   been   given   by  the  learned
counsel for the appellant on the fact that various
tenants are tenants of small shops which are their
source of livelihood when application under 14(1)(e)
filed by the landlord on bona fide need, they are not
even entitled to contest the application by filing
written statement. They are obliged to obtain leave
to defend as per Section 25B which leave to defend is
rejected   in  most  of  the   cases  which   causes  great
hardship on the tenants. It is submitted that in so
far as applicability of the procedure under Section
25B is concerned, the issue needs to be revisited to
save  the   tenants  from   hardship.   In  our  view  this
cannot  be   a  ground  for   referring   the  judgment  of
Satyawati Sharma    to larger Bench for reconsideration
of  judgment   of  Satyawati    Sharma.  Satyawati   Sharma

                                                            62
having not said about the procedure, there is nothing
in the judgment which needs to be revisited on the
above aspect. It is for the Legislature to take stock
of  situation   and    if   it   so  decides   it   can  make
necessary changes in the procedure for considering
the application under Section 14(1)(e) with regard to
eviction of commercial tenants on the ground of bona
fide need of the land lord. We need to add nothing
more on the subject. In sofaras submission of the
learned   counsel   for    the   appellant   is   that  under
Section  14(1)(e)    in   respect   of   commercial   tenancy
leave to defend is generally rejected, it is suffice
to say that rejection of leave for a particular case
is matter to be examined in each case and no general
observation can be made in this regard.
46. There   is  one   more   aspect   of  the   matter  which
needs   to   be   noted.     We   have   already    extracted
observation of Constitution Bench judgment in Gian
Devi  Anand   in paragraph      39 where   the Constitution
Bench observed that bona fide need of the landlord
stands very much on the same footing in regard to
either class of premises, residential or commercial.

                                                         63
We, therefore, suggest that Legislature may consider
the advisability of making the bona fide requirement
of the landlord a ground of eviction in respect of
commercial premises as well. After more that a decade
of    the     above    observation,     a    comprehensive
Legislation, namely, Delhi Rent Act, 1995 has been
enacted   to   provide  for   the  regulation   of  rents,
repairs   and   maintenance  and  evictions   relating  to
premises and of rates of hotels and lodging houses in
the National Capital Territory of Delhi. In Act, 1995
the definition of premises as was contained in Act,
1958  remained    same.  With  regard   to  protection  of
tenant  against eviction     a new   Section 22(r)   which
provides as follows:
           “Section 22(r) that the premises let
     for residential or non-residential purposes
     are required, whether in the same form or
     after re-construction or re-building, by
     the landlord for occupation for residential
     or non-residential purpose for himself or
     for any member of his family if he is the
     owner thereof, or for any person for whose
     benefit the premises are held and that the
     landlord or such person has no other
     reasonably suitable accommodation:
            Provided that where the landlord has
     acquired the premises by transfer, no
     application for the recovery of possession
     of such premises shall lie under this

                                                       64
     clause unless a period of three years has
     elapsed from the date of the acquisition:
          Provided further that where an order
     for the recovery of possession of any
     premises is made on the ground specified in
     this clause, the landlord shall be entitled
     to    obtain   possession   thereof    on   the
     expiration of a period of six months in the
     case of residential premises and one year
     in the case of non-residential premises
     from the date of passing of eviction
     order.”
47. We may notice another three-Judge Bench judgment
of this Court, i.e., Subramanian Swamy and others vs.
Raju   through   Member,  Juvenile   Justice   Board and
another, (2014) 8 SCC 390. This Court in the above
judgment laid down that reading down the provisions
of a statute cannot be resorted to when the meaning
thereof is plain and unambiguous and the legislative
intent is clear. We need to notice the issues raised
in the above case and the ratio of the judgment.
Above was a case where a lady of 23 years in age in
moving   bus   was   brutally  assaulted   sexually  and
physically. The lady succumbed to her injuries. Five
persons   were   apprehended  in   connection   with the
crime. The respondent, Raju was below 18 years of age
on the date of commission of the crime. His case was

                                                           65
referred for inquiry to the Juvenile Justice Board.
The other accused were tried in a regular Sessions
Court  and   have   been  found   guilty  of   the  offences
under Section 376(2)(g) and Section 302 of the Penal
Code. Other accused were sentenced to death, appeal
against which was dismissed by the High court. The
petitioners   had   filed   applications   for   impleadment
before the Juvenile Justice Board. The case of the
petitioners was that on a proper interpretation of
the  Act (Juvenile     Justice (Care    and Protection    of
Children)   Act,  2000),    the  Juvenile(respondent)    was
not entitled to the benefits under the Act but was
liable to be tried under the penal law of the land in
a   regular   criminal    court   along   with    the  other
accused.
48. A writ petition was also filed in the High Court
praying   for    an   authoritative     interpretation    of
Sections 2(l) and 2(k) of the Act that the criterion
of 18 years set out therein does not comprehend cases
of grave offences in general and of heinous crimes
against women in particular that shakes the root of
humanity in general. The writ petition was dismissed

                                                         66
by the High Court holding that against the order of
the Juvenile Justice Board the alternative remedies
were available under the Act which should be first
exhausted.    The   prayer   for   impleadment    of   the
petitioners was also rejected.
49. A   Special   Leave   Petition   against   the   above
judgment of the High Court as well as writ petition
was   filed   in   this   Court.   The   submissions    of
petitioners were noted by this Court. In paragraphs
59 and 60 this Court noticed the submissions made on
behalf of the petitioner as below:
         “59. Dr. Swamy at the outset has urged
     that there is no attempt on his part to
     challenge the constitutional validity of
     the    Act,   particularly,    the   provisions
     contained in Sections 2(k) and 2(l) of the
     Act and what he seeks is a mere reading
     down of the Act……
     60. Dr. Swamy would urge that the relevant
     provisions of the Act i.e. Sections 1(4),
     2(k), 2(l) and 7 must be read to mean that
     juveniles (children below the age of 18)
     who are intellectually, emotionally and
     mentally mature enough to understand the
     implications of their acts and who have
     committed serious crimes do not come under
     the purview of the Act. Such juveniles are
     liable to be dealt with under the penal law
     of the country and by the regular hierarchy
     of courts under the criminal justice system
     administered in India……”

                                                             67
50. This   Court    in   the   background    of    the   above
submissions laid down following in paragraph 61:
         “61. Reading down the provisions of a
     statute cannot be resorted to when the
     meaning thereof is plain and unambiguous
     and the legislative intent is clear. The
     fundamental principle of the "reading down"
     doctrine can be summarized as follows.
     Courts must read the legislation literally
     in the first instance. If on such reading
     and       understanding       the      vice       of
     unconstitutionality       is     attracted,      the
     courts must explore whether there has been
     an unintended legislative omission. If such
     an intendment can be reasonably implied
     without     undertaking    what,    unmistakably,
     would be a legislative exercise, the Act
     may    be    read    down   to    save    it   from
     unconstitutionality. The above is a fairly
     well     established      and     well     accepted
     principle of interpretation which having
     been reiterated by this Court time and
     again would obviate the necessity of any
     recall of the huge number of precedents
     available except, perhaps, the view of
     Sawant,     J.    (majority    view)    in    Delhi
     Transport Corporation v. D.T.C. Mazdoor
     Congress and Ors. 1991 Supp. (1) SCC 600
     which succinctly sums up the position is,
     therefore, extracted below: (SCC pp.728-29,
     para 255)
       “255. It is thus clear that the
       doctrine     of    reading    down    or    of
       recasting the statute can be applied
       in     limited      situations.      It     is
       essentially used, firstly, for saving
       a statute from being struck down on
       account of its unconstitutionality. It
       is an extension of the principle that
       when       two      interpretations        are

                                                         68
       possible--one          rendering          it
       constitutional and the other making it
       unconstitutional, the former should be
       preferred. The unconstitutionality may
       spring from either the incompetence of
       the legislature to enact the statute
       or from its violation of any of the
       provisions of the Constitution. The
       second situation which summons its aid
       is where the provisions of the statute
       are vague and ambiguous and it is
       possible to gather the intentions of
       the legislature from the object of the
       statute, the context in which the
       provision occurs and the purpose for
       which it is made. However, when the
       provision is cast in a definite and
       unambiguous language and its intention
       is clear, it is not permissible either
       to mend or bend it even if such
       recasting is in accord with good
       reason    and     conscience.     In    such
       circumstances, it is not possible for
       the court to remake the statute. Its
       only duty is to strike it down and
       leave it to the legislature if it so
       desires, to amend it. What is further,
       if the remaking of the statute by the
       courts is to lead to its distortion
       that course is to be scrupulously
       avoided. One of the situations further
       where the doctrine can never be called
       into   play     is   where   the     statute
       requires     extensive     additions     and
       deletions. Not only it is no part of
       the court's duty to undertake such
       exercise,    but    it   is    beyond    its
       jurisdiction to do so.””
51. Rejecting   the   submission   of  the   petitioner to
read down the statute following was held in paragraph

                                                          69
64:
          “64.If the provisions of the Act clearly
      indicate the legislative intent in the
      light    of   the    country's    international
      commitments and the same is in conformity
      with the constitutional requirements, it is
      not necessary for the Court to understand
      the legislation in any other manner. In
      fact, if the Act is plainly read and
      understood, which we must do, the resultant
      effect thereof is wholly consistent with
      Article 14. The Act, therefore, need not be
      read down, as suggested, to save it from
      the vice of unconstitutionality for such
      unconstitutionality does not exist.”
52. Now reverting to the judgment of this Court in
Satyawati Sharma (supra), in the said judgment this
Court   did  not  read   down  the  provision   of  Section
14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act. This Court
held that Section 14(1)(e) is not intra vires the
doctrine of equality enshrined in Article 14 of the
Constitution.    In  paragraph   31   following   was  laid
down:
      “31………In     our     considered    view,     the
      discrimination which was latent in Section
      14(1)(e) at the time of enactment of the
      1958 Act has, with the passage of time
      (almost 50 years), become so pronounced
      that the impugned provision cannot be
      treated intra vires Article 14 of the
      Constitution    by    applying   any   rational
      criteria.”

                                                       70
53. After considering all aspects of the matter, this
Court in Satyawati Sharma (AIR 2008 SC 3148) held
that Section 14(1)(e) is violative of the doctrine of
equality embodied in Article 14 of the Constitution.
This  Court,  thus,   struck   down  the  discriminatory
portion of Section 14(1)(e). In paragraphs 38 and 39
following was laid down:
         “38. In view of the above discussion, we
     hold that Section 14(1)(e) of the 1958 Act
     is violative of the doctrine of equality
     embodied in Article 14 of the Constitution
     of   India   insofar   as    it  discriminates
     between the premises let for residential
     and non-residential purposes when the same
     are required bona fide by the landlord for
     occupation for himself or for any member of
     his family dependent on him and restricts
     the latter's right to seek eviction of the
     tenant    from    the    premises    let   for
     residential purposes only.”
         39. However, the aforesaid declaration
     should   not   be   misunderstood    as  total
     striking down of Section 14(1)(e) of the
     1958 Act because it is neither the pleaded
     case of the parties nor the learned Counsel
     argued     that     Section     14(1)(e)    is
     unconstitutional in its entirety and we
     feel that ends of justice will be met by
     striking down the discriminatory portion of
     Section 14(1)(e)…”
54. The judgment of Satyawati Sharma was, thus, not a

                                                              71
case of reading down of Section 14(1)(e) rather it
was  a   case   where   portion   of  Section    14(1)(e)   was
struck    down    as   discriminatory    and    violative    of
Article    14  of   the  Constitution.    Thus,    three-Judge
Bench   judgment     in   Subramanian    Swamy     and  others
(supra)    is   clearly    distinguishable    and    does   not
affect    the   ratio    laid   down   by   two-Judge     Bench
judgment in Satyawati Sharma case.
55. The     Legislature    itself   notices    the   need   for
providing a ground for eviction to landlord on bona
fide need with regard to residential as well as non-
residential    premises. Thus,      what was    said in    Gian
Devi   Anand   in   paragraph    39  was  duly    accepted   by
Legislature.     It is   another matter     that Delhi     Rent
Act,   1995   even   though   it   received   assent   of   the
President     could    not   be   enforced.     Section    1(3)
provided that it shall come into force on such date
as the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint. Central Government did not
issue any notification in the Official Gazette for
enforcement of the Act. Writ Petition was filed in
Delhi High Court for issuance of mandamus to Central

                                                        72
Government to enforce Act, 1995 which was dismissed.
From the above, it is clear that what was observed by
Gian Devi Anand was also accepted by the Legislature
in providing for eviction from both the residential
and non-residential premises on the ground of bona
fide need in Act, 1995. Although, said Act could not
be enforced, the Legislation is complete when the Act
is passed by the Legislature and receives the assent
of the President.
56. A  Constitution     Bench   in  State  of  Kerala and
others  vs.  Mar    Appraem   Kuri   Company  Limited and
another, (2012) 7 SCC 106, laid down following in
paragraphs 50 and 51:
         “50. Broadly speaking, law-making is
     exclusively      the     function    of    the
     legislatures (see Articles 79 and 168).
     The President and the Governor are a part
     of the Union or the legislatures of the
     States.    As     far    as    Parliament   is
     concerned, the legislative process is
     complete    as    soon    as   the   procedure
     prescribed     by    Article    107   of   the
     Constitution and connected provisions are
     followed and the Bill passed by both the
     Houses of Parliament has received the
     assent of the President under Article
     111.   Similarly,     a    State   legislation
     becomes an Act as soon as a Bill has been
     passed by the State Legislature and it
     has received the assent of the Governor

                                                        73
     in accordance with Article 200. It is
     only in the situation contemplated by
     Article 254(2) that a State legislation
     is    required    to     be    reserved   for
     consideration     and     assent     by   the
     President. Thus, irrespective of the date
     of enforcement of a parliamentary or
     State enactment, a Bill becomes an Act
     and comes on the statute book immediately
     on receiving the assent of the President
     or the Governor, as the case may be,
     which assent has got to be published in
     the Official Gazette.
     51. The legislature, in exercise of its
     legislative power, may either enforce an
     Act, which has been passed and which has
     received the assent of the President or
     the Governor, as the case may be, from a
     specified date or leave it to some
     designated authority to fix a date for
     its enforcement. Such legislations are
     conditional legislations as in such cases
     no part of the legislative function is
     left unexercised. In such legislations,
     merely    because    the    legislature   has
     postponed the enforcement of the Act, it
     does not mean that the law has not been
     made.”
57. The above authority duly supports our view that
law has been made by the Parliament in enacting Act,
1995  which  accepts   the  suggestion   of  Constitution
Bench in Gian Devi Anand and hence what has been held
by Satyawati Sharma was felt both by this Court and
Legislature. We, thus, do not find any good ground to

                                                     74
refer the judgment of this Court in Satyawati Sharma
for  reconsideration  by a  larger  Bench.  We,  thus,
reject the submission of the learned counsel for the
appellant that Satyawati Sharma needs to be referred
to a larger Bench for reconsideration.
58. We having decided the above issue let the appeals
be now listed for consideration on merits.
                              ......................J.
                               ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
                              ......................J.
                               ( K.M. JOSEPH )
New Delhi,
August 05, 2019


