                                                                          REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO.7023 OF 2019
                               (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 8519 OF 2019)
                       M/S MAYAVTI TRADING PVT. LTD.                   APPELLANT(S)
                                                        VERSUS
                       PRADYUAT DEB BURMAN                             RESPONDENT(S)
                                                 JUDGMENT
                       R.F. Nariman, J.
                       1)      Leave granted.
                       2)      We have heard Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior
                       Advocate appearing for the appellant and Mr. Shyam Divan,
                       learned Senior Advocate appearing for the respondent at
                       considerable length.
                       3)      On the facts of this case, we do not propose to interfere
                       with the impugned decision of 12.03.2019 and, therefore, do not
                       find it necessary to exercise our extraordinary jurisdiction under
Signature Not Verified Article 136 of the Constitution of India.
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2019.09.11
16:48:00 IST
Reason:
                       4)      Having said this, however, during the course of argument,
                       a recent decision of this Court was pointed out, namely, United
                                                                                          1

India Insurance Company Limited vs. Antique Art Exports
Private Limited, (2019) 5 SCC 362. In this judgment, purportedly
following Duro Felguera, S.A. vs. Gangavaram Port Limited,
(2017) 9 SCC 729, this Court held:
       “20. The submission of the learned counsel for the
       respondent that after insertion of sub-section (6-A) to
       Section 11 of the Amendment Act, 2015 the jurisdiction
       of this Court is denuded and the limited mandate of the
       Court is to examine the factum of existence of an
       arbitration and relied on the judgment in Duro
       Felguera, S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd. [(2017) 9 SCC
       729 : (2017) 4 SCC (Civ) 764] The exposition in this
       decision is a general observation about the effect of
       the amended provisions which came to be examined
       under reference to six arbitrable agreements (five
       agreements for works and one corporate guarantee)
       and each agreement contains a provision for
       arbitration and there was serious dispute between the
       parties in reference to constitution of Arbitral Tribunal
       whether there has to be Arbitral Tribunal pertaining to
       each agreement. In the facts and circumstances, this
       Court took note of sub-section (6-A) introduced by the
       Amendment Act, 2015 to Section 11 of the Act and in
       that context observed that the preliminary disputes are
       to be examined by the arbitrator and are not for the
       Court to be examined within the limited scope
       available for appointment of arbitrator under Section
       11(6) of the Act. Suffice it to say that appointment of
       an arbitrator is a judicial power and is not a mere
       administrative function leaving some degree of judicial
       intervention; when it comes to the question to examine
       the existence of a prima facie arbitration agreement, it
       is always necessary to ensure that the dispute
       resolution process does not become unnecessarily
       protracted.
       21.     In the instant case, prima facie no dispute
                                                                 2

        subsisted after the discharge voucher being signed by
        the respondent without any demur or protest and claim
        being finally settled with accord and satisfaction and
        after 11 weeks of the settlement of claim a letter was
        sent on 27-7-2016 for the first time raising a voice in
        the form of protest that the discharge voucher was
        signed under undue influence and coercion with no
        supportive prima facie evidence being placed on
        record in absence thereof, it must follow that the claim
        had been settled with accord and satisfaction leaving
        no arbitral dispute subsisting under the agreement to
        be referred to the arbitrator for adjudication.”
5)      Section 11 (6A) was added by the amendment Act of 2015
and states as follows:
        “11. (6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be,
        the High Court, while considering any application
        under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5) or sub-section
        (6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or
        order of any Court, confine to the examination of the
        existence of an arbitration agreement.”
6)      Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate, has pointed
out that by an amendment Act of 2019, which has since been
passed, this sub-section has now been omitted. Section 3 of the
amendment Act of 2019 insofar as it pertains to this omission has
not yet been brought into force. The omission is pursuant to a
High Level Committee Review regarding institutionalization of
arbitration in India, headed by Justice B. N. Srikrishna. The Report
given by this Committee is dated 30 th July, 2017. The omission of
                                                                     3

the sub-section is not so as to resuscitate the law that was
prevailing prior to the amendment Act of 2015. The reason for
omission of            S. 11(6A) is given in the Report as follows:
       “Thus, the 2015 amendments to section 11 are geared
       towards facilitating speedy disposal of section 11
       applications by: (a) enabling the designation of any
       person or institution as an appointing authority for
       arbitrators in addition to the High Court or Supreme
       Court under section 11; (b) limiting challenges to the
       decision made by the appointing authority; and (c)
       requiring the expeditious disposal of section 11
       applications, preferably within the prescribed 60-day
       time period.
       While these amendments no doubt facilitate the
       speedy disposal of section 11 applications to a large
       extent, they do not go all the way in limiting court
       interference. Pursuant to the amendments, the
       appointment of arbitrators under section 11 may be
       done: (a) by the Supreme Court or the High Court; or
       (b) by a person or institution designated by such court
       in exercise of an administrative power following
       section 11(6B). In either case, the amendments still
       require the Supreme Court / the High Court to examine
       whether an arbitration agreement exists, which can
       lead to delays in the arbitral process as extensive
       evidence and arguments may be led on the same.
       The Committee notes that the default procedure for
       appointment of arbitrators in other jurisdictions do not
       require extensive court involvement as in India.
       For instance, in Singapore, the relevant provision of
       the IAA provides that where the parties fail to agree on
       the appointment of the third arbitrator, within 30 days
       of the receipt of the first request by either party to
       appoint the arbitrator, the appointment shall be made
       by the appointing authority (the President of the SIAC)
       by the request of the parties. (See section 9A(2) read
                                                                    4

with sections 2(1) and 8(2), IAA)
The arbitration legislation of Hong Kong incorporates
Article 11 of the UNCITRAL Model Law relating to the
appointment of arbitrators. Like in the case of
Singapore where the SIAC is the appointing authority
for arbitrators, the default appointment of arbitrator(s)
is done by the HKIAC. (Section 13(2) read with section
24, AO)
In the United Kingdom, in the case of default of one
party to appoint an arbitrator, the other party may
appoint his arbitrator as the sole arbitrator after giving
notice of 7 clear days to the former of his intention to
do so. (Section 17, AA) The defaulting party may apply
to the court to set aside the appointment. (Section
17(3), AA) In case of a failure of the appointment
procedure, any party may apply to the court to make
the appointment or give directions regarding the
making of an appointment. (Section 18(2), AA)
The Committee recommends the adoption of the
practice followed in Singapore and Hong Kong in the
Indian scenario — apart from avoiding delays at court
level, it may also give impetus to institutional
arbitration.
xxx xxx
Recommendations
   1. In   order to ensure speedy appointment of
      arbitrators, section 11 may be amended to
      provide that the appointment of arbitrator(s)
      under the section shall only be done by arbitral
      institution(s) designated by the Supreme Court (in
      case of international commercial arbitrations) or
      the High Court (in case of all other arbitrations)
      for such purpose, without the Supreme Court or
      High Courts being required to determine the
      existence of an arbitration agreement.”
                                                           5

       Thus, it can be seen that after the amendment Act of 2019,
Section 11(6A) has been omitted because appointment of
arbitrators is to be done institutionally, in which case the Supreme
Court or the High Court under the old statutory regime are no longer
required to appoint arbitrators and consequently to determine
whether an arbitration agreement exists.
7)     Prior to Section 11(6A), this Court in several judgments
beginning with SBP & Co. vs. Patel Engineering Ltd. and Anr.
(2005) 8 SCC 618 has held that at the stage of a Section 11(6)
application being filed, the Court need not merely confine itself to
the examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement but
could also go into certain preliminary questions such as stale
claims, accord and satisfaction having been reached etc.
8)      In ONGC Mangalore Petrochemicals Limited vs. ANS
Constructions Limited and another, (2018) 3 SCC 373, this
Court in a case which arose before the insertion of Section 11(6A)
dismissed a Section 11 petition on the ground that accord and
satisfaction had taken place in the following terms: -
        “31. Admittedly, no-dues certificate was submitted by
        the contractee company on 21-9-2012 and on their
        request completion certificate was issued by the
        appellant contractor. The contractee, after a gap of
                                                                     6

       one month, that is, on 24-10-2012, withdrew the no-
       dues certificate on the grounds of coercion and duress
       and the claim for losses incurred during execution of
       the contract site was made vide letter dated 12-1-
       2013, i.e. after a gap of 3 ½ (three-and-a-half) months
       whereas the final bill was settled on 10-10-2012. When
       the contractee accepted the final payment in full and
       final satisfaction of all its claims, there is no point in
       raising the claim for losses incurred during the
       execution of the contract at a belated stage which
       creates an iota of doubt as to why such claim was not
       settled at the time of submitting final bills that too in the
       absence of exercising duress or coercion on the
       contractee by the appellant contractor. In our
       considered view, the plea raised by the contractee
       company is bereft of any details and particulars, and
       cannot be anything but a bald assertion. In the
       circumstances, there was full and final settlement of
       the claim and there was really accord and satisfaction
       and in our view no arbitrable dispute existed so as to
       exercise power under Section 11 of the Act. The High
       Court was not, therefore, justified in exercising power
       under Section 11 of the Act.”
9)     The 246th Law Commission Report dealt with some of
these judgments and felt that at the stage of a Section 11(6)
application, only “existence” of an arbitration agreement ought to
be looked at and not other preliminary issues.              In a recent
judgment of this Court, namely, Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. vs.
Coastal Marine Constructions & Engineering Ltd., (2019 SCC
OnLine SC 515), this Court adverted to the said Law Commission
Report and held: -
     “14. The case law under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration
                                                                        7

Act, as it stood prior to the Amendment Act, 2015, has
had a chequered history. In Konkan Railway Corporation
Ltd. v. Mehul Construction Co., (2000) 7 SCC 201
[“Konkan Railway I”], it was held that the powers of the
Chief Justice under Section 11(6) of the 1996 Act are
administrative in nature, and that the Chief Justice or his
designate does not act as a judicial authority while
appointing an arbitrator. The same view was reiterated in
Konkan Railway Corporation Ltd. v. Rani Construction
(P) Ltd., (2002) 2 SCC 388 [“Konkan Railway II”].
15. However, in SBP & Co. (supra), a seven-Judge
Bench overruled this view and held that the power to
appoint an arbitrator under Section is judicial and not
administrative. The conclusions of the seven-Judge
Bench were summarised in paragraph 47 of the
aforesaid judgment. We are concerned directly with sub-
paragraphs (i), (iv), and (xii), which read as follows:
   “(i) The power exercised by the Chief Justice of the
   High Court or the Chief Justice of India under Section
   11(6) of the Act is not an administrative power. It is a
   judicial power.
   xxx xxx xxx
   (iv) The Chief Justice or the designated Judge will
   have the right to decide the preliminary aspects as
   indicated in the earlier part of this judgment. These will
   be his own jurisdiction to entertain the request, the
   existence of a valid arbitration agreement, the
   existence or otherwise of a live claim, the existence of
   the condition for the exercise of his power and on the
   qualifications of the arbitrator or arbitrators. The Chief
   Justice or the designated Judge would be entitled to
   seek the opinion of an institution in the matter of
   nominating an arbitrator qualified in terms of Section
   11(8) of the Act if the need arises but the order
   appointing the arbitrator could only be that of the Chief
   Justice or the designated Judge.
   xxx xxx xxx
                                                              8

   (xii) The decision in Konkan Rly. Corpn. Ltd. v. Rani
   Construction (P) Ltd. [(2002) 2 SCC 388] is overruled.”
16. This position was further clarified in Boghara Polyfab
(supra) as follows:
   “22. Where the intervention of the court is sought for
appointment of an Arbitral Tribunal under Section 11, the
duty of the Chief Justice or his designate is defined in
SBP & Co. [(2005) 8 SCC 618]. This Court identified and
segregated the preliminary issues that may arise for
consideration in an application under Section 11 of the
Act into three categories, that is, (i) issues which the
Chief Justice or his designate is bound to decide; (ii)
issues which he can also decide, that is, issues which he
may choose to decide; and (iii) issues which should be
left to the Arbitral Tribunal to decide.
   22.1. The issues (first category) which the Chief
Justice/his designate will have to decide are:
   (a) Whether the party making the application has
   approached the appropriate High Court.
   (b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and
whether the party who has applied under Section 11 of
the Act, is a party to such an agreement.
   22.2. The issues (second category) which the Chief
Justice/his designate may choose to decide (or leave
them to the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal) are:
   (a) Whether the claim is a dead (long-barred) claim or
   a live claim.
   (b) Whether the parties have concluded the
   contract/transaction by recording satisfaction of their
   mutual rights and obligation or by receiving the final
   payment without objection.
   22.3. The issues (third category) which the Chief
                                                           9

Justice/his designate should leave exclusively to the
Arbitral Tribunal are:
   (i) Whether a claim made falls within the arbitration
   clause (as for example, a matter which is reserved for
   final decision of a departmental authority and
   excepted or excluded from arbitration).
   (ii) Merits or any claim involved in the arbitration.”
17. As a result of these judgments, the door was wide
open for the Chief Justice or his designate to decide a
large number of preliminary aspects which could
otherwise have been left to be decided by the arbitrator
under Section 16 of the 1996 Act. As a result, the Law
Commission of India, by its Report No. 246 submitted in
August 2014, suggested that various sweeping changes
be made in the 1996 Act. Insofar as SBP & Co. (supra)
and Boghara Polyfab (supra) are concerned, the Law
Commission examined the matter and recommended the
addition of a new sub-section, namely, sub-section (6A)
in Section 11. In so doing, the Law Commission
recommendations which are relevant and which led to
the introduction of Section 11(6A) are as follows:
   “28. The Act recognizes situations where the
intervention of the Court is envisaged at the pre-arbitral
stage, i.e. prior to the constitution of the arbitral tribunal,
which includes sections 8, 9, 11 in the case of Part I
arbitrations and section 45 in the case of Part II
arbitrations. Sections 8, 45 and also section 11 relating
to “reference to arbitration” and “appointment of the
tribunal”, directly affect the constitution of the tribunal
and functioning of the arbitral proceedings. Therefore,
their operation has a direct and significant impact on the
“conduct” of arbitrations. Section 9, being solely for the
purpose of securing interim relief, although having the
potential to affect the rights of parties, does not affect the
“conduct” of the arbitration in the same way as these
other provisions. It is in this context the Commission has
examined and deliberated the working of these
                                                                10

provisions and proposed certain amendments.
   29. The Supreme Court has had occasion to
deliberate upon the scope and nature of permissible pre-
arbitral judicial intervention, especially in the context of
section 11 of the Act. Unfortunately, however, the
question before the Supreme Court was framed in terms
of whether such a power is a “judicial” or an
“administrative” power – which obfuscates the real issue
underlying such nomenclature/description as to –
       the scope of such powers – i.e. the scope of
   arguments which a Court (Chief Justice) will consider
   while deciding whether to appoint an arbitrator or not –
   i.e. whether the arbitration agreement exists, whether
   it is null and void, whether it is voidable etc.; and
   which of these it should leave for decision of the
   arbitral tribunal.
       the nature of such intervention – i.e. would the
   Court (Chief Justice) consider the issues upon a
   detailed trial and whether the same would be decided
   finally or be left for determination of the arbitral
   tribunal.
   30. After a series of cases culminating in the decision
in SBP v. Patel Engineering, (2005) 8 SCC 618, the
Supreme Court held that the power to appoint an
arbitrator under section 11 is a “judicial” power. The
underlying issues in this judgment, relating to the scope
of intervention, were subsequently clarified by
RAVEENDRAN J in National Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Boghara Polyfab Pvt. Ltd., (2009) 1 SCC 267, where the
Supreme Court laid down as follows –
“1. The issues (first category) which Chief Justice/his
designate will have to decide are:
   (a) Whether the party making the application has
   approached the appropriate High Court?
                                                             11

   (b) Whether there is an arbitration agreement and
   whether the party who has applied under section 11 of
   the Act, is a party to such an agreement?
2. The issues (second category) which the Chief
Justice/his designate may choose to decide are:
   (a) Whether the claim is a dead (long barred) claim or
   a live claim?
   (b) Whether the parties have concluded the
   contract/transaction by recording satisfaction of their
   mutual rights and obligation or by receiving the final
   payment without objection?
3. The issues (third category) which the Chief Justice/his
designate should leave exclusively to the arbitral tribunal
are:
   (a) Whether a claim falls within the arbitration clause
   (as for example, a matter which is reserved for final
   decision of a departmental authority and excepted or
   excluded from arbitration)?
   (b) Merits of any claim involved in the arbitration.”
   31. The Commission is of the view that, in this context,
the same test regarding scope and nature of judicial
intervention, as applicable in the context of section 11,
should also apply to sections 8 and 45 of the Act – since
the scope and nature of judicial intervention should not
change upon whether a party (intending to defeat the
arbitration agreement) refuses to appoint an arbitrator in
terms of the arbitration agreement, or moves a
proceeding before a judicial authority in the face of such
an arbitration agreement.
   32. In relation to the nature of intervention, the
exposition of the law is to be found in the decision of the
Supreme Court in Shin Etsu Chemicals Co. Ltd. v. Aksh
Optifibre, (2005) 7 SCC 234, (in the context of section 45
of the Act), where the Supreme Court has ruled in favour
                                                            12

of looking at the issues/controversy only prima facie.
   33. It is in this context, the Commission has
recommended amendments to sections 8 and 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The scope of the
judicial intervention is only restricted to situations where
the Court/Judicial Authority finds that the arbitration
agreement does not exist or is null and void. In so far as
the nature of intervention is concerned, it is
recommended that in the event the Court/Judicial
Authority is prima facie satisfied against the argument
challenging the arbitration agreement, it shall appoint the
arbitrator and/or refer the parties to arbitration, as the
case may be. The amendment envisages that the judicial
authority shall not refer the parties to arbitration only if it
finds that there does not exist an arbitration agreement
or that it is null and void. If the judicial authority is of the
opinion that prima facie the arbitration agreement exists,
then it shall refer the dispute to arbitration, and leave the
existence of the arbitration agreement to be finally
determined by the arbitral tribunal. However, if the
judicial authority concludes that the agreement does not
exist, then the conclusion will be final and not prima
facie. The amendment also envisages that there shall be
a conclusive determination as to whether the arbitration
agreement is null and void. In the event that the judicial
authority refers the dispute to arbitration and/or appoints
an arbitrator, under sections 8 and 11 respectively, such
a decision will be final and non-appealable. An appeal
can be maintained under section 37 only in the event of
refusal to refer parties to arbitration, or refusal to appoint
an arbitrator.”
18. Pursuant to the Law Commission recommendations,
Section 11(6A) was introduced first by Ordinance and
then by the Amendment Act, 2015. The Statement of
Objects and Reasons which were appended to the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2015
which introduced the Amendment Act, 2015 read as
follows:
      “STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
                                                                 13

xxx xxx xxx
6. It is proposed to introduce the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2015, to replace the
Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance,
2015, which inter alia, provides for the following,
namely:-
  (i) to amend the definition of “Court” to provide that in
  the case of international commercial arbitrations, the
  Court should be the High Court;
  (ii) to ensure that an Indian Court can exercise
  jurisdiction to grant interim measures, etc., even where
  the seat of the arbitration is outside India;
  (iii) an application for appointment of an arbitrator shall
  be disposed of by the High Court or Supreme Court,
  as the case may be, as expeditiously as possible and
  an endeavour should be made to dispose of the matter
  within a period of sixty days;
  (iv) to provide that while considering any application
  for appointment of arbitrator, the High Court or the
  Supreme Court shall examine the existence of a prima
  facie arbitration agreement and not other issues;
  (v) to provide that the arbitral tribunal shall make its
  award within a period of twelve months from the date it
  enters upon the reference and that the parties may,
  however, extend such period up to six months, beyond
  which period any extension can only be granted by the
  Court, on sufficient cause;
  (vi) to provide that a model fee Schedule on the basis
  of which High Courts may frame rules for the purpose
  of determination of fees of arbitral tribunal, where a
  High Court appoints arbitrator in terms of section 11 of
  the Act;
  (vii) to provide that the parties to dispute may at any
                                                              14

        stage agree in writing that their dispute be resolved
        through fast track procedure and the award in such
        cases shall be made within a period of six months;
        (viii) to provide for neutrality of arbitrators, when a
        person is approached in connection with possible
        appointment as an arbitrator;
        (ix) to provide that application to challenge the award
        is to be disposed of by the Court within one year.
     7. The amendments proposed in the Bill will ensure that
     arbitration process becomes more user-friendly, cost
     effective and lead to expeditious disposal of cases.
     xxx xxx xxx”
     19. A reading of the Law Commission Report, together
     with the Statement of Objects and Reasons, shows that
     the Law Commission felt that the judgments in SBP &
     Co. (supra) and Boghara Polyfab (supra) required a
     relook, as a result of which, so far as Section 11 is
     concerned, the Supreme Court or, as the case may be,
     the High Court, while considering any application under
     Section 11(4) to 11(6) is to confine itself to the
     examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement
     and leave all other preliminary issues to be decided by
     the arbitrator.”
10)     This being the position, it is clear that the law prior to the
2015 Amendment that has been laid down by this Court, which
would have included going into whether accord and satisfaction
has taken place, has now been legislatively overruled. This being
the position, it is difficult to agree with the reasoning contained in
the aforesaid judgment as Section 11(6A) is confined to the
                                                                       15

examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement and is to
be understood in the narrow sense as has been laid down in the
judgment Duro Felguera, S.A. (supra) – see paras 48 & 59.
11)    We, therefore, overrule the judgment in United India
Insurance Company Limited (supra) as not having laid down the
correct law but dismiss this appeal for the reason given in para 3
above.
12)    Mr. Rohatgi now requests us for an extension of the status
quo order granted by the trial court for a period of one week from
today so that he may adopt other proceedings. This request is
granted.
                                 ………………........................... J.
                                 (ROHINTON FALI NARIMAN)
                                 ………………........................... J.
                                 (R. SUBHASH REDDY)
                                 ………………........................... J.
                                 (SURYA KANT)
New Delhi;
September 05, 2019.
                                                                      16


