                                                   1
                                                                         REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOS.5518­5523 Of 2017
      HON'BLE PUNJAB AND HARYANA
      HIGH COURT AT CHANDIGARH                             ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                VERSUS
      STATE OF PUNJAB AND ORS.                              ...RESPONDENT(S)
      WITH
      CIVIL APPEAL             NO. 10185­10187/2018 (DIARY NO.32341) OF 2017,
      CIVIL APPEAL              NO.10176 OF 2018 (ARISING OUT OF SLP(C) NO.16772
      OF 2017),
      CIVIL APPEAL             NO.5513 OF 2017,
      CIVIL APPEAL             NO.5509 OF 2017,
      CIVIL APPEAL             NO.5525 OF 2017,
      CIVIL APPEAL             NO.5510 OF 2017,
      CIVIL APPEAL             NO.5515­5517 OF 2017, AND
      CIVIL APPEAL             NO.5528­5529 OF 2017
                                            J U D G M E N T
      ASHOK BHUSHAN,J.
                       Delay condoned. Leave granted.
      2.               These appeals have been filed challenging the judgment
      dated 03.03.2017 of Division Bench of the High Court of Punjab
      and Haryana at Chandigarh allowing the Writ Petition No.1056
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2019.03.02
      of 2016 and other connected writ petitions.
10:58:16 IST
Reason:
      3.               The questions which have arisen for determination in this

                                   2
batch of appeals relate to inter se seniority dispute between
three streams of Punjab Superior Judicial Service, i.e.,
     (i)    the   officers      promoted       on    the      basis    of
merit­cum­seniority under 50% quota (hereinafter referred to
as “promotees”);
     (ii) the  direct   recruits     under   25%   quota    (hereinafter
referred to as “direct recruits”); and
     (iii)officers    promoted      on    the     basis     of   limited
departmental competitive examination under 25% quota (as it
then  existed)   (hereinafter     referred     to   as   “out   of   turn
promotees”).
4.   The members of Punjab Superior Judicial Service had filed
writ petition in the High court challenging the seniority list
dated 24.12.2007 issued by the High Court determining the
inter  se  seniority   of   the  members    of   the   Punjab   Superior
Judicial Service.
5.   The judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court has
been   questioned   by    Punjab     and   Haryana     High    Court   at
Chandigarh, members of Punjab Superior Judicial Service who
were direct recruits and Superior Judicial Officers who are
promotees   under  50%    quota.     Civil   Appeals     on   behalf   of
Kanwaljit Singh Bajwa and others and Jitender Kaur are the
appeals filed by direct recruits and other appeals are the

                                  3
appeals filed by the promotee officers under 50% quota.
6.   C.A.Nos.5518­5523 of 2017 filed by the High Court are
being treated as leading appeals, reference of pleadings of
which appeals shall be sufficient to decide this batch of
appeals.
Background Facts
7.   The Higher Judicial Service of the State of Punjab was
governed by a set of Rules, namely, Punjab Superior Judicial
Service Rules, 1963. Rule 8, as it existed initially, provided
that of the total number of cadre­posts, two­third shall be
manned by promotee officers and one­third by direct recruits.
8.   Rule  12  dealt   with  seniority  which  provided  that the
seniority,   inter   se,  of   the  substantive  members   of the
Service, whether direct recruits or promotee officers, shall
be determined with reference to the respective dates of their
confirmation. On 31.12.1976 Rule 12 was amended providing that
seniority, inter se, of the members of the Service, shall be
determined by the length of continuous service on a post in
the Service irrespective of the date of confirmation.
9.   On 28.01.1991, Rule 8(2) was amended providing that of
the total number of cadre posts, three­fourth shall be manned
by promotee Officers and one­fourth by direct recruits.
10. This Court in All India Judges' Association and others

                                  4
vs.   Union  of  India    and   others,    2002   (4)   SCC  247,   on
21.03.2002,   after  considering     Justice    Shetty   Commission's
report had issued various directions regarding recruitment to
the Higher Judicial Service in the cadre of District Judges.
The  directions   were   issued   by   this   Court   directing   that
recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service i.e. the cadre of
District Judges shall be from      three streams i.e.:
     “(1)(a) 50 per cent by promotion from amongst the
     Civil Judges (Senior Division) on the basis of
     principle of merit­cum­seniority and passing a
     suitability test;
     (b) 25 per cent by promotion strictly on the basis
     of merit through limited competitive examination of
     Civil Judges (Senior Division) having not less than
     five years qualifying service; and
     (c) 25 per cent of the posts shall be filled by
     direct   recruitment     from    amongst    the    eligible
     advocates on the basis of the written and viva voce
     test conducted by respective High Courts. ”
11. This Court further directed that appropriate rules shall
be  framed   by  the   High   Courts    as  early   as   possible   in
compliance of the aforesaid directions. The Punjab Superior
Judicial Service (First Amendment) Rules, 2004 were notified
on 15.01.2004 in compliance of judgment of this Court in           All
India   Judges'  Association    case    (supra).   It   appears   that
amendment made in Rules on 15.01.2004 did not fully serve the
purpose nor fully complied with this Court's directions made

                                   5
in   All India Judges' Association(supra), hence, a new set of
rules was framed, namely, the Punjab Superior Judicial Service
Rules, 2007 which were published in the Gazette on 03.09.2007.
The cadre strength of     Punjab Superior Judicial Service before
2007 comprised of 88 posts. The High Court on 14.10.2004 had
made 10 promotions as per unamended Rules on 10 vacancies
which   were  existing   since   prior   to  amendment  of  Rules  on
15.01.2004. On 31.08.2007, total cadre strength was 89, which
was   increased   to  107   as  on   11.10.2007.    The  process  for
recruitment of direct recruits under Rule 7(3)(c) of Rules,
2007   was  initiated   on   02.02.2008    with  the  publication  of
advertisement. The promotions under 50% quota on the basis of
merit­cum­seniority      was    affected      on   18.02.2008.    The
competitive    test    for    limited     departmental    competitive
examination   was   held   on  18.05.2008    for  which  process  was
initiated on 23.04.2008 by issuance of letter via e­mail. Full
Court   on  25.07.2008   approved    the  recommendations   both  for
direct recruitment and out of turn promotion, by two separate
letters i.e. letter No.628 dated 29.07.2008 the recommendation
of direct recruitment and by letter No.629 dated 29.07.2008
recommendation for out of turn promotion were sent to the
Government. The appointment letters in reference to limited
competitive examination were received earlier than those of

                                    6
direct   recruits.    On  14.08.2008,     Governor    of  Punjab   issued
Office Order whereby eight Officers were promoted under out of
turn   quota,   posting    with   regard    to   whom    was   issued   on
22.10.2008.   The   Governor    of  Punjab    had   issued    letter   for
direct recruits on 28.11.2008 with regard to whom posting
order   dated   08.12.2008    was  issued.     Fifteen    Officers    were
promoted under 50% quota, eight Officers were promoted under
out of turn promotion quota 25%. Twelve direct recruits were
appointed    vide    order   dated     08.12.2008.     The   process    of
recruitment of all the three streams was thus completed in the
same year and Officers of the three streams                 joined their
respective posts in the year 2008 itself although on different
dates. The promotees got joining first followed by out of turn
promotees and lastly by direct recruits. This Court in All
India Judges     Association and      Ors. vs. Union of India and
Ors., 2010 (15) SCC 170, reduced the out of turn promotion
quota   from   25%    to  10%   which    was   to   take    effect    from
01.01.2011. The High Court initiated the process of fixation
of inter se seniority of the officers of two streams in the
year   2014.   A   tentative    seniority    list    was   prepared    and
circulated by the Registrar of the High Court on 25.09.2014 to
the members of Superior Judicial Service. Various objections
to the list were filed including the objections by direct

                                  7
recruits as well as officers promoted under the out of turn
quota.   The  Judges'    Committee     submitted   a   report   after
considering   the    objections     recommending    that    tentative
seniority list determined does not require any modification or
alteration and the same may be finalised. The report of the
Committee   was  accepted    by  Full     Court  on   22.12.2015.   A
notification dated 24.12.2015 was issued publishing the inter
se  seniority   of  the   members    of  Punjab  Superior    Judicial
Service, promoted, appointed, absorbed in the year 2008. From
serial Nos.1 to 14 in the list were the promotee Officers,
from serial Nos.15 and 16 were direct recruits, from serial
Nos.17   to   24   were    promotee     officers   through    limited
departmental examination and from serial Nos.25 to 35 were
direct recruits.
12. Writ Petition No.1056 of 2016, was filed by             Kanwaljit
Singh Bajwa and two others praying for following reliefs:
     i) To issue an appropriate writ, order or direction
     especially a writ in the nature of certiorari for
     quashing    the    impugned      Seniority    List    dated
     24.12.2015 (Annexure P­1) issued by respondent No.2;
     ii) To issue a writ of Mandamus or any other
     suitable writ, order or direction, directing the
     respondent No.1 and 2 to redraw and reframe
     seniority list by showing the petitioners over and
     above the respondent Nos.3 to 5;
     iii) To say the operation of the impugned seniority
     list 24.12.2015(P­1) and stay the further promotion
     of the respondents in furtherance of the impugned

                                   8
     seniority list;
     iv) To any other writ, order or direction which this
     Hon'ble Court deem fit and proper keeping in view
     the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present
     case, in the interest of justice;
     v) To dispense with the issuance of advance notices
     to the respondents;
     vi) Exempt the petitioner from filing the certified
     & typed copies for the Annexures;
     vii) Award costs of the writ petition in favour of
     the petitioner and against the respondents.”
13. Writ Petition No.1209 of 2016 was filed by Jatinder Kaur,
direct   recruit,     challenging     the  seniority    list    dated
24.12.2015. Similarly Writ Petition No.1057 of 2016 was filed
by  Jatinder   Pal   Singh   Khurmi   and  others   challenging   the
seniority list. Writ Petition No.2335 of 2016 was filed by
Virinder Aggarwal & another,       who were out of turn promotees.
They  also  challenged    the   seniority  list   dated  24.12.2015.
Their  prayers   in   the  writ  petition   were  to  the  following
effect:
         “i) Issue an appropriate writ, order or
     direction in the nature of certiorari quashing the
     Tentative      Seniority     List    dated      25.09.2014
     (AnnexureP­1), the Report dated 11.08.2015 (Annexure
     P­4) and the decision of the Full Court dated
     22.12.2015 (Annexure P­5) and consequently directing
     the official respondents to frame a fresh seniority
     list of the Officers belonging to the Punjab
     Superior Judicial Service having been appointed in
     the year 2008 in accordance with law and specially

                                 9
     by implementing the roster and for the grant of all
     consequential    benefits    flowing     therefrom     viz.
     continuity of service, antedated promotions, arrears
     of pay, interest thereon etc.;
     ii) issue any other appropriate writ, order or
     direction, which this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and
     proper in the peculiar facts and circumstances of
     the case;
     iii) exempt the petitioners from service            of  the
     advance notices upon the respondents;
     iv) exempting the petitioners from            filing    the
     certified copies of the annexures;
     v) costs of      the   petition   be    awarded    to   the
     petitioner.”
14. Another Writ Petition No.1983 of 2016 was filed by Munish
Singal and two others who were direct recruits challenging
seniority  list   dated   24.12.2015.   In   the    writ    petitions
affected  parties   were   impleaded.    The   High   Court   through
Registrar filed written statement in Writ Petition No.1056 of
2016. Promotees also filed their written statement in Writ
Petition  No.1056   of   2016.  The   Division    Bench    heard  the
parties.  All  the  writ   petitions  were    decided   by  a  common
judgment. The Division Bench of the High Court in its judgment
had noticed the submission of the parties, the report of the
Committee. In paragraph 102 of the judgment the High Court has
observed that the Committee had framed eight issues. The eight
issues framed by the Committee as noticed in paragraph 102 are

                                  10
as follows:
     "(1) Whether the promotions dated 19.02.2008 made
     under Rule 7(3)(a) are liable to be termed as
     irregular or 'ad­hoc', and if so, to what effect ?
     (2) Whether the posts meant for the 'out­of­turn
     promotion'   under    Rule     7(3)(b)   which    remained
     unfilled as    no competitive examination took place
     from the year 2004 to 2008, can be included in
     'promotion quota' under Rule 7(3)(a), and if not, to
     which quota such posts shall stand diverted ?
     (3) Whether promotions made on 19.2.2008 under Rule
     7(3)(a) were in excess to the 'promotion quota', and
     if so, what is the effect on seniority of such
     excess promotions?
     (4) Whether promoted officers irrespective of Rule
     7(3)(a) or (b) are entitled to the 'weightage' of
     their service rendered in PCS (Judicial Branch)
     towards seniority in Superior Judicial Service in
     view of second proviso to Rule 23 of 2007 Rules ?
     (5) Whether the direct recruits under Rule 7(3)(c)
     could be assigned seniority from the date their
     names were recommended by the High Court fro
     appointment ?
     (6) Whether officers absorbed from Fast Track
     Courts are liable to be treated as 'ex gratia
     appointees', and if so, what is the effect in law
     and   what    would    be    their    'deemed    date    of
     appointment'?
     (7) Whether Roster (Appendix 'B') can be read into
     and applied to the Rule of seniority ?
     (8) Whether Mr. Arunvir Vashista is entitled to          be
     absorbed as ADJ w.e.f. 24.6.2008 or he be placed         at
     Sr.No.1 amongst the out­of­turn promotees in view        of
     para 146(13) of the judgment in Brij Mohan Lal­II        ?”
15. The   Division   Bench   further   noticed   that   in  the   writ
petition    arguments    were    addressed    relating     to    Issue

                                  11
Nos.1,2,3,5 and 7. The High Court held that promotees were in
excess, hence, promotions made shall be treated in excess of
quota  and  they   shall  take   seniority   on the   date  post  is
available in their quota. The High Court further held that the
date of recommendation of direct recruits cannot be treated
the date for the purpose of seniority. On applicability of
roster   in   determination    of    seniority,   the   High   Court
categorically    held   that   roster    shall  be   applicable   in
determining the seniority as per Rules, 2007. The vacancies
under  Rule  7(1)(b)   shall  shift    to  Rule 7(1)(a)   only  with
effect from 01.01.2011. The writ petitions were allowed and
operative portion of judgment is contained in paragraph 208
which is to the following effect:
     "208. For the reasons mentioned above, the writ
     petitions are allowed. The impugned seniority list
     dated 24.12.2015 is set aside. It is held that:
          (i) promotion of officers under Rule 7(3)(a)
          [Regular promotion] of the 2007 Punjab Rules is
          held to be beyond quota, hence, ad hoc. They
          will not be entitled to get benefit of that
          service for the purpose of seniority;
          (ii) direct recruits shall not be entitled to be
          considered as members of the cadre from the
          date of their recommendation by the High Court
          to the State, for appointment;
          (iii) as a consequence, the officers promoted
          under Rule 7(3)(a) of the 2007 Punjab Rules
          shall be placed at the bottom of the seniority
          after the direct recruits.

                               12
     The seniority list be re­cast accordingly.”
16. Aggrieved by the judgment of the Division Bench of the
High Court, the High Court has filed Civil Appeal Nos.5518­23
of 2017.
17. Civil Appeals of Kanwaljit Singh Bajwa and others and
Civil Appeal of Jatinder Kaur, two Civil Appeals by direct
recruits, other Civil Appeals have been filed by promotee
Officers whose promotions were treated to be ad hoc and are
directed to be placed at the bottom of the seniority. Out of
turn promotees had not challenged the judgment, since, the
judgment of the High court was substantially in their favour.
SUBMISSIONS
18. Shri   Raju  Ramachandran  and  Shri  Ajit  Sinha,  learned
senior counsel have appeared for the High Court. Shri Dushyant
Dave and Shri K.V. Viswanathan, learned senior counsel have
appeared for promotees. Shri P.S. Patwalia, learned senior
counsel, has appeared for out of turn promotees. Shri Nidhesh
Gupta,   learned  senior  counsel   has  appeared   for  direct
recruits. In addition, we have also heard several counsel in
this batch of appeals appearing for different parties.
19. Shri Raju Ramachandran, learned senior counsel appearing
for the High Court submits that seniority list prepared by the

                                13
High Court pursuant to the acceptance of Judges' Committee
Report by Full Court was in accordance with Rules, 2007 and
promotees had    first joined the post and when the promotees
joined post of District Judge cadre, neither direct recruits
nor out of turn promotees were born in the cadre.
20. Shri Dushyant Dave, learned senior counsel appearing for
regular promotees submits that they have completed five years
of service in the year 2000 but neither any Rules were framed
nor any examination was held. When the quota is to be followed
due to the judgment of this Court, the promotees cannot be
pushed down. No examination was held for effecting promotion
under Rule 7(3)(b) hence promotees under Rule 7(3)(a) were
entitled to have the quota meant for Rule 7(3)(b), continuous
officiation   in   service  is  the   Rule  to   be  followed  for
determination   of   seniority,  Full  Court   and  Administrative
Committee has taken correct view of the matter. The officers
desirous to compete, ought to have approached the High court
praying that examination to be held. The High Court did not
hold any suitability test for promotion of the officers under
Rule 7(3)(a) for which promotees cannot be made to suffer. The
challenge to promotion cannot be allowed to be raised at the
time of determination of seniority. The roster provided in
Appendix B to the Rules, 2007 is only for the purpose of

                                  14
recruitment    and   has   no application    for   determination    of
seniority. Had the competitive examination for out of turn
promotees held in      February, 2008, promotees would have also
appeared and would have succeeded in the examination. The
appointment having not made in time, quota rule is broken
down. The promotees having been promoted on regular basis even
if they are in excess of quota, their services have to be
considered, the appointment of promotees is not an ad hoc
appointment, hence, entire service rendered by promotees is to
be reckoned for seniority.
21. Shri    K.V.    Viswanathan   submits   that    assumption    that
promotees are in excess of their quota is not correct. Rules,
2004  and    roster    introduced    by  Rules,   2007   has   to   be
prospective. Computation has to be on 43 vacancies which were
existing   vacancies     and  not    cadre  strength    of   107.   In
accordance with 43 vacancies the quota for promotees will be
22, out of turn promotees will be 10 and direct recruits will
be 11. The roster has no application for determination for
seniority. Assuming that Appendix B applies, it is for quota
and since examination has not been held in time the quota has
broken down.
22. Shri P.S. Patwalia appearing for out of turn promotees
submits   that    whole   argument    made  by   the   promotees    is

                                15
misconceived. The diversion of quota under Rule 7(3)(b) to
7(3)(a)  shall   take  place  only  when  test   is   held  and  no
suitable candidate is available for appointment under Rule
7(3)(b). The quota applied to the post in service. The High
Court has wrongly applied the quota to the vacancies. 25%
quota  was   introduced  as  incentive   to   improve   meritorious
officers. On date of selection, 53 were promotees who were in
excess to their quota, 14 were filled by direct recruits and
there were no vacancies for the regular promotees. There being
no conscious decision of diversion of quota under Rule 7(3)(b)
to 7(3)(a), no benefit can be claimed by the promotees. The
clubbing of vacancies under Rule 7(3)(a) and 7(3)(b) is not
permissible. The out of turn promotees have never challenged
the merit promotion.
23. Shri Patwalia submits that roster is not applicable to
the seniority. When the quota is worked out in the cadre
strength   there  is  no  vacancy  under    Rule  7(3)(a)   but  15
promotions   have  been  affected.  Their   promotion   is  not  in
accordance with law. Whether they would have taken test or not
is realm of conjecture, if we construe Rule 23 of Rules, 2007
and Punjab Civil Services (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1994
harmoniously the seniority has to be on the strength of length
of service. Referring to Haryana Service Rules, Shri Patwalia

                                  16
contends that in Haryana Service Rules roster has been made as
part of seniority whereas in Punjab Service Rules it is not
so. He submits that the High Court has made very equitable
decision which needs no interference.
24. Shri Nidhesh Gupta appearing for direct recruits submits
that  this   Court  in     All   India Judges'  Association   case
(supra) has introduced roster in seniority for the purposes to
minimise inter se dispute of seniority in the Higher Judicial
Service. The    judgment of    this Court in   All India Judges'
Association case has to be given effect by the High Court.
Rules, 2007 has to be interpreted in the light of the judgment
of this Court in      All India Judges' Association case, which
directions resulted in Amendment Rules, 2004 and Rules, 2007.
Out of turn promotees in their writ petitions have prayed for
applying the roster for determination of seniority. The High
Court although in the body of judgment held that roster is
applicable in seniority but in operative portion the said
conclusion is not reflected which had rendered the judgment of
the High Court erroneous. The roster having been accepted as
applicable for purposes of seniority, seniority list has to be
drawn  as   per   roster.   It   is  submitted  that  process   of
recruitment initiated on 2nd February, 2008 whereas promotions
and  out  of  turn   promotions   were  held thereafter.    It  is

                                 17
submitted that recommendations sent to the Government on the
same  day  but  appointment   letter    for   direct  recruits   were
received later which will have no effect on the seniority that
is the direct recruits which have to be made as per the
roster. Rule 7(4) read with Appendix B of Rules, 2007 makes it
clear that appointment has to be made as per roster which
clearly means that seniority will follow the appointment. In
the writ petition filed before the High Court, out of turn
promotees  have    categorically    taken   stand   that  roster   is
relevant  for   the   purpose  of   seniority.    The  out   of  turn
promotees cannot be allowed to take contrary stand before this
Hon'ble Court. The fortuitous circumstances i.e. when letter
of appointments were issued cannot be basis for seniority.
Accepting   the   contention  that     length   of   service   should
determine the seniority and not the roster, shall be defeating
the All India Judges Association's judgment of this Court as
well as Rules, 2007. Rules, 2007 specially Rule 7, Rule 12,
Rule 23 read with Appendix B have to be construed in a manner
so to advance the object of Rules and should be interpreted in
a manner so that      no prejudice is caused to any member of
Service.
25. Learned counsel for the parties have also referred to
various judgments of this Court which shall be referred to

                                   18
while considering the submissions in detail.
DISCUSSION
26. The subordinate judiciary of this Country is back bone of
our judicial system. It is the subordinate judiciary which
comes in contact with the common man          in administration of
justice. This Court in       All India Judges' Association (supra)
has noticed that the weight on the judicial system essentially
rests on the subordinate judiciary. In paragraph 27 following
was observed:
          “27....The      subordinate    judiciary     is    the
     foundation of the edifice of the judicial system. It
     is,    therefore,      imperative,    like    any     other
     foundation, that it should become as strong as
     possible.    The    weight    on  the   judicial     system
     essentially rests on the subordinate judiciary.....”
27. The    enormous    responsibility    which  is   shouldered    by
subordinate    judiciary     demands  respectable    conditions    of
service    and   fulfillment     of   the   due   aspirations     and
expectations of the officers manning the judicial system. The
seniority in service plays      a very important and vital role in
service   career    of    an   incumbent.   Promotions,     different
perquisites and benefits follow seniority. It is, thus, very
important that due claims of seniority of members of Superior
Judicial Service are recognised and implemented by all those
on  whose   shoulder   the   responsibility  of  determination    and

                                  19
implementation   lies.   This Court by     its direction in       All
India Judges' Association case (supra) has required uniform
procedure  for   recruitment    and  rules   for  determination    of
seniority with the object of achieving a uniformity and a
certainty to minimise the inter se seniority dispute as far as
possible. Thus, before we proceed to consider the respective
submissions of the parties it is pertinent to refer           to the
judgment of this Court in      All India Judges' Association case
which is foundation of Service Rules, 2007 and throws light on
different aspects of higher judicial service.
28. As noticed above, 1963 Rules contained provisions for
filling the post of Superior Judicial Service only by two
methods,  by   promotion   from   Punjab   Service   and  by  direct
recruitment.   Initially    the   total   number   of   cadre   posts
two­third   were   manned   by  promotion    and  one­third   direct
recruits which was changed on 28.1.1991 as three­fourth by
promotions and one­fourth by direct recruits.
29. In   different    States   there  were    different   Rules   for
recruitment   in  Judicial   Service.   Justice  Shetty   Commission
took up the whole breadth and length of Judicial Service, its
service conditions, perks and all aspects of the matter. On
21.03.1996 pursuant to direction of this Court, Government of
India by a Resolution constituted a First Judicial Commission

                               20
under  the  Justice  Shetty.   Justice    Shetty   Commission  has
submitted its report on 11.11.1999 touching various aspects of
Judicial Service. State and Union Territories were sent report
asking their response. One of the questions which fell for
consideration before the Justice Shetty Commission was method
of recruitment to the Higher Judicial Service. In        All India
Judges' Association case (supra) this Court held that it is
imperative  for  the  Judicial    Officer   to   keep  abreast  of
knowledge of law. This Court also held that there has to be
certain minimum standard, objectively adjudged, for officers
who are to enter the Higher Judicial Service as Additional
District Judges and District Judges. In paragraph 27 of the
judgment following was laid down:
      “27....It is imperative that they keep abreast of
     knowledge of law and the latest pronouncements, and
     it is for this reason that the Shetty Commission has
     recommended the establishment of a judicial academy
     which is very necessary. At the same time, we are of
     the opinion that there has to be certain minimum
     standards, objectively adjudged, for officers who
     are to enter the higher judicial service as
     Additional District Judges and District Judges.
     While we agree with the Shetty Commission that the
     recruitment to the higher judicial service i.e., the
     District Judge cadre from amongst the advocates
     should be 25 per cent and the process of recruitment
     is to be by a competitive examination, both written
     and viva voce, we are of the opinion that there
     should be an objective method of testing the
     suitability of the subordinate judicial officers for
     promotion   to   the    higher     judicial     service.
     Furthermore, there should also be an incentive
     amongst the relatively junior and other officers to

                               21
     improve and to compete with each other so as to
     excel and get quicker promotion. In this way, we
     expect that the caliber of the members of the higher
     judicial service will further improve. In order to
     achieve this, while the ratio of 75 per cent
     appointment by promotion and 25 per cent by direct
     recruitment to the higher judicial service is
     maintained, we are, however, of the opinion that
     there should be two methods as far as appointment by
     promotion is concerned : 50 per cent of the total
     post in the higher judicial services must be filled
     by   promotion   on   the  basis   of   principle   of
     merit­cum­seniority. For this purpose, the High
     Courts should devise and evolve a test in order to
     ascertain and examine the legal knowledge of those
     candidates and to assess their continued efficiency
     with adequate knowledge of case law. The remaining
     25 per cent of the posts in the service shall be
     filled by promotion strictly on the basis of merit
     through   the    limited   departmental    competitive
     examination for which the qualifying service as a
     Civil Judge (senior division) should be not less
     than five years. The High Courts will have to frame
     a rule in this regard. ”
30. In paragraph 28 directions were issued by this Court to
the following effect:
     “28. As a result of the aforesaid, to recapitulate,
     we direct that recruitment to the High Judicial
     Service i.e. the cadre of District Judges will be:
          (1)(a) 50 per cent by promotion from amongst
          the Civil Judges (Senior Division) on the basis
          of principle of merit­cum­seniority and passing
          a suitability test;
          (b) 25 per cent by promotion strictly on the
          basis of merit through limited competitive
          examination of Civil Judges (Senior Division)
          having not less than five years qualifying
          service; and
          (c) 25 per cent of the posts shall be filled by

                                 22
          direct recruitment from amongst the eligible
          advocates on the basis of the written and viva
          voce test conducted by respective High Courts.
         (2) Appropriate rules shall be framed as above
     by the High Courts as early as possible.”
31. This    Court   has   noticed    the  serious   discontentment
regarding inter se seniority of members of Higher Judicial
Service.   This   Court   observed   that  the  least   amount  of
litigation   in the   country  is   there where   quota system  in
recruitment exists and where a roster system is followed.
Following was laid down in paragraph 29:
         “29. Experience has shown that there has been a
     constant discontentment amongst the members of the
     higher judicial service in regard to their seniority
     in service. For over three decades, large number of
     cases have been instituted in order to decide the
     relative seniority from the officers recruited from
     the two different sources, namely, promotees and
     direct recruits. As a result of the decision today,
     there will, in a way, be three ways of recruitment
     to higher judicial service. The quota for promotion
     which we have prescribed is 50 percent by following
     the   principle    "merit­cum­seniority"    25   percent
     strictly    on    merit    by    limited   departmental
     competitive examination and 25 per cent by direct
     recruitment. Experience has also shown that the
     least amount of litigation in the country, where
     quota system in recruitment exists, in so far as
     seniority is concerned, is where a roster system is
     followed. For example, there is, as per the rules of
     the Central Government, a 40­point roster which has
     been prescribed which deals with the quotas for
     Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Hardly, if
     ever, there has been a litigation amongst the
     members of the service after their recruitment as
     per the quotas, the seniority is fixed by the roster
     points and irrespective of the fact as to when a

                               23
     person is recruited. When roster system is followed,
     there is no question of any dispute arising. The
     40­point roster has been considered and approved by
     this Court in R.K. Sabharwal and Ors. v. State of
     Punjab[1995]2 SCC 745. One of the methods of
     avoiding any litigation and bringing about certainty
     in this regard is by specifying quotas in relation
     to posts and not in relation to the vacancies. This
     is the basic principle on the basis of which the
     40­point roster works. We direct the High Courts to
     suitably amend and promulgate seniority rules on the
     basis of the roster principle as approved by this
     Court in R.K. Sabharwal's case (supra) as early as
     possible. We hope that as a result thereof, there
     would be no further dispute in the fixation of
     seniority. It is obvious that this system can only
     apply prospectively except where under the relevant
     rules seniority is to be determined on the basis of
     quota and rotational system. The existing relative
     seniority of the members of the higher judicial
     service has to be protected but the roster has to be
     evolved for the future. Appropriate rules and
     methods will be adopted by the High Courts and
     approved by the States, wherever necessary by
     31­3­2003. ”
32. In pursuance of judgment of this Court dated 21.03.2002
Rules, 1963 were amended in 2004 by Punjab Superior Judicial
Service (First Amendment) Rules, 2004 where for existing Rules
following Rules have been substituted:
     "8. Recruitment to Service.­ Recruitments to       the
     Service shall be made in the following manner:­
          (a) fifty per cent by promotion from amongst
          the Civil Judges (Senior Division) on the basis
          of    merit­cum­seniority     and    passing    a
          suitability test;
          (b) twenty five per cent by promotion strictly
          on   the   basis  of    merit   through   limited

                               24
          departmental competitive examination of Civil
          Judges (Senior Division) having not less than
          five years qualifying service;
          (c) twenty five per cent by direct recruitment
          from amongst the eligible Advocates by holding
          a test consisting of written examination of 200
          marks and viva voce test of 50 marks to be
          conducted by the High Court”.
33. Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 2007 were framed
and notified in Gazette on 3rd September, 2007. Rule 7 dealt
with method of appointment which is to the following effect:
         “7.    Method   of   appointment.   —   (1)   The
     appointment to the Service by promotion shall be
     made from amongst the members of the Punjab Civil
     Service(Judicial Branch), by the Governor on the
     recommendations of the High Court.
     (2) The direct appointment to the Service shall be
     made by the Governor on the recommendations of the
     High Court from amongst the eligible advocates on
     the basis of the written test and viva­voce
     conducted by the High Court.
     (3) Appointment to the Service shall be made in the
     following manner :­
          (a) fifty per cent by promotion from amongst
          the Civil Judges (Senior Division), on the
          basis of merit­cum­seniority and passing of a
          suitability test ;
          (b) twenty­five per cent by promotion on the
          basis of merit through departmental competitive
          examination of Civil Judges (Senior Division)
          having not less than five years qualifying
          Service as Civil Judge (Senior Division); and
          (c) twenty­five per cent of the posts shall be
          filled by direct appointment from amongst the
          eligible advocates on the basis of the written

                               25
          test and viva­voce, as conducted by the High
          Court.
     Explanation. — For the purposes of clauses (a) and
     (b), it is clarified that the qualifying service for
     promotion should be either on the post of Civil
     Judge(Senior Division) or Chief Judicial Magistrate
     or    Additional   Civil     Judge(Senior    Division)
     separately or by clubbing the service on any of the
     said posts.
     (4) These posts shall be filled in accordance with
     the Roster attached as Appendix­B.”
34. Rule 12 dealt with seniority in the following manner:
         “12.Seniority.—(1)The original seniority of the
     promotee officers promoted from amongst the members
     of the Punjab Civil Services (Judicial Branch),
     shall not be disturbed.
     (2) The inter se seniority of the out­of­turn
     promoted officers shall be in the order of merit as
     is determined by the High Court.
     (3) The inter se seniority of the direct appointees
     shall be on the basis of merit as is determined by
     the High Court :
     Provided further that an officer, who is promoted
     on ad hoc basis on a vacant post, belonging to the
     out­of­turn promotee officers or direct appointees,
     as the case may be, shall not have any right on the
     said post and such officer shall not be allowed to
     claim addition of the period of such ad hoc service
     towards the Service for the purpose of seniority.”
35. Rule   23  dealt  with  application   of  the  Punjab   Civil
Services (General and Common Conditions of Service) Rules,
1994 in respect of the matters, which are not specifically
provided in these rules. Rule 23 is as follows:

                              26
         “23. Application of the Punjab Civil Services
         (General and Common Conditions of Service
         Rules, 1994. — (1) In respect of the matters,
         which are not specifically provided in these
         rules, the members of the Service shall be
         governed by the Punjab Civil Services (General
         and Common Conditions of Service) Rules, 1994,
         as amended from time to time:
         Provided that the said rules of 1994 shall not
         affect the provisions as contained in rules 5,
         7, 12, 13, 19, 20 and 21 of these rules :
         Provided further that the conditions of service
         as determined by the National Judicial Pay
         Commission shall have an over riding effect.
         (2) The Punjab Civil Services (General and
         Commons Conditions of Service) Rules, 1994, at
         present, in force are contained in Appendix
         `E'.”
36. Appendix 'B' provided for roster as referred to in Rules,
2007.
37. As noticed above in the present matter recruitments for
all the three streams as enumerated in Rule 7(3)(a), (b) and
(c) were completed in 2008 and all incumbent also joined their
post in 2008. The dispute is regarding inter se seniority of
above three streams. From the submissions of learned counsel
for the parties and pleadings on record following are main
issues which have arisen for consideration in this batch of
appeals:
         (1) Whether promotees promoted under Rule 7(3)(a),

                               27
     15 in numbers who were promoted and joined their post in
     February, 2008 were: (a) in excess to their quota, (b)
     their   appointment   has  to  be   treated  as   ad  hoc
     appointment, (c) they have to be placed at the bottom of
     seniority.
          (2) Whether   appointment to   members  of  Superior
     Judicial Service belonging to all three streams have to
     be made on the basis of roster as per Rule 7(4) read with
     Appendix B of the Rules, 2007.
          (3) Whether for determination of inter se seniority
     belonging to all the three streams has to be based on the
     basis of roster in pursuance of Rule 7 read with Appendix
     B.
          (4) How the inter se seniority of Fast Track Judges
     is to be determined who were earlier working as Fast
     Track Judges and have been absorbed and taken in regular
     cadre in different stream under Rule 7(3)(a), (b) and
     (c).
     (5) Reliefs, if any.
Issue No.1:
Whether promotees are in excess of their quota?
38. The High Court in its impugned judgment has noticed the
cadre strength of Punjab Superior Judicial Service as 107 on

                                 28
10.11.2007.     The  Promotion   quota   under   Rule  7(3)(a)  was
determined as 53 and actual working having been found as 58.
High Court noticed that 05 officers were working in excess.
25 per cent quota under Rule 7(3)(b) was determined as 27,
which was found to be vacant.         Direct recruits were also
determined as 21 excluding the officers in position.       14 posts
were advertised for direct recruitment.         One of the issues
raised is as to whether for determination of the quota cadre
strength has to be looked into or quota has to be determined
on the basis of vacancies by bifurcating vacancies as per
respective quota.    The issue is no more res integra.       In All
India Judges Case (supra), this Court in Para 29 has held “One
of the methods of avoiding any litigation and bringing about
certainty in this regard is by specifying quotas in relation
to posts and not in relation to the vacancies”. A Three Judge
Bench of this Court in Srikant Roy and Others Vs. State of
Jharkhand  and   Others,  (2017)    1 SCC  457   while  determining
question  of   number   of  vacancies    in  respect    of  limited
competitive examination of Jharkhand as in Jharkhand Superior
Judicial  Service   has  held  that   “cadre   strength  is  always
measured by the number of posts comprising the cadre and the
percentage of quota has to be worked out in relation to number
of posts which form the cadre and has no relevance to the

                               29
vacancy  that  would  occur.      Following  was  laid  down  in
Paragraph 24:­
    “24. The High Court has overlooked the distinction
    between “post” and “vacancy”. If the requisite posts
    were already exhausted by the direct recruits against
    the earmarked quota for direct recruitment, merely
    because some vacancies occur, it would not be open to
    the aspiring candidates against the direct recruit
    quota to challenge the selection process commenced
    for the in­service judicial officers by promotion
    through limited competitive examination. The cadre
    strength is always measured by the number of posts
    comprising the cadre. The right to be considered for
    appointment can only be claimed in respect of a post
    in the given cadre. The percentage of quota has to be
    worked out in relation to number of posts which form
    the cadre and has no relevance to the vacancy that
    would occur…………………………….”
39.  The High Court Committee determined the vacancies for all
the three streams for 2008 recruitment on the basis of cadre
strength of 107.   Working strength before 2008 selection was
58 promotees, 0 out of turn promotion and 6 direct recruits.
Thus, 64 officers were in position and there were 43 vacancies
for 2008 recruitment.    High Court determined vacancies for
Rule 7(3)(a) as 15, for Rule 7(3)(b) as 8 and 14 for direct
recruitment.   In the impugned judgment, the High Court has
taken a view that since 50 per cent of 107 cadre strength
comes as 53, 5 promotee officers were in excess, since working
strength before 2008 selection was 58.     The above calculation
has been arrived by determining 50 per cent of 107.      Whether

                                    30
any   fallacy    is    committed   by   the    High   Court   in   above
determination     is   to  be   examined.       On  face   of   it,   the
determination on mathematical calculation, i.e. taking 50 per
cent   of  cadre   strength   for   promotees    come  to   53.    Thus,
whether 5 officers, who were found in excess were in excess of
their quota is one part of question and the other part of
question would be that what number of vacancies have to be
earmarked for out of turn promotees under Rule 7(3)(b).                We
have already noticed that from 28.01.1991, Rule 8 was amended
providing for three­fourth of the cadre to be filled up by
promotee officers and one­fourth by direct recruits.                  The
above position continues till Rules were amended in 2004 under
the direction of this court in All India Judges case (supra).
40.   For the first time by amending Punjab Superior Judicial
Service Rules on 15.01.2004, the promotion quota under Rule 8
was fixed as 50 per cent, 25 per cent for limited departmental
competitive examination and         as far as for direct recruits,
earlier 25 per cent was maintained.         Thus, the issue was only
with    regard   to    quota   for    promotion    on   the   basis    of
merit­cum­seniority and of out of turn promotees.            This Court
in  All   India   Judges   case   (supra)   in   Para  29  has   clearly
directed that the system which was directed to be put in place
by   this   Court    vide  Paras    27,  28   and   29   was  to    apply

                                 31
prospectively.   This Court had directed that appropriate rules
and methods will be adopted by the High Courts and approved by
the States, wherever necessary by 31st March, 2003.           Upto
2004,   the    quota    for    promotion   on    the    basis   of
merit­cum­seniority was 75 per cent, the cadre strength as on
13.09.2007 was 89, which was increased on 10.11.2007 as 107.
After the amendment of Rules on 15.01.2004, promotion of 10
officers were made.    It is mentioned in the Civil Appeal of
the High Court that cadre strength of Punjab Superior Judicial
Service before 2004 was 88.     Thus, in the year 2004, when the
cadre strength was 88, 75 per cent posts were to be manned by
promotees under merit­cum­seniority, i.e. 66 were to be manned
by promotee officers.    The judgment of this Court in All India
Judges case (supra) being prospective, the ratio of officers
as  existing  before   unamended    rules can  not   be  adversely
affected.  A promotee before the amendment of Rules, 2004, who
was well within their quota, suddenly cannot go out of their
quota and become an excess merely on the strength of amendment
of Rules, which are prospective in nature.        For determining
the quota, the cadre strength, which existed prior to amended
rules and subsequent to the amended rules have to be treated
differently.   Promotees quota, which was 75 per cent prior to
2004 Rules makes 66 posts in their quota as before amendment

                               32
dated 15.01.2004, when the cadre strength has been increased
from 89 to 107, 18 posts have to be further added to the
cadre.   This increase having been made after the amendment of
the Rules dated 15.01.2004, on this cadre strength, the Rules
as amended will be applied for bifurcation of quota.      On 18
newly created posts, 50 percent comes to 9, for out of turn
promotees 4.5 and for direct recruits 4.5.       Thus promotee
officers on or after the increase of the cadre could have been
66+9 i.e. 75.    In the appeal filed by the High Court, it is
also indicated that 10 promotees were affected in October,
2004 under 50 per cent quota of merit­cum­seniority.        The
rules providing 25 per cent quota for out of turn promotion
being in place, at­least few vacancies ought to have been
given to the out of turn promotees.    There is no details of
any further promotion or appointment made after 2004 to 2008.
The out of turn promotion quota having been culled out only as
per  the  judgment  of  this Court  in All  India  Judges  case
(supra), which was to be required in the Rules by the State,
the said quota will come into existence only prospectively.
An out of turn promotee cannot claim that they should be given
25 per cent posts of the cadre strength right from day one.
It is true that quota has to be determined on the basis of
cadre strength but determination of the cadre strength has to

                                  33
be made taking into consideration that rules amended w.e.f.
15.01.2004 were prospective in nature and cannot impair or
affect any right, which accrued to the member of judicial
service prior to the amendment of the Rules.
41.  We, thus, do not find any patent error in the calculation
of the vacancy by the High court in the administrative side
and consequently the recruitment made from three different
streams  was   well   within  such   determination  and  cannot  be
faulted.   The promotion of officers under Rule 7(3)(a) was in
accordance with the rules and there is no question of treating
the promotion to be adhoc promotion nor they can be pushed to
the bottom of seniority.     The new set of rules, the new scheme
of recruitment, new rules of determination of seniority as
brought in place by 2007 Rules, its implementation has to be
done  with  care   so   as  not   to  defeat  any  existing  right.
Mechanical   application   of   the  rules,  which  may  result  to
unjust result has to be avoided to advance the scheme of the
new rules and the object which were delineated by this Court
in All India Judges case (supra).        While allocating posts to
be filled by different streams, cadre strength, officers of
particular stream in position, quota of each stream has to be
kept  in  mind.     The  vacancies   existing  for  recruitment  in
particular year has not to be mechanically divided at the

                                    34
ratio of 50, 25 and 25 per cent.
Issue Nos. 2 and 3:
Whether appointment to members of Superior Judicial Service
belonging to all three streams have to be made on the basis of
roster as per Rule 7(4) read with Appendix B of the Rules,
2007? and
Whether for determination of inter se seniority belonging to
all the three streams has to be based on the basis of roster
in pursuance of Rule 7 read with Appendix B?
42.    One   of  the   major   area    of  difference    in  submissions
advanced   by   learned   counsel     appearing    for   the  promotees,
direct   recruits    and   out   of    turn   promotees    is   regarding
applicability of roster for determination of seniority.             In so
far the stand of out of turn promotees is concerned, although
before the High Court in its pleadings and submissions, out of
turn   promotees    prayed    for    implementation      of   roster   in
seniority but in this Court they have taken a somersault and
are  now   contending    that   the    roster   is  not   applicable   in
seniority.
43.   Rota and quota in service jurisprudence is well known
concept, which finds reflected in large number of service
rules of different services.            Quota between promotees and
directs were throughout present in 1963 Rules, which has been
further   amplified   in   2007   Rules.    This   Court  in   All  India
Judges case (supra) has highlighted the importance and the

                               35
usefulness of roster system.   In Para 29, it was held:
    “Experience has also shown that the least amount of
    litigation in the country, where quota system in
    recruitment   exists,   insofar    as   seniority    is
    concerned, is where a roster system is followed”.
    For example, there is, as per the rules of the
    Central Government, a 40­point roster which has been
    prescribed which deals with the quotas for Scheduled
    Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Hardly, if ever, there
    has been a litigation amongst the members of the
    service after their recruitment as per the quotas,
    the seniority is fixed by the roster points and
    irrespective of the fact as to when a person is
    recruited. When roster system is followed, there is
    no question of any dispute arising. The 40­point
    roster has been considered and approved by this Court
    in R.K. Sabharwal v. State of Punjab, (1995) 2 SCC
    745.”
44.   The Rules, 2007 has been amended by direction of this
Court in in All India Judges case (supra).     Now, coming back
to the Rules, 2007, there are two rules, which need to be
interpreted to find out real purpose and intent of 2007 Rules.
Rule 7 as noted above provides for method of recruitment,
sub­rule(3) provides for appointment to the service shall be
made   50   per   cent   by   promotion   on    the   basis  of
merit­cum­seniority, 25 per cent by promotion on the basis of
merit through departmental competitive examination of Civil
Judges (Senior Division) and 25 percent of posts shall be
filled  by  direct  recruitment.    Sub­clause   (4),  which is
relevant provides “these posts shall be filled in accordance
with the Roster attached as Appendix­B”.    Part of Appendix­B,

                               36
which is relevant for the present case is as follows (only
part is quoted):­
                          “APPENDIX ‘B’
                   [See sub­rule(4) of rule 7]
                              ROSTER
            ROSTER INDICATING THE MODE OF RECRUITMENT
    Serial          Source               Rule
      No.
      1.   Officer Promoted on the        7(3)(a)
           basis of
           seniority­cum­suitability
      2.   Officer promoted on the        7(3)(a)
           basis of
           seniority­cum­suitability
      3.   Direct Recruit from the Bar    7(3)(c)
      4.   Officer promoted through       7(3)(b)
           limited competitive
           examination
      5.   Officer promoted on the        7(3)(a)
           basis of
           seniority­cum­suitability
                  Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
      89.  Officer promoted on the        7(3)(a)
           basis of
           seniority­cum­suitability.
45.  Sub­rule (4) uses the phrase “the posts shall be filled”.
The  word  “filled”  means  appointment  on   the post.    The
submission of the learned counsel for the promotees is that
sub­rule(4) read with Appendix­B at best can be read that
roster is to be followed in recruitment only and not for
determination of seniority.  When an order for filling up of a
post is provided in Appendix­B, the purpose and object is that
officers of different streams should hold the posts in the

                                 37
sequence, which is provided in Appendix­B.      The recruitment to
the  different   streams   consists   of  different  and  separate
processes, few processes may take lesser time like effecting
promotion under Rule 7(3)(a) whereas few processes like direct
recruitment under 7(3)(c) takes greater time.          For direct
recruits, which is an All India Competitive Written Test,
large  number   of  candidates   participate   and  evaluation  of
answer sheets and holding viva­voce takes sufficient time.
The object as incapsulated by this Court in All India Judges
case (supra) in carrying recruitment by roster was with the
object of eliminating disputes pertaining to determination of
seniority.   The Rule 7(4) and Appendix­B has to be read in a
manner so as to advance the object of the Rules.         When this
court  directed   for  adopting   roster  system  for  determining
seniority, Rules, 2007 cannot be interpreted in a manner which
may violate the direction of this Court.       Article 141 of the
Constitution provides that law declared by the Supreme Court
shall be binding on all courts and authorities.            In this
reference,  it   is  useful  to  refer   to  a Three  Judge  Bench
judgment of this Court in O.P. Singla and Another Vs. Union of
India and Others, (1984) 4 SCC 450, this Court had occasion to
consider the issue of seniority and promotion in context of
temporary promotee, direct recruits quota rules in respect of

                               38
Delhi Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1970.  This Court in Para
17 held that when a Rule or Section is part of integral
scheme, it should not be considered or construed in isolation.
In paragraph 17, following has been held:­
    “17……………However, it is well recognised that, when a
    rule or a section is a part of an integral scheme, it
    should not be considered or construed in isolation.
    One must have regard to the scheme of the fasciculus
    of the relevant rules or sections in order to deter­
    mine the true meaning of any one or more of them. An
    isolated consideration of a provision leads to the
    risk of some other inter­related provision becoming
    otiose or devoid of meaning. That makes it necessary
    to call attention to the very next rule, namely, Rule
    8. It provides by clause 2 that:
        “The seniority of direct recruits vis­a­vis
        promotees shall be determined in the order of
        rotation of vacancies between the direct re­
        cruits and promotees based on the quotas of
        vacancies reserved for both categories by
        Rule 7 provided that the first available va­
        cancy will be filled by a direct recruit and
        the next two vacancies by promotees and so
        on.”
                                      (emphasis supplied)
    This provision leaves no doubt that the overall
    scheme of the rules and the true intendment of the
    proviso to Rule 7 is that one­third of the substan­
    tive posts in the Service must be reserved for direct
    recruits. Otherwise, there would neither be any occa­
    sion nor any justification for rotating vacancies be­
    tween direct recruits and promotees. Rule 8(2), which
    deals with fixation of seniority amongst the members
    of the Service, provides, as it were, a key to the
    interpretation of the proviso to Rule 7 by saying
    that the proviso prescribes “quotas” and reserves va­
    cancies for both categories. The language of the pro­
    viso to Rule 7 is certainly not felicitous and is un­
    conventional if its intention was to prescribe a

                                 39
    quota for direct recruits. But the proviso, as I have
    stated earlier, must be read along with Rule 8(2)
    since the two provisions are interrelated. Their com­
    bined reading yields but one result, that the proviso
    prescribes a quota of one­third for direct recruits.”
46.   One submission, which was pressed by learned counsel for
the promotees as well as by learned counsel appearing for the
out  of  turn  promotees   was   that  in  2007  itself,  Judicial
Service Rules have been framed for Haryana namely, Haryana
Superior Judicial Service Rules, 2007, in which Rules, it was
expressly provided by Rule 10 of the Rules that inter se
seniority of the persons recruited to the service under clause
(a), (b) and (c) of Rule 6 shall take his position in the
seniority list as shown in roster annexed. Rule 10 of the
Haryana Rules is as follows:­
    “10. Seniority.
    (i)(a) The inter se seniority of the members of the
            Haryana   Civil    Service    (Judicial   Branch)
            promoted in the same batch under rule 6(a)
            shall be the same as in the Haryana Civil
            Service (Judicial Branch).
        (b)  Inter se seniority of the member of the
            Haryana Superior Judicial Service promoted
            under rule 6(b) shall be in the order of merit
            determined in the selection process.
        (c) Inter se seniority of the direct recruits to
            the Service under rule 6(c) shall be on the
            basis of merit determined by the Selection
            Committee of the High Court at the time of the
            recruitment.

                               40
        (d) Inter se seniority position of the officers
            appointed in the Service under rule 6 shall be
            as given in roster annexed.
    (ii) A person recruited to the Service under clauses
    (a), (b) and (c) of rule 6 shall take his position in
    the seniority list as shown in the roster annexed
    irrespective of the date on which he actually joins
    the Service.
    (iii) A promoted officer, who is promoted on an ad
    hoc basis in the vacancy/post against a roster point
    earmarked for an officer belonging to categories
    specified in clauses (b) and (c) of rule 6, shall not
    have any right to the post. He shall not be entitled
    to add period of his ad hoc service to regular
    service for the purpose of seniority:
       Provided that the existing rules shall continue to
    govern the matters of seniority of the existing
    members of the Service.”
47.  It has been pointed out that both Judicial Service Rules,
2007 of Haryana and Punjab Superior Judicial Rules, 2007 were
sent by the High Court in the similar fashion, where Punjab
Rules have been published by the Government by changing the
proposed rules pertaining to seniority without consultation of
the High Court.    The High Court in its impugned judgment in
Para 181 after noticing the Haryana Rules, 6, 7, 8 and 9 has
made following observations:­
    “Similar rules were recommended by the High Court to
    the State of Punjab for notification but changed at
    its own level without consultation with High Court.”
48.   In the present case, we need not enter into the issue as

                                 41
to what was proposed and what changes were made by Government
while  notifying   the  rules.     The  above  observation   in   the
impugned judgment clearly indicate that Punjab & Haryana High
Court has contemplated to implement the direction of this
Court in All India Judges case (supra) and it was clear to the
High Court that the appointment of all the three streams as
per roster is to also determine the seniority as per the
roster.    In any view of the matter, there is nothing in the
Rules – Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 2007, which
may   indicate   that  there    is   any   provision   contrary    to
determination of seniority by roster.         Mere fact that said
rules   are  not  explicit  or   makes   it  expressly   clear   that
seniority is to be determined on the basis of roster is not
conclusive.    The purpose and object of the Rule 7 of Rules,
2007 read with Appendix­B is clear that the roster is to be
followed for determination of the seniority.         The High Court
in  the   impugned  judgment   has   considered  the   issue   as  to
whether roster is applicable in determination of seniority or
not.   Issue No. 7 as was noticed above, which was framed by
the Committee and was also adjudicated by the High Court was
“Whether roster (Appendix­B) can be read into and applied to
the rule of seniority”.       After elaborate discussions, High
Court in Para 180 concluded:­

                                   42
    “Hence,    this    Court   is     of   the   opinion    that   for
    determination of inter se seniority of officers recruited
    from three different sources, roster as directed by
    Hon’ble the Supreme Court shall be applicable.            The same
    forms part of the Rules as Appendix ‘B’ but mentioning
    roster for recruitment, however, shall be applicable even
    for determination of seniority.”
49.   We endorse the above view of the High Court that roster
shall be applicable for determination of seniority.
50.   At this juncture, one of the submissions, which has been
emphatically pressed by the learned counsel for the promotees
is that for determination of seniority, continuous length of
service is determinative.     The direct recruits and out of turn
promotees, who were not even born in the cadre when promotees
were   promoted,    they   have    to   take   seniority   after   the
promotees.    In this reference, it is useful to refer to a
judgment of this Court in Union of India and Others Vs. N.R.
Parmar and Others, (2012) 13 SCC 340, the issue in the said
case was also an issue of determination of seniority between
direct   recruits    vis­à­vis    promotees    and  quota    and  rota
principles.    This Court had occasion to consider the office
memorandum    issued    by   the    Government    dated   22.12.1959.
Noticing   Para  6   of  above   office   memorandum   following   was
stated in Para 23 of the judgment:­
    “23. The General Principles for determining seniority

                               43
    in the Central Services are shown to have been laid
    down in an annexure to an Office Memorandum dated
    22­12­1959 issued by the Government of India, Min­
    istry of Home Affairs (hereinafter referred to as
    “the OM dated 22­12­1959”). Para 6 of the annexure,
    referred to above, laid down the manner of determin­
    ing inter se seniority between direct recruits and
    promotees. Para 6 is being extracted hereunder:
        “6. Relative seniority of direct recruits and
        promotees.—The relative seniority of direct
        recruits and of promotees shall be determined
        according to the rotation of vacancies between
        direct recruits and promotees which shall be
        based on the quotas of vacancies reserved for
        direct recruitment and promotion respectively
        in the Department Rules.”
    It is apparent from the above extract of the OM dated
    22­12­1959, that the “quota” between promotees and
    direct recruits was to be read into the seniority
    rule. The OM also provided for a definite rotation of
    seniority points (“rota”) between promotees and di­
    rect recruits. The rotation provided for was founded
    on the concept of rotation of quotas between promo­
    tees and direct recruits. It is therefore apparent,
    that under the OM dated 22­12­1959 inter se seniority
    between the promotees and direct recruits was based
    on the “quota” and “rota” principle. The same has
    been meaningfully described as “rotation of quotas”
    in some of these instruments.”
51.  There was further office memorandum on 07.02.1986 to take
care of situation where it was decided that in future, while
the principle of rotation of quotas will still be followed for
determining  the  inter­se  seniority  of direct  recruits and
promotees, the present practice of keeping vacant slots for
being filled up by direct recruits of later years, thereby

                               44
giving  them  unintended  seniority  over  promotees  who  were
already  in  position,  would be  dispensed  with.  This  Court
noticed office memorandum dated 07.02.1986 and observed that
“when direct recruits or promotees become available through
later examinations or selections”, it clearly mean that the
situation contemplated is one where, there has been an earlier
examination or selection, and is then followed by a "later"
examination or selection.
52.   In the above context, this court laid down following in
Paragraph 31.2 that “it is not necessary, that the direct
recruits of a particular recruitment year, should join within
the recruitment year itself”. It was held that date of joining
would not be a relevant factor for determining seniority of
direct recruits.    In paragraph 31.2 and 34.1 following has
been laid down:­
    “31.2. It is not necessary, that the direct recruits
    for vacancies of a particular recruitment year,
    should join within the recruitment year (during which
    the vacancies had arisen) itself. As such, the date
    of joining would not be a relevant factor for deter­
    mining seniority of direct recruits. It would suffice
    if action has been initiated for direct recruit va­
    cancies, within the recruitment year in which the va­
    cancies had become available. This is so, because de­
    lay in administrative action, it was felt, could not
    deprive an individual of his due seniority. As such,
    initiation of action for recruitment within the re­
    cruitment year would be sufficient to assign senior­
    ity to the appointees concerned in terms of the “ro­
    tation of quotas” principle, so as to arrange them
    with other appointees (from the alternative source),

                               45
    for vacancies of the same recruitment year.
    34.1. If the process of recruitment has been initi­
    ated during the recruitment year (in which the vacan­
    cies have arisen) itself, even if the examination for
    the said recruitment is held in a subsequent year,
    and the result is declared in a year later (than the
    one in which the examination was held), and the se­
    lected candidates joined in a further later year
    (than the one in which the result was declared), the
    selected candidates will be entitled to be assigned
    seniority, with reference to the recruitment year (in
    which the requisition of vacancies was made). The
    logic and reasoning for the aforesaid conclusion (ex­
    pressed in the ON dated 2­2­2000) is, if the process
    of direct recruitment is initiated in the recruitment
    year itself, the selected candidate(s) cannot be
    blamed for the administrative delay, in completing
    the process of selection.”
53.   In the present case, process for all the three streams
was completed in the year 2008 and all the officers of three
streams had joined in the same year.       The submission that
quota  rota  rule  was broken  or  seniority  will be  affected
because of joining of one category of officers earlier cannot
be accepted.   It is also relevant to notice that purpose of
statutory rules and laying down a procedure for recruitment
was to achieve the certainty.   Officers belonging to different
streams have to be confidant that they shall be recruited
under their quota and get seniority as per their quota and
roster.   In event, the seniority is to be fixed with date of
joining of particular stream, it will lead to uncertainty and

                                 46
making   seniority   depending   on    administrative    authorities,
which is neither in the interest of service nor serve the
cause of justice. We, thus, conclude that roster is fully
applicable   for   determination    of   seniority.      Officers   of
different streams selected in a particular year even though
they were allowed to join the post on different dates shall
not affect their inter se seniority, which is to be decided on
the basis of roster.
The position of Fast Track Court Judges including              in  the
Select list of all three streams in 2008 recruitment.
54. The promotion order issued by the Government of Punjab on
the  recommendations    of  the   High    Court   promoting   fifteen
officers under 50% quota under Rule 7(3)(a) also contained six
officers   who  were  working   on   ad­hoc   basis   in  Fast   Track
Courts. Similarly, appointment order promoting eight judicial
officers under quota for out of turn promotion included one
officer Shri Arunvir Vashista, who was working on ad­hoc basis
in Fast Track Court. The tentative seniority list indicates
that two officers namely Parminder Pal Singh (at Sl.No.15) and
Sukhdev Singh (Sl.No.16) were shown as direct recruits having
been absorbed from Fast Track Courts against the quota of
direct recruits under Rule 7(3)(c). Parminder Pal Singh and
Sukhdev   Singh  were   recruited    as  Fast   Track   Court   Judges

                              47
directly from the Bar. In the tentative seniority list, the
name of promotee officers who had earlier been working as Fast
Track Court Judge have been shown as per their seniority in
lower cadre.
55. The officers, under out of turn promotions quota, whose
names were mentioned at Serial No.17 to 24 under Rule 7(3)(b)
were arranged according to their merit as disclosed in limited
Departmental  Competitive Examination.  Two  Fast  Track  Court
Judges who were included against available posts in direct
recruit quota were shown above the direct recruits. In so far
inter­se­seniority  amongst  the  promotee  officers   promoted
under Rule 7(3)(a) is concerned, there is no issue. All have
been arranged according to their seniority as required by Rule
12(1). After the circulation of tentative seniority list dated
25.09.2014,   objections  were   filed   by   direct   recruits
questioning the placement of Parminder Pal Singh and Sukhdev
Singh at Serial No.15 and 16 under the direct quota above
other direct recruits.
56.  With regard to Parminder Pal Singh and Sukhdev Singh, it
was stated by direct recruits that their appointment under
Rule 7(3)(c) was not permissible since they were not advocates
at the time of selection of Direct recruits and they were not

                                 48
selected on the basis of the written test and viva­voice under
which all direct recruit candidates were subjected. It was
submitted that absorption of these officers is an ex gratia
absorption  in   service  and  as   such   they  cannot   be  treated
senior to the direct recruits.
57.  One of the out of turn promotee namely, Arunvir Vashista
had staked his claim before the committee.          It was submitted
that  he  being   seniormost   officer   among    the   out  of  turn
selected candidates and although he was placed at serial No.6
as per his merit but he being the only officer who already
stood promoted as presiding officer of the Fast Track Court on
ad­hoc basis, he was entitled to be absorbed and remained
promoted   to   the   Superior    Judicial    Service.    Thus,   his
appointment   on   regular   basis    will   relate    back   to  his
appointment in Fast Track Court in the service.
58.   With regard to absorption of Fast Track Court Judges,
this Court had elaborately considered the issue in Brij Mohan
Lal versus Union of India and others, (2012) 6 SCC 502. Fast
Track Courts Judges who were working as direct recruits from
the Bar as well as those who were ad­hoc promotees as Fast
Track Court Judges had staked their claim for being absorbed
on regular cadre. After considering the respective submission,

                                  49
this court in paragraph 207 has issued various directions.
Paragraph 207.9 relates to Fast Track Court Judges who were
appointed  by   way   of  direct   appointment,   which  is to the
following effect: ­
           “207.9. All the persons who have been
        appointed by way of direct recruitment from
        the Bar as Judges to preside over FTCs under
        the FTC Scheme shall be entitled to be
        appointed to the regular cadre of the Higher
        Judicial Services of the respective States
        only in the following manner:
           (a) The direct recruits to FTCs who opt for
        regularization       shall     take     a   written
        examination to be conducted by the High
        Courts     of    the    respective     States   for
        determining their suitability for absorption
        in the regular cadre of Additional District
        Judges.
           (b) Thereafter, they shall be subjected to
        an    interview    by    a    Selection   Committee
        consisting of the Chief Justice and four
        senior most Judges of that High Court.
           (c) There shall be 150 marks for the
        written examination and 100 marks for the
        interview. The qualifying marks shall be 40%
        aggregate for general candidates and 35% for
        SC/ST/OBC candidates. The examination and
        interview shall be held in accordance with
        the relevant Rules enacted by the States for
        direct     appointment      to    Higher   Judicial
        Services.
           (d) Each of the appointees shall be
        entitled to one mark per year of service in
        the FTCs, which shall form part of the

                                50
        interview marks.
          (e) Needless to point out that this
        examination and interview should be conducted
        by the respective High Courts keeping in mind
        that all these applicants have put in a
        number of years as FTC Judges and have served
        the country by administering justice in
        accordance with law. The written examination
        and interview module, should, thus, be framed
        keeping in mind the peculiar facts and
        circumstances of these cases.
          (f) The candidates who qualify the written
        examination      and     obtain     consolidated
        percentage    as    aforeindicated    shall   be
        appointed to the post of Additional District
        Judge in the regular cadre of the State.
          (g) If, for any reason, vacancies are not
        available in the regular cadre, we hereby
        direct the State Governments to create such
        additional vacancies as may be necessary
        keeping in view the number of candidates
        selected.
          (h) All sitting and/or former FTC Judges
        who were directly appointed from the Bar and
        are desirous of taking the examination and
        interview for regular appointment shall be
        given age relaxation. No application shall be
        rejected on the ground of age of the
        applicant being in excess of the prescribed
        age.”
59. With  regard   to  candidates    from  any  state  who were
promoted as Fast Track Court Judges from the post of Civil
Judge, Senior division, following direction were issued in

                                51
paragraph 207.13:
           “207.13. The candidates from any State, who
        were promoted as FTC Judges from the post of
        Civil Judge, Senior Division having requisite
        experience in service, shall be entitled to
        be absorbed and remain promoted to the Higher
        Judicial Services of that State subject to:
           (a) Such promotion, when effected against
        the 25% quota for out­of­turn promotion on
        merit, in accordance with the judgment of
        this Court in All India Judges’ Assn. (3)12,
        by taking and being selected through the
        requisite examination, as contemplated for
        out­of­turn promotion.
           (b) If the appointee has the requisite
        seniority and is entitled to promotion
        against     25%   quota     for    promotion    by
        seniority­cum­merit, he shall be promoted on
        his own turn to the Higher Judicial Services
        without any written examination.
           (c) While considering candidates either
        under   Category    (a)    or   (b)   above,   due
        weightage shall be given to the fact that
        they have already put in a number of years in
        service in the Higher Judicial Services and,
        of    course,    with    reference     to    their
        performance.
           (d) All other appointees in this category,
        in the event of discontinuation of the FTC
        Scheme, would revert to their respective
        posts in the appropriate cadre.”
60.   With regard to the candidates Parminder Pal Singh and
Sukhdev  Singh,   Recruitment   and   Appointment   committee has

                                 52
noticed  that  they   were   subjected    to  a  written   test  and
viva­voice for finding their suitability to be absorbed in the
regular Cadre. In paragraph 9 of the report dated 11.08.2015
of Recruitment/Promotion Committee (Superior Judicial Service)
it has noticed that presiding officers of Fast Track Courts
for being considered in the regular Cadre, they were subjected
to undergo written test examination and viva­voice. Paragraph
9 of the report of the committee is as follows: ­
        “9. Hon’ble Selection Committee comprising
        the Chief Justice and four senior­most judges
        in its meeting held on 18.03.2008 considered
        the absorption of Presiding Officers of Fast
        Track   Courts    in    the   regular    cadre   of
        Additional District & Sessions Judges from
        the quota of Bar in the State in the States
        of Punjab and Haryana, respectively. The
        Officers were considered on the basis of
        their performance in (i) written examination;
        (ii) viva voice and (iii) ACRs. As per the
        merit list, the names of Parminder Pal Singh
        and Sukhdev Singh were recommended for
        absorption in the regular cadre of Additional
        District & Sessions Judge in the State of
        Punjab. These recommendations were approved
        by the Full Court in its meeting held on
        10.04.2008.     The     Government     of    Punjab
        appointed    both    the    Officers    to   Punjab
        Superior    Judicial      Service    Order    dated
        24.06.2008.””
61.  The above report was subsequently approved by full court
on the basis of which tentative seniority list was issued. The
two  officers  Parminder    Pal   Singh  and   Sukhdev   Singh  were

                                53
appointed to Punjab Superior Judicial Service by Order dated
24.06.2008. In the tentative seniority list, they were placed
at serial no.15 and 16 i.e. above the direct recruits. It is
relevant  to  note   that  the   tentative  seniority  list  was
prepared by the committee on the basis of continuous length of
service. It was probably due to that reason that serial no. 15
and 16, direct recruits were shown above the out of turn
promotees and direct recruits. The above two officers who were
taken on the regular Cadre of Additional District Judge, after
written  test  and  viva­voce  test  which  is  almost the  same
procedure which has been subsequently laid down by this Court
in Brij Mohan Lal case dated 19.04.2012(Supra). The above two
officers having been included in direct recruitment quota,
they have to be clubbed along with the direct recruits. We
have already held that for determining the seniority, the
roster is applicable. The objection of direct recruits that
they cannot be included in the quota meant for direct recruits
since  they  have  not  undergone   the  same  written test  and
viva­voce, which has been undertaken by the direct recruits,
thus, cannot be accepted.
62. As per the judgment of this court in Brij Mohan Lal case
(Supra), officers from Bar, advocates working as Fast Track
Court Judges can be taken under the regular Cadre after they

                                 54
have cleared the written test and viva­voice. The direction of
this Court in paragraph 207.9(g) which says that “if for any
reason, vacancies are not available in the regular Cadre, we
hereby direct the State Government to create such additional
vacancies as may be necessary, keeping in view the number of
selected candidates”, indicates that Fast Track Court Judges
had to be taken into regular cadre if vacancies are there. In
the present case, there have been adjustments against two
vacancies which were available, hence, they having been taken
in the regular Cadre as a direct recruit, has to be accepted.
Further, present is not a case where their selection in the
regular cadre as Additional District Judge is under challenge.
Only issue which is raised is regarding their placement in the
seniority list.
63.   One more aspect in this context needs to be noted. Rule
12(3)  provides  that   “the   inter­se­seniority  of  the  direct
appointee shall be on the basis of merit as is determined by
the High Court.” The inter­se­seniority as contemplated by
Rule 12(3) obviously means inter­se­seniority reflected in the
same examination. The two officers from the Fast Track Court
having  not  taken  the   same  examination,  Rule  12(3)  is  not
technically  applicable    while   judging inter­se­seniority   of
these two officers and other direct recruits. However, in view

                                 55
of the directions of this Court in Brij Mohan Lal’s case
(Supra) taking these two Fast Track Court officers from Bar in
the regular cadre cannot be held faulty. They having been
working as Additional District Judges in the Fast Track Court
and they having been appointed in the regular cadre although
in the same recruitment year, their placement above other
direct recruits is justified. However, these two officers will
be   grouped   along  with  direct   recruits   and   shall   occupy
position number 1 and 2 in the direct recruits and others will
follow thereafter.
64. Now we come to the claim of Shri Arunvir Vashista Fast
Track Court Judge who was selected by out of turn promotion.
Shri Arunvir Vashista was appointed as Fast Track Court Judge
consequent to promotion of fifteen officers under Rule 7(3)
(a).   The   appointment  and  selection    committee   along   with
proposing   fifteen   promotions   under  Rule  7(3)(a)   has   also
proposed seven officers to man the Fast Track Courts in which
Shri Arunvir Vashista was included. Shri Arunvir Vashista thus
occupied the Fast Track Court judge post in the year 2008
itself    and    participated   in    the   limited    departmental
competitive examination and secured sixth position on merit.
Among the out of turn promotees Shri Arunvir Vashista has been
placed at sixth place.

                              56
65. Shri Arunvir Vashista in his brief written synopsis does
not dispute that seniority is to be fixed by the roster points
and  irrespective  of   the fact,  as  to  when  a  person  is
recruited. He rightly submits that rules are subsidiary and
subservient to the law. He has also placed reliance on order
of this Court dated 28.04.2016 passed in W.P.(C) No.1022/1989,
All India Judges Association and others versus Union of India
and others. The Order of this court dated 28.04.2016, is to
the following effect: ­
        “The second prayer of the petitioner is for
        direction to the respondents to follow “post
        based roster” in appointments to the cadre of
        District Judges with effect from 31.03.2003.
        The said prayer is again based on the
        statement of law as propounded in paragraph
        49 of the above referred to decision rendered
        in All Indian Judges’ Association and Others
        (Supra). While stating as to in what manner
        the 40­point roster is to be determined, this
        Court directed that appropriate Rules and
        methods should be adopted by the High Courts
        and approved by the States wherever necessary
        by 31.03.2003. When this application was
        moved, initially on behalf of the High Court,
        learned Standing Counsel took notice and
        submitted that in the High Court a Committee
        has been constituted which is deliberating on
        this issue and, therefore, he will be able to
        report to this Court in a week’s time. It is
        now pointed out by Mr.Patil, learned senior
        counsel for the applicant(s) that the 34
        point roster has been drawn by the High Court
        based on the cadre strength providing for
        different points applicable to the promotes
        by way of limited competitive examination as
        well as for direct recruits in the entry

                                 57
         level     District/Additional     District      and
         Sessions Judge. It is also brought to           our
         notice that appropriate Rules have also        been
         drawn by the High Court which has              been
         notified by the State Government on             16th
         March, 2004.””
66. The Order of this Court dated 28.04.2006 re­enforces the
directions given by this Court in All India Judges’ Case dated
21.03.2002.
67. It   was   contended  on  behalf   of  Shri    Arunvir    Vashista
before the Recruitment and Promotion Committee that although
in the merit list of out of turn promotion, he is at serial
No. 6 but he being the only officer who was working officer as
presiding officer of the Fast Track Court on ad­hoc basis, he
is  “entitled   to  be  absorbed  and  remained    promoted    to  the
post.” There is no denial that Shri Arunvir Vashista has been
regularly   promoted   under   Rule  7(3)(b)    and   continues    his
substantive   promotion.   When  the  roster   is   applicable,    the
seniority has to be fixed by the roster point. As per Rule
12(2)  the   inter­se­seniority   of  the   out   of  turn    promoted
officers shall be “in the order of merit as is determined by
the High Court”. Thus, seniority position of Shri Arunvir
Vashista   among   the  out  of  turn   promotees    has   to   be  in
accordance with the merit. His position among the out of turn
promotees has thus rightly been shown as serial no.6 with

                                 58
which no infirmity can be found. We thus conclude that all
Fast Track Court judges who were taken into the regular cadre
in different streams have been rightly placed in the seniority
list amongst their stream to which no exception can be taken.
OUR CONCLUSIONS:
68. The tentative seniority list was prepared on the basis of
continuous length of service, hence, all promotee officers who
had  joined  on  27th/28th  February,  2008  have  been  shown  at
serial no.1 to 14. Parminder Pal Singh and Sukhdev Singh, Fast
Track Court Judges from Bar who were appointed in regular
cadre w.e.f. 01.08.2008 have been shown at serial no.15 and
16. From Serial No.17 to 24 were out of turn promotees in
block and thereafter Serial No.25 to 35, direct recruits were
placed in block. The final tentative seniority list has been
approved by the committee after considering the objections. It
is  reflected   in   its  report  dated  11.08.2015.   Full  Court
approved the report dated 11.08.2015, hence, final seniority
list was issued on 24.12.2015. Final seniority list was same
as tentative seniority list. The Division Bench of the High
Court deciding the writ petitions challenging the seniority
list has held:
     i)  roster    shall   be  applicable   in  determination   of
     seniority.

                                 59
     ii) fifteen promotees promoted under Rule 7(3)(a) were in
     excess of their quota.
     iii) Promotion of fifteen promotees under Rule 7(3) has
     to  be  treated   as  ad­hoc   promotion  and  they   shall  be
     placed at the bottom of seniority.
69. The Writ Petitions were allowed by Division Bench. In
accordance with the judgment of the Division Bench only change
in  the  seniority   list  was  to   displace  the  promotees   from
serial no.1 to 14 and to place it in the seniority list below
direct recruits. The division bench judgment of the High Court
is under challenge before us.
70.    In view of the foregoing discussion, we come to the
following conclusions: ­
     1)  Promotion   of   fifteen   officers  under   Rule   7(3)(a)
     cannot be held to be beyond their quota.
     2) The promotion of fifteen officers cannot be said to be
     ad­hoc nor they can be directed to be put       at the bottom
     of the seniority list.
     3) The High Court even though accepted the principle that
     roster   is  applicable    in   the  seniority    but   in  the
     operative portion of the judgment in paragraph 208 did

                                60
     not issue any direction to re­cast the seniority as per
     the roster given in the Appendix­B which is an apparent
     error committed by the High Court.
     4) Rule 2007 having been brought in place to give effect
     to  the  judgment  of  this   Court   in  All  India  Judges
     association case, (2002) 4 SCC 247, while interpreting
     the Rules 2007 the direction issued by this court have to
     be kept in mind and rules cannot be interpreted in a
     manner so as to violate the directions issued by this
     Court in the above judgment.
     5) Rule 7(4) read with Appendix­B has to be read in the
     light of direction of this Court in All India’s case and
     harmonious  construction   of  the  rule  clearly  indicates
     that roster which has been expressly made applicable for
     filling  the  post  of  all   the  three  streams  shall  be
     applicable while determining the seniority.
Reliefs: ­
71. In view of foregoing discussion, the seniority list dated
24.12.2015   is to  be  set   aside.   After  setting  aside  the
seniority list, two courses are open. Firstly, to remit this
matter to the High Court again to re­cast the seniority list
as per our direction and secondly, to finalize seniority list

                                 61
in this judgment itself. We choose to adopt the second course
for two reasons:
      a) Already period of three years has elapsed when the
      tentative seniority list was published. Finalisation of
      seniority as early as possible is essential and necessary
      for administration of justice.
      b) There is no dispute regarding inter­se­seniority of
      the promotees under Rule 7(3)(a) and issue pertaining to
      inter­se­seniority of out of turn promotees and direct
      recruits have already been finalized by us. Only exercise
      which is to be undertaken is to place officers of three
      streams in accordance with the roster as indicated in
      Appendix­B. After placing the officers of three streams,
      the seniority position as per roster comes as follows:
 S.NO.                  NAME                       RULE
   1.    Shri   Keshav    Chander    Gupta,      7(3)(a)
         Addl.D&SJ
         (Since retired prematurely)
   2.    Shri Narinder Kumar Gaur,               7(3)(a)
         Addl.D&SJ
         (since retired prematurely w.e.f
         07.06.2011)
   3.    Shri Parminder Pal Singh,               7(3)(c)
         Addl.D&SJ
   4.    Shri Virinder Aggarwal,                 7(3)(b)
         Addl.D&SJ
   5.    Shri Kishore Kumar,                     7(3)(a)
         Addl.D&SJ

                            62
 6. Shri Paramjit Singh,        7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ
 7. Shri Sukhdev Singh,         7(3)(c)
    Addl.D&SJ
 8. Ms. Mandeep Pannu,          7(3)(b)
    Addl.D&SJ
 9. Shri Pritam Singh Dhanona,  7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ, (Ex.S.M.)
10. Shri Harpal Singh,          7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ
11. Shri Munish Singhal,        7(3)(c)
    Addl.D&SJ
12. Shri Ashok Paul Batra,      7(3)(b)
    Addl.D&SJ
13. Shri Amrinder Singh Grewal, 7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ
14. Ms. Harpreet Kaur Randhawa, 7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ
15. Ms. Rupinderjit Chahal,     7(3)(c)
    Addl.D&SJ
16. Shri Rajinder Agarwal,      7(3)(b)
    Addl.D&SJ
17. Ms. Ramesh Kumari,          7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ
18. Shri Jagjit Singh Chohan,   7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ (since expired)
19. Shri Kamaljit lamba,        7(3)(c)
    Addl.D&SJ
20. Shri Tarsem Mangla,         7(3)(b)
    Addl.D&SJ
21. Shri Nirmal Singh,          7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ
    (Since retired prematurely)
22. Ms. Sunita Kumari,          7(3)(a)
    Addl.D&SJ
23. Shri Nirbhow Singh Gill,    7(3)(c)

                              63
       Addl.D&SJ
  24.  Shri Arunvir Vashista,                   7(3)(b)
       Addl.D&SJ
  25.  Ms. Asha Condal,                         7(3)(a)
       Addl.D&SJ
  26.  Shri Kuldeep Kumar Kareer,               7(3)(a)
       Addl.D&SJ
  27.  Shri Jatinder Pal Singh Khumi,           7(3)(c)
       Addl.D&SJ
  28.  Shri Jasjit Singh Bhinder,               7(3)(b)
       Addl.D&SJ
  29.  Dr. Hemant Gopal,                        7(3)(c)
       Addl.D&SJ
  30.  Shri Surinder Singh Sahni,               7(3)(b)
       Addl.D&SJ
  31.  Shri Kanwaljit Singh Bajwa,              7(3)(c)
       Addl.D&SJ
  32.  Shri Sumeet Malhotra,                    7(3)(c)
       Addl.D&SJ
  33.  Shri Arun Gupta,                         7(3)(c)
       Addl.D&SJ
  34.  Ms. Jatinder Kaur­II,                    7(3)(c)
       Addl.D&SJ
  35.  Shri Mohd. Gulzar,                       7(3)(c)
       Addl.D&SJ
72. It is further relevant to note that in view of judgment
of  this  Court  in  (2010)  15  SCC  17o,  All   India Judges
Association, quota of 25 percent for out of turn promotees has
been reduced as 10 percent w.e.f. 01.01.2011. The present
seniority dispute being related to recruitment held in 2008,
the reduction in quota may not be relevant in the present
case.

                               64
73.   In view of foregoing conclusions all appeals are allowed
in following manner: ­
     1) The Division Bench judgment of the High Court so far
     as   it  holds   that   roster   is   applicable  in   the
     determination  of   seniority   of   members  of  superior
     judicial service is upheld.
     2) The judgment of the Division bench of the High Court
     holding that fifteen promotees under Rule 7(3)(a) were
     beyond the quota and shall take position at the bottom of
     the seniority list is set aside.
     3) The seniority list dated 24.12.2014 is set aside. The
     list of 35 officers arranged as per Roster as indicated
     above shall be treated as final Seniority list of the
     officers recruited in the year 2008.
74. The parties shall bear their own cost.
                                   ..........................J.
                                 ( A.K. SIKRI )
                                   ..........................J.
                                ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 03, 2018.


