                                                   1
                                                                       NON-REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 Criminal Appeal  No(s).  1869 of 2017
      RAKESH              & ANR.                                     Appellant(s)
                                                 VERSUS
      THE STATE OF HARYANA                                           Respondent(s)
                                           J U D G M E N T
      BANUMATHI, J.:
      (1)              This appeal arises out of judgment and order dated 4th
      March, 2015 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
      Chandigarh in Criminal Appeal-S No.2089 of 2003 whereby the
      High Court confirmed the conviction of the appellants under
      Section 307 I.P.C. read with Section 34 I.P.C. and affirmed the
      sentence of seven years imposed upon them.              The High Court also
      confirmed the conviction of the appellants under Section 25 of
      the Arms Act and the sentence of imprisonment of two years
      imposed upon each of the appellants.
      (2)              The case in a nutshell is as follows.   Jai Kishan son of
      complainant is alleged to have abducted Dolly, daughter of
      Rajinder and sister of the accused.              It is alleged that, since
      then there has been enmity between the two families.
Signature Not Verified
                                                                            On the
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2018.10.26
      date of occurrence i.e. 12th April, 2000 at about 05.30-5.45
15:15:11 IST
Reason:
      a.m., when complainant’s son Raj Kishan (PW-6) went to answer
      nature’s call, Rakesh, the accused no.1 inflicted injuries on

                                      2
the  head    of   Raj    Kishan   with    a   “dang”.        The   second
accused/appellant, Dalbir, shot Raj Kishan on the neck.            A case
was registered and the law was set in motion.
(3)  Upon   consideration     of  the   evidence,    the    Trial    Court
convicted   both   the  accused-appellants     under   Sections    307/34
I.P.C.   and     sentenced     them   to    seven     years’     rigorous
imprisonment.     They were further convicted under Section 324
I.P.C. and sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment and
also convicted under Section 323 I.P.C. and sentenced to one
year rigorous imprisonment.       The second appellant, Dalbir, was
further   convicted    under   Section   25   of   the   Arms    Act   and
sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment.           In appeal, the
High Court affirmed the conviction as well as the sentence of
imprisonment of both the accused-appellants.
(4)  Even though many grounds were raised in the appeal, at the
time  of   the  arguments    Mr.   Jayant   Bhushan,    learned    senior
counsel appearing for the accused-appellants, submitted that
Dr. G.P. Aggrawal (PW-12) had opined that injury no.2 could
have been caused by a blunt weapon.             Therefore, conviction
under Section 307 I.P.C. is not sustainable.             Learned senior
counsel  prayed    for   modification    of  the   conviction     of   the
appellants from 307 I.P.C. to Section 325 I.P.C.                  Learned
senior  counsel    further   submitted    that  at   the   time   of   the
occurrence, which was of the year 2000 the accused-appellants
were only 26 and 24 years of age.          He, therefore, prayed for
further reduction of sentence of imprisonment.

                                   3
(5)  Dr. G.P. Aggrawal (PW-12) examined the injured Raj Kishan
and noted the following injuries:
        “(i)   An incised wound of size 1-½ x ½” over
        right occipital parietal area of skull;
        (ii)   A small lacerated wound of size 1.5 x 1
        cm over left sub-mandible area 2-½” from angel
        of left mandible 2 inches below the left jaw;
        (iii) A lacerated wound on left arm lateral
        side 3” above the left elbow joint.”
(6)  Dr. G.P. Aggrawal (PW-12) has opined that injury No.2 was
caused by fire arm.     Dr. Aggrawal further deposed that injury
No.2 was dangerous to life and the patient could have died if
he had not been given proper treatment.       The evidence of Dr.
G.P. Aggrawal (PW-12) has to be examined in the light of the
testimony of injured witness-Raj Kishan (PW-6). Even though use
of fire through pistol was strongly refuted by the appellants,
it is pointed out that the pistol was also recovered from the
second appellant.
(7)  Having  regard   to  the  testimony  of  injured  witness-Raj
Kishan (PW-6) and the nature of the injuries, in our view the
conviction under Section 307 I.P.C. is justified and we do not
find any reason to modify their conviction under Section 325
I.P.C.    Insofar  as   the  sentence  for  the  conviction  under
Section 307 I.P.C. is concerned, the appellants were sentenced
to undergo imprisonment for seven years.     Since the occurrence
was of the year 2000 and in the facts and circumstances of the
present case and also considering the age of the appellants at

                                  4
the  time  of  the  occurrence,  the sentence  of  imprisonment
imposed upon them is reduced to five years.
(8)  The appeal is accordingly disposed of.
                                      ..........................J.
                                       (R. BANUMATHI)
                                      ..........................J.
                                       (INDIRA BANERJEE)
NEW DELHI,
OCTOBER 10, 2018.


