                                              1
                                                         NON-REPORTABLE
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURSIDCITON
                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1799 OF 2010
           SHYAM SHARMA                                   … APPELLANT
                                           VERSUS
           STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH AND ANR. …RESPONDENTS
                                         JUDGMENT
           S. ABDUL NAZEER, J.
           1.          The appellant-Shyam Sharma has called in question the
           legality and correctness of the judgment in Criminal Appeal
           No.190 of 1999, dated 19th January, 2007 passed by the High
           Court of Judicature at Madhya Pradesh, Jabalpur Bench at Gwalior
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MEENAKSHI KOHLI
Date: 2017.10.04
15:01:27 IST
Reason:

                                  2
whereby the judgment dated 31.3.1999 passed by the Sessions
Judge, Gwalior, in Sessions Trial No. 379/1996 has been affirmed.
2.   The Appellant-Shyam Sharma was convicted by the Sessions
Judge, under Section 307 IPC and was sentenced to undergo
three years rigorous imprisonment along with a fine of Rs.1,000/-
and in the event of default in payment of fine, he was directed to
further undergo additional imprisonment of five months.
3.   The contention of Mr. V. Giri, learned senior counsel,
appearing for the appellant, is that the independent witnesses
Anoop Bhargava (PW-1) and Ramprakash (PW-4) did not support
the prosecution case. Manjeet Singh (PW-3) is an interested
witness. The appellant is a computer engineer and has no
criminal background. At the most, the appellant can be convicted
under Section 324 of the IPC.        On the other hand, learned
counsel   appearing   for the   respondents   has  supported   the
judgment of the High Court.
4.   We have carefully considered the submissions of the learned
counsel made at the Bar and perused the materials placed on
record.   As rightly submitted by the learned counsel for the

                                 3
appellant, both Anoop Bhargava (PW-1) and Ramprakash (PW-4)
have turned hostile. It was established that Manjeet Singh has
sustained gunshot injury.    Dr. Vikram Singh Tomar (PW-2), on
examination, found two entry wounds over the lateral aspect of
left shoulder and interior aspect of upper part of left scapula
region of Manjeet Singh. However, firearm injury suffered by
Manjeet    Singh   (PW-3)  could   not  be  impeached    in  their
cross-examination. It is also evident that the accused fired at
Manjeet Singh without any pre-meditation. The injury suffered by
Manjeet Singh was not on the vital part of his body. In our view,
the prosecution has failed to prove that accused intended to
cause the death of the deceased. Therefore, the appellant can
only be convicted under Section 324 of the IPC and not under
Section 307 of the IPC.     Therefore, the appellant is convicted
under Section 324 of the IPC instead of Section 307 of the IPC.
5.    The appellant has already been imprisoned for about four
months.    Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the
case, it is just and proper to reduce the sentence to the period

                                 4
already undergone by the appellant-Shyam Sharma. Ordered
accordingly.
6.   The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
                                          ….……………………..J.
                                         (R.K. AGRAWAL)
                                         ....………………………J.
New Delhi                               (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
October 4, 2017.


