                                                                           ‘REPORTABLE’
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                        CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420 OF 2018
                      R LAKSHMIKANTHAM                                    Appellant(s)
                                                     VERSUS
                      DEVARAJI                                            Respondent(s)
                                                J U D G M E N T
                      R. F. NARIMAN, J.
                            In  the   present   appeal,   despite  service   of  notice,
                      nobody appears for the respondent.       We have heard Dr. (Ms.)
                      Pooja Jha, learned counsel appearing for the appellant.
                            The High Court, in the present appeal, has, by the
                      impugned judgment dated 03.02.2017, set aside the concurrent
                      judgments of the Courts below, and allowed the appeal of the
                      erstwhile defendant, who is the respondent before us, and
                      hence, set aside the decree for specific performance that
                      was passed in the plaintiff’s favour.
                            By an agreement to sell dated 22.09.2002, the suit-
                      property was to be sold for a sum of Rs.3,65,000/-.        Certain
                      clauses  of   the   agreement   are  important  and  are  set  out
Signature Not Verifiedhereinbelow:
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2019.07.25
10:44:30 IST
Reason:                   “1. The sale price of the property mentioned in the
                             schedule hereunder shall be Rs.3,65,000/-(Rupees
                             Three Lakhs and Sixty Five Thousand only).
                                                                                         1

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420 OF 2018
    2. The party of the second part has       paid a sum of
        Rs.5,000/-(Rupees Five Thousand       only) towards
        advance by cash and the party of     the first part
        hereby admit and acknowledge the     receipt of the
        same.
    3. The balance sale consideration shall be paid by
        the party of the second part to the party of the
        first part within three months from today.      The
        party of the first part agrees to execute sale
        deed on the day on which the balance sale
        consideration is paid.
    4. The party of the second part agrees to pay part of
        the sale consideration of Rs.60,000/-(Rupees Sixty
        Thousand only) to the party of the first on or
        before 10th day of October.
    5. The party of the first part had handed over the
        original title documents to the mortgagee and the
        party of the second part shall settle the loan,
        receive the documents from the mortgagee and keep
        the same in his custody.
    ……………………………………………………………………………………
    ………………………………………………………………………………….
    8. If there is no encumbrance to the schedule
        property and when the party of the second part is
        willing to pay the balance sale consideration, the
        party of the first shall execute sale deed in
        favour of the party of the second part or her
        nominee.     If the party of the first part refuses
        to do so, the party of the second part is entitled
        to take legal action.”
       It is stated that at the time of the sale agreement,
the suit property was worth roughly a sum of Rs.6 lakhs, but
the parties finally agreed and the defendant, in particular,
agreed to sell the aforesaid property for Rs.3.65 lakhs.    A
perusal of the agreement to sell would show that though
clause 3 requires that the balance sale consideration will
be paid within three months from the date of the agreement
                                                              2

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420 OF 2018
and that the seller will execute the sale deed on the date
on which balance sale consideration was paid yet, clauses 5
and 8 clearly show that the original title deeds which are
with   the   mortgagee    had   yet   to   be   handed   over   and   the
mortgage had yet to be redeemed.            It is only when this is
done that clause 3 would kick in, showing that the time of
three months is obviously not of essence.
       Soon   after    the    agreement,     the    plaintiff    sent   a
registered letter dated 18.12.2002 to the present address of
the defendant reminding the defendant that Rs.5000/- had
been   received    on  the   date   of   signing    the  agreement    and
Rs.60,000/- had been received on 14.10.2002.              Despite this,
the   original title     documents were       not obtained     from the
mortgagee and hence the mortgage could not be discharged.
The letter then goes on to state that repeated calls were
made and that the plaintiff is ready with the balance money,
and that the defendant should come forward immediately to
discharge     the    mortgage,     get    all    documents    from    the
mortgagee, and register the sale deed.            This registered A.D.
letter was returned to the sender stating that the addressee
did not receive the same for the past one week.                The same
was the fate of another legal notice on the very next date,
i.e.,    19.12.2002.      Finally, on 07.07.2003, the plaintiff
sent a legal notice referring to the earlier legal notice of
19.12.2002    and   called    upon   the   defendant    to  immediately
comply with the terms of the agreement.                To this notice,
                                                                          3

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420 OF 2018
which was admittedly received by the defendant at the very
same address, no reply was given.         Thereafter, the present
suit for specific performance was filed by the plaintiff in
February, 2005.
       Given these facts, the trial Court, by its judgment
dated 12.09.2008, held that the suit agreement was proved
and   that   three   notices  sent  by  the   plaintiff   were  also
proved, it being clear that the defendant was attempting to
wriggle out of his obligations under the agreement.           Though
the suit was filed belatedly, the trial Court felt that as
the defendant did not furnish the address of his mortgagee
or take steps to clear the mortgage, it was clear that the
defendant was attempting to wriggle out of the agreement.
Further,    the   plaintiff’s    readiness   and   willingness   was
proved by the fact that he has necessary funds as on the
date of the agreement, and thereafter, as was stated by him
in his letter dated 18.12.2002.         This being the case, the
Court   ordered    specific   performance   as   the  balance   sale
consideration had already been deposited into the Court on
the date of the filing of the Suit.         The first appeal from
the aforesaid judgment was        dismissed on 20.12.2010 by the
Principal     District    Judge.     The   District    Judge   found
concurrently for the plaintiff on all the points argued and
hence dismissed the first appeal.
       By the impugned judgment, the High Court reversed the
concurrent    judgments and    held, on    a construction    of the
                                                                     4

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420 OF 2018
agreement,    that   since    only  three   months    were  given  to
complete the sale transaction, time was of essence.           It also
went on to hold that the two letters dated 18.12.2002 and
19.12.2002 could not have been said to have been served on
the defendant and hence were not proved.              The High court
recorded the defendant’s advocate’s statement that it was
not going into other aspects except that plaintiff was not
ready and willing throughout to perform the sale agreement.
Despite this, the High Court held that since the Suit itself
was   filed    belatedly,    it  would   not    be   enough  for  the
plaintiff to show that he had the necessary funds.           It would
also   have   been   necessary    for  him   to   show  that  he  was
otherwise ready and willing throughout, which cannot be said
to be correct considering that there was a long time gap
between     22.09.2002     and    07.07.2003      inasmuch   as   the
intermediate     letters/notices    were   not   proved.    The  High
Court also further stated that the property value was Rs.10
lakhs on the date of the sale agreement, though this was not
proved by the defendant, and then went on to state that
since readiness and willingness had to be held against the
Plaintiff, and since the Suit itself was belated, specific
performance cannot be granted on the facts of this case and,
as stated earlier, reversed the concurrent findings of the
Courts below.
       We have heard learned counsel for the appellant.
       The High Court has, in the second appeal, obviously
                                                                      5

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420 OF 2018
gone wrong on a number of counts.         First, to hold that time
was   of   essence    in  the  agreement,    is  wholly   incorrect.
Clause 3 has to be read along with clauses 5 and 8, which
clearly show that in the nature of reciprocal promises, the
promise made by the seller in clause 5 has to be performed
first, viz., that the title documents have to be obtained
from the mortgagee after the mortgage is cleared.              It is
only then that the consideration above Rs.70,000/-, being
the balance consideration for the sale, has to be paid.
Secondly, the High court is wholly incorrect in stating that
the two letters of 18.12.2002 and 19.12.2002 cannot be said
to have been proved.           Both the letters were registered
A.D. letters sent to the very address of the defendant,
which   the   defendant    states  is   the  address   on  which  it
received the legal notice dated 07.07.2003.            Further, the
moment the registered letter once sent is returned with the
remarks mentioned hereinabove, it shall be deemed to have
been   served   on   the  defendant   on  the   address  so  stated,
unless the contrary is proved.         The defendant did not come
forward with anything to show that this was not the proper
address.    In fact, that this is the proper address is shown
by the fact that he acknowledged the receipt of the legal
notice dated 07.07.2003 on this very address.
       The High Court order is not correct in stating that
readiness and willingness cannot be inferred because the
letters dated 18.12.2002 and 19.12.2002 had not been sent to
                                                                     6

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420 OF 2018
the defendant.      The High Court also erred in holding that
despite having the necessary funds, the plaintiff could not
be   said    to  be   ready   and   willing.    In   the  aforesaid
circumstances, the High Court was also incorrect in putting
a short delay in filing the Suit against the plaintiff to
state that he was not ready and willing.           In India, it is
well settled that the rule of equity that exists in England,
does    not   apply,   and   so   long  as   a Suit   for  specific
performance is filed within the period of limitation, delay
cannot    be   put   against   the   plaintiff  –   See  Mademsetty
Satyanarayana v. G. Yelloji Rao and others AIR 1965 Supreme
Court 1405 (paragraph 7) which reads as under:
           “(7) Mr. Lakshmaiah cited a long catena of
    English decisoins to define the scope of a Court’s
    discretion.        Before referring to them, it is
    necessary to know the fundamental differnece between
    the two systems-English and Indian-qua the relief of
    specific performance.          In England the relief of
    specific performance pertains to the domain of
    equity; in India, to that of statutory law.              In
    England there is no period of limitation for
    instituting a suit for the said relief and,
    therefore, mere delay – the time lag depending upon
    circumstances – may itself be sufficient to refuse
    the relief; but, in India mere delay cannot be a
    ground for refusing the said relief, for the statute
    prescribes the period of limitation. If the suit is
    in time, delay is sanctioned by law; if it is beyond
    time, the suit will be dismissed as barred by time;
    in either case, no question of equity arises.”
       The High Court also went into error in stating that
the value of the property was Rs.10 lakhs at the time of the
sale agreement.      PW-1 in his cross examination admitted that
it was Rs.10 lakhs on the date when PW1 was cross-examined.
                                                                    7

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2420 OF 2018
The value of the property on the date of the sale agreement
was only Rs.6 lakhs, and it was open for the parties to
negotiate the said price upwards or downwards, which was
what the parties did in the facts of the present case.
Nothing    can,   therefore,   be  derived  from   the  erroneous
assumption    that   a  valuable  property had   been  sold at  a
throwaway price.
       For all these reasons, therefore, we allow the appeal
and set aside the judgment of the High Court and restore
that of the Courts below.
                                  ……………………………………………………………., J.
                                  [ R. F. NARIMAN ]
                                  ……………………………………………………………., J.
                                  [ SURYA KANT ]
New Delhi;
July 10, 2019.
                                                                  8


