                                                                                  1
                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                  CIVIL APPEAL NO.9732 OF 2017
               (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 14386 OF
                                                      2015)
           Neeraj Kumar Rai and ors.                                  …Appellants
                                                     Versus
           State of U.P. & Others                                 …Respondents
                                               JUDGMENT
           Adarsh Kumar Goel, J.
           1.          Leave granted. This appeal has been preferred against the
           judgment of the Allahabad High Court dated 25 th February, 2015
           in Neeraj Kumar Rai and ors.                    versus State of U.P. and
           ors1.
           2.          The High Court repelled the challenge to the validity of
           notification dated 29th July, 2011 issued by the National Council
           for Teacher Education (NCTE) under Section 23 (1) of the Right of
Signature Not Verified
           Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE). The
Digitally signed by
MAHABIR SINGH
Date: 2017.07.25
17:15:52 IST
Reason:
           challenge was raised on the ground of arbitrariness leading to
           1                2015(2) ADJ 795, 2015(4)ALJ 94

                                                                   2
violation of Article 14.        Under the impugned notification,
requirement of 50% marks in graduation was made mandatory
apart from other qualifications for appointment of teachers in
schools. The said requirement was not mandatory earlier for those
who had 50% marks in post graduation at the time when they
took admission to the B.Ed., which was also the relevant
qualification for appointment as teacher in terms of notification
dated 23rd August, 2010 under Section 23 of the RTE.         Further
contention of the appellants was that even according to the NCTE
those who had 50% marks in post graduation, and were eligible
for admission to B.Ed. on that basis, could be treated as qualified
in terms of the said notification. The High Court held that once the
petitioners are not covered by the notification dated 29 th July,
2011, the stand of the NCTE to the contrary could not be relied
upon.
3.    Thus,  the   question    for  consideration  is  whether   the
candidates who had already passed B.Ed., had the requisite
percentage in post graduation and are otherwise covered by
notification dated 23rd August, 2010, will stand excluded only on

                                                                  3
the ground that their marks in graduation were less than the
percentage prescribed in the notification dated 29 th July, 2011.
4.   The case of the appellants is that they had the post
graduation and B.Ed. qualifications.      They also had the TET
qualification. In post-graduation their marks are more than 50%.
The NCTE is a statutory body under the NCTE Act to achieve the
planned and coordinated development of the teacher education
system. It lays down qualification for recruitment of teachers and
also criteria for admission to training in teacher education. The
NCTE (Determination of Minimum Qualifications for Recruitment of
Teachers in Schools) Regulations, 2001 prescribe qualification for
recruitment of teachers. The said regulations were amended from
time to time.     Regulations were also framed for admission to
teacher education programmes including for admission to B.Ed.
The said regulations prescribed requirement of 45% / 50% either
in graduation or in post graduation for admission to the B.Ed.
which the appellants possessed. Only the impugned notification
dated 29th July, 2011 prescribed requirement of 50% marks in
graduation which was earlier optional for those who had 50%
marks in post graduation.      On that basis, the State of Uttar

                                                                  4
Pradesh declared candidates who were B.Ed. and TET and were
otherwise qualified in terms of the qualifications laid down by the
NCTE for appointment of teachers as ineligible.       Some persons
who were earlier appointed but their services were later
terminated.     The claim of similarly placed candidates was
supported by the NCTE and was also upheld by the High Courts of
Rajasthan and Uttarakhand which judgments were operative and
had become final.
5.    To appreciate the submissions reference may briefly be
made to relevant notifications. The 2003 amendment to the 2001
regulations provides for requirement of graduation along with
B.Ed or its equivalent without any minimum marks in graduation.
The 2007 Norms and Standards for Secondary Teacher Education
Programme leading to B.Ed. require 45% marks either in
Bachelor’s degree or in Master’s degree or any other qualification
equivalent thereto. The 2009 Norms and Standards for Secondary
Teacher Education Programme through Open and Distance
Learning System leading to B.Ed. do not provide for any minimum
percentage of marks in Bachelor’s degree. However, in the NCTE
notification dated 23rd August, 2010 the requirement of prescribed

                                                                   5
percentage of marks in graduation was laid down on which basis
the said requirement was laid down in the impugned notification
dated 29th July, 2011denying eligibility to the appellants.
6.   It is submitted that similarly placed candidates approached
the Rajasthan High Court by way of D.B. Civil Writ Petition No.
3964 of 2011 etc. titled Sushil Sompura and Ors.              versus
State (Education) and Ors. The Division Bench of the High
Court in its judgment dated 20th May, 2011 upheld their stand and
observed:-
                 “The relief prayed by the petitioners stands
           satisfied in view of the agreement expressed on
           behalf of NCTE to the effect that in case they
           have passed B.A., B.Sc., B.Com., Senior
           Secondary or its equivalent qualification
           and obtained admission in the requisite
           courses such as B.Ed., B.EI.Ed., D.Ed. etc.
           as mentioned in para-1 of the Notification
           dated 23.8.2010, prior to the prescription
           of the minimum qualifying marks by NCTE
           in Bachelor’s degree or Master’s degree
           etc. or any other qualification equivalent
           thereto vide notification dated 27.9.2007
           and 31.8.2009, the minimum qualification
           of having 45% or 50% marks, as the case
           may be, in the Bachelor’s degree or
           Master’s      degree     etc.  or    any    other
           equivalent qualification, shall not be
           insisted as stated by Mr. Kuldeep Mathur,
           learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
           NCTE on being instructed by Regional
           Director, NCTE. Thus, the major grievance of

                                                             6
          the petitioners that their qualifications of B.Ed.
          B.EI.Ed. etc. mentioned in para 1 are being
          derecognized with retrospective effect when
          there was no prescription of minimum qualifying
          marks of 45% or 50%, as the case may be,
          stands redressed in view of the statement made
          by learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
          NCTE. It has been further stated by the learned
          counsel for the NCTE that for the first time,
          de-novo qualifications were prescribed by the
          NCTE vide Notification dated 27.9.2007 and
          further, qualifications were prescribed vide
          Notification dated 31.8.2009 and in case
          admission has been taken by the incumbents in
          any of the courses of B.Ed. B.El.Ed. etc. as
          mentioned in para-1 of the Notification dated
          23.8.2010 prior to aforesaid dates, they shall not
          insist for having 45% or 50% marks, as the case
          may be, in qualifying examination for aforesaid
          courses.     Thus, respondents have to allow
          aforesaid incumbents in TET examination, 2011.”
                                            (emphasis added)
7.   Again, similar issue was raised before the High Court of
Uttarakhand in Writ Petition No. 772(SS) of 2011 etc. titled
Baldev Singh and ors. versus State of Uttarakhand and
ors.  The High Court in its judgment dated 20th August, 2011,
after noticing the observations in the Rajasthan High Court
judgment, observed:
                “Apparently therefore the restriction of a
          minimum percentage of marks in graduation
          (45% or 50% as the case might be) is not going
          to be enforced by NCTE, as it is evident from the
          above paragraph, as these were the instructions

                                                                     7
          of the Regional Director, NCTE to its counsel
          before the Hon’ble Rajasthan High Court. The
          counsel representing NCTE Mr. Sudhir Singh has
          fairly submitted before this Court that he also
          gets his instructions from the same Regional
          Director, NCTE, yet there are no such
          instructions with him. That being the factual
          position, we leave it at that.
                However, even assuming for the sake of
          argument that the above decision of the Hon’ble
          Rajasthan High Court does not help the case of
          the petitioners, yet this Court is of a considered
          view, as it has already been discussed in the
          preceding paragraphs, that such a restriction (of
          having minimum percentage in graduation) is
          both unreasonable, unjust and violative of Article
          14 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, this
          Court declares such condition of asking a
          minimum percentage of marks in graduation
          from those candidates who are B.Ed. qualified in
          NCTE     notification    dated    23.8.2010    and
          subsequent State Government Order dated
          29.4.2011 as violative of Article 14 of the
          Constitution of India. Further this Court directs
          the respondents to permit the petitioners to
          appear in TET examination treating them to be
          qualified under Clause 3 of the notification dated
          23.8.2010 and State Government Order dated
          29.4.2011.”
8.   Mr.  AS    Nadkarni,    learned    Additional  Solicitor General,
appearing for the NCTE fairly stated that the appellants may be
treated at par with those covered by the Rajasthan and
Uttarakhand High Courts judgments which have been accepted by
the NCTE.

                                                                   8
9.    In view of fair stand of learned Additional Solicitor General
and the view of Rajasthan and Uttarakhand High Courts, we do
not find any reason to deny similar relief to the appellants. No
doubt, as rightly held by the High Court the NCTE ought to have
issued a clarification by way of a supplementary notification but
the NCTE may now do so within one month from today.
Accordingly, we direct that if the appellants or any other similarly
placed persons are entitled to any further relief in terms of
judgments of Rajasthan and Uttarakhand High Courts, they will be
at liberty to put forward their claim before the concerned
authorities who may take a decision thereon in accordance with
law within one month. We have not examined any such claim in
these proceedings except what has been stated hereinabove.
10. The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.
                                     …………………………………….J.
                                               (Adarsh Kumar Goel)
                                     …………………………………….J.
                                                 (Uday Umesh Lalit)
New Delhi;
25th July, 2017.


