                                              1
                                                                      REPORTABLE
                              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                             CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 104-109 OF 2015
      MAXOPP INVESTMENT LTD.                                  .....APPELLANT(S)
                                          VERSUS
      COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX,
      NEW DELHI                                           .....RESPONDENT(S)
                                           WITH
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1423 OF 2015
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3267 OF 2013
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 130 OF 2015
                             CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 110-112 OF 2015
                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1500 OF 2018
                       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 19614 OF 2013)
                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1508 OF 2018
                       (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 31417 OF 2016)
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ASHWANI KUMAR
Date: 2018.03.13
17:10:40 IST
Reason:                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 115 OF 2015
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 8596 OF 2014

                         2
         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1505 OF 2018
  (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 27054 OF 2016)
         CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 10096 OF 2013
           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 123 OF 2015
          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 6590 OF 2015
          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1576 OF 2018
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4024 OF 2018
             @ DIARY NO. 39820 OF 2017)
         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1579 OF 2018
  (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 20475 OF 2017)
         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1578 OF 2018
  (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) NO. 23123 OF 2017)
          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 18019 OF 2017
         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1580 OF 2018
    (ARISING OUT OF SLP (CIVIL) 32405 OF 2017)
         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1575     OF 2018
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4023 OF 2018
             @ DIARY NO. 36413 OF 2017)
          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2802 OF 2018
(@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6746 OF 2018
              @ DIARY NO. 1146 OF 2018)
          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2791 OF 2018

                                        3
          (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6685 OF 2018
                        @ DIARY NO. 39823 OF 2017)
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2792          OF 2018
          (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6686 OF 2018
                        @ DIARY NO. 41903 OF 2017)
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1577          OF 2018
          (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4027 OF 2018
                        @ DIARY NO. 41890 OF 2017)
                     CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2793 OF 2018
          (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6687 OF 2018
                        @ DIARY NO. 41203 OF 2017)
                                     AND
                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2794          OF 2018
         (@ SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6688          OF 2018
                        @ DIARY NO. 41922 OF 2017)
                            JUDGMENT
A.K. SIKRI, J.
           Chapter IV of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as
     the ‘Act’) contains the provisions pertaining to ‘computation of total
     income’.    Section 14 which is the first provision under this Chapter
     enumerates five heads of income within which all income are to be
     classified. Under the scheme of the Act, certain types of income are
     exempt from tax and, in this behalf, specific provisions are made
     stipulating that such incomes would not form part of the total income
     under the Act as fortiorari, they are not included under any of the heads

                                        4
   of income and, therefore, no taxes levied on such exempted incomes. It
   is in this backdrop, Section 14A of the Act clarifies that if any expenditure
   is incurred in earning that income which does not form part of the total
   income, such expenditure shall also not be allowed as deduction.
   Though, Section 14A was inserted by the Finance Act, 2001, but it was
   given retrospective effect from April 1, 1962. Original Section was in the
   following terms:
              “Section 14A - For the purposes of computing the total income
              under this Chapter, no deduction shall be allowed in respect
              of expenditure incurred by the assessee in relation to income
              which does not form part of the total income under this Act.”
2) By the Finance Act, 2006, the aforesaid provision was amended
   whereby it was renumbered as sub-section (1) and sub-sections (2) and
   (3) were added thereto.         Before that, a proviso was also added by
   amendment vide Finance Act, 2002 which was to operate retrospectively
   from May 11, 2001. In these batch of appeals, we are not concerned
   with sub-sections (2), (3) or the proviso and it is only interpretation that
   has to be given to sub-section (1), which arises for consideration.
3) Though, it is clear from the plain language of the aforesaid provision that
   no deduction is to be allowed in respect of expenditure incurred by the
   assessee in relation to income which does not form part of the total
   income under the Act, the effect whereof is that if certain income is
   earned which is not to be included while computing total income, any

                                      5
   expenditure incurred to earn that income is also not allowed as a
   deduction. It is well known that tax is leviable on the net income. Net
   income is arrived at after deducting the expenditures incurred in earning
   that income. Therefore, from the gross income, expenditure incurred to
   earn that income is allowed as a deduction and thereafter tax is levied
   on the net income. The purpose behind Section 14A of the Act, by not
   permitting deduction of the expenditure incurred in relation to income,
   which does not form part of total income, is to ensure that the assessee
   does not get double benefit. Once a particular income itself is not to be
   included in the total income and is exempted from tax, there is no
   reasonable basis for giving benefit of deduction of the expenditure
   incurred in earning such an income. For example, income in the form of
   dividend earned on shares held in a company is not taxable. If a person
   takes interest bearing loan from the Bank and invests that loan in
   shares/stocks, dividend earned therefrom is not taxable.         Normally,
   interest paid on the loan would be expenditure incurred for earning
   dividend income. Such an interest would not be allowed as deduction
   as it is an expenditure incurred in relation to dividend income which itself
   is spared from tax net. There is no quarrel upto this extent.
4) However, in these appeals, the question has arisen under varied
   circumstances where the shares/stocks were purchased of a company
   for the purpose of gaining control over the said company or as

                                      6
   ‘stock-in-trade’. However, incidentally income was also generated in the
   form of dividends as well. On this basis, the assessees contend that the
   dominant intention for purchasing the share was not to earn dividends
   income but control of the business in the company in which shares were
   invested or for the purpose of trading in the shares as a business activity
   etc. In this backdrop, the issue is as to whether the expenditure incurred
   can be treated as expenditure ‘in relation to income’ i.e. dividend income
   which does not form part of the total income. To put it differently, is the
   dominant or main object would be a relevant consideration in
   determining as to whether expenditure incurred is ‘in relation to’ the
   dividend income. In most of the appeals, including in Civil Appeal Nos.
   104-109 of 2015, aforesaid is the scenario.         Though, in some other
   cases, there may be little difference in fact situation. However, all these
   cases pertain to dividend income, whether it was for the purpose of
   investment in order to retain controlling interest in a company or in group
   of companies or the dominant purpose was to have it as stock-in-trade.
5) Before we proceed further, we may briefly note the facts of Civil Appeal
   Nos. 104-109 of 2015, for better understanding of the issue involved.
         The appellant company is engaged, inter alia, in the business of
   finance, investment and dealing in shares and securities. The appellant
   holds shares/securities in two portfolios, viz. (a) as investment on capital

                                  7
account; and, (b) as trading assets for the purpose of acquiring and
retaining control over investee group companies, particularly Max India
Ltd., a widely held quoted public limited company. Any profit/loss arising
on sale of shares/securities held as ‘investment’ is returned as income
under the head ‘capital gains’, whereas profit/loss arising on sale of
shares/securities held as ‘trading assets’ (i.e. held, inter alia, with the
intention of acquiring, exercising and retaining control over investee
group companies) has been regularly offered and assessed to tax as
business income under the head ‘profits and gains of business or
profession’.
      Consistent with the aforesaid treatment regularly followed, the
appellant filed return for the previous year relevant to the Assessment
Year 2002-03, declaring income of Rs.78,90,430/-.         No part of the
interest expenditure of Rs.1,16,21,168/- debited to the profit and loss
account, to the extent relatable to investment in shares of Max India
Limited, yielding tax free dividend income, was considered disallowable
under Section 14A of the Act on the ground that shares in the said
company were acquired for the purposes of retaining controlling interest
and not with the motive of earning dividend. According to the appellant,
the dominant purpose/intention of investment in shares of Max India Ltd.
was acquiring/retaining controlling interest therein and not earning
dividend and, therefore, dividend of Rs.49,90,860/- earned on shares of

                                        8
     Max India Ltd. during the relevant previous year was only incidental to
     the holding of such shares. The Assessing Officer (AO), while passing
     the assessment order dated August 27, 2004, under Section 143(3)
     worked out disallowance under
     Section 14A of the Act at Rs.67,74,175/- by apportioning the interest
     expenditure of Rs.1,16,21,168/- in the ratio of investment in shares of
     Max India Ltd. (on which dividend was received) to the total amount of
     unsecured loan. The AO, however, restricted disallowance under that
     Section to Rs.49,90,860/- being the amount of dividend received and
     claimed exempt.
  6) In appeal, the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) {CIT(A)} vide
     order dated January 12, 2005 upheld the order of the AO. The appellant
     herein carried the matter in further appeal to the Income Tax Appellate
     Tribunal, New Delhi (for short the ‘ITAT’).    In view of the conflicting
     decisions of various Benches by the ITAT with respect to the
     interpretation of Section 14A of the Act, a Special Bench was constituted
     in the matter of ITO v. Daga Capital Management (Private) Ltd. 1 The
     appeal of the appellant was also tagged and heard by the aforesaid
     Special Bench.
  7) The Special Bench of the ITAT in the case of Daga Capital
     Management (Private) Ltd., dismissing the appeal of the appellant,
1                       312 ITR (AT) 1

                                      9
   inter alia, held that investment in shares representing controlling interest
   did not amount to carrying on of business and, therefore, interest
   expenditure incurred for acquiring shares in group companies was hit by
   the provisions of Section 14A of the Act. The Special Bench further held
   that holding of shares with the intention of acquiring/retaining controlling
   interest would normally be on capital account, i.e. as investment and not
   as ‘trading assets’. For that reason too, the Special Bench held that
   there existed dominant connection between interest paid on loan utilized
   for acquiring the aforesaid shares and earning of dividend income.
   Consequently, the provisions of Section 14A of the Act were held to be
   attracted on the facts of the case.
8) On the interpretation of the expression ‘in relation to’, the majority
   opinion of the Special Bench was that the requirement of there being
   direct and proximate connection between the expenditure incurred and
   exempt income earned could not be read into the provision. According
   to the majority view, ‘what is relevant is to work out the expenditure in
   relation to the exempt income and not to examine whether the
   expenditure incurred by the assessee has resulted into exempt income
   or taxable income’. As per the minority view, however, the existence of
   dominant and immediate connection between the expenditure incurred
   and dividend income was a condition precedent for invoking the
   provisions of Section 14A of the Act. It was accordingly held, as per the

                                        10
     minority, that mere receipt of dividend income, incidental to the holding
     of shares, in the case of a dealer in shares, would not be sufficient for
     invoking provisions of Section 14A of the Act.
  9) Against the aforesaid order of the Special Bench, the appellant preferred
     appeal under Section 260A of the Act to the High Court. The High
     Court of Delhi has, vide impugned judgment dated November 18, 2011,
     held that the expression ‘in relation to’ appearing in Section 14A of the
     Act was synonymous with ‘in connection with’ or ‘pertaining to’, and, that
     the provisions of that Section apply regardless of the intention/motive
     behind making the investment.           As a consequence, proportionate
     disallowance of the expenditure incurred by the assessee is maintained.
  10)      It would be pertinent to point out at this stage that Punjab and
     Haryana High Court in a recent judgment in the case of Principal
     Commissioner of Income Tax v. State Bank of Patiala2 has taken a
     view which runs contrary to the aforesaid view taken by the Delhi High
     Court. The Punjab and Haryana High Court followed, with approval, the
     judgment of the High Court of Karnataka in CCI Ltd. v. Joint
     Commissioner of Income Tax, Udupi Range 3 The Revenue has filed
     appeals challenging the correctness of the aforesaid decisions. Thus, in
     view of conflict of opinions of various High Courts, these batch of
2                      (2017) 391 ITR 218 (P&H)
3                      (2012) 206 Taxman 563

                                        11
  appeals are by those assessees who were lost before the High Court
  and by the Income Tax Department against the judgments of the High
  Court where the view taken is favourable to the assessee and against
  the Revenue.
11)     Before adverting to the discussions on these judgments, let us go
  through the relevant statutory provisions, as that would enable us to
  appreciate the ratio of these cases more appropriately. Since the focus
  of discussion is Section 14A of the Act, we reproduce Section 14A in its
  entirety hereinbelow:
            “Expenditure incurred in relation to income not includible in
            total income.
            14A. (1) For the purposes of computing the total income
            under this Chapter, no deduction shall be allowed in respect
            of expenditure incurred by the assessee in relation to income
            which does not form part of the total income under this Act.
            (2) The Assessing Officer shall determine the amount of
            expenditure incurred in relation to such income which does
            not form part of the total income under this Act in accordance
            with such method as may be prescribed, if the Assessing
            Officer, having regard to the accounts of the assessee, is not
            satisfied with the correctness of the claim of the assessee in
            respect of such expenditure in relation to income which does
            not form part of the total income under this Act.
            (3) The provisions of sub-section (2) shall also apply in
            relation to a case where an assessee claims that no
            expenditure has been incurred by him in relation to income
            which does not form part of the total income under this Act :
                      Provided that nothing contained in this section shall
            empower the Assessing Officer either to reassess under
            section 147 or pass an order enhancing the assessment or
            reducing a refund already made or otherwise increasing the
            liability of the assessee under section 154, for any

                                                  12
                   assessment year beginning on or before the 1st day of April,
                   2001.”
    12)        Sub-section (2) of Section 14A deals with the proportionality as it
       empowers the AO to extricate that amount of expenditure which is
       incurred in relation to such income which does not form part of the total
       income under the Act. However, this is to be done ‘in accordance with
       such method as may be prescribed.’ This prescription is provided by the
       delegated legislation, in the form of Rule 8D of the Income Tax Rules,
       1962 (for short ‘Rules’) which Rule was inserted w.e.f. March 24, 2008
       vide Income Tax (Fifth Amendment) Rules, 2008 4. We, thus, reproduce
       Rule 8D hereunder:
                   “Method for determining amount of expenditure in
                   relation to income not includible in total income.
                   8D.(1) Where the Assessing Officer, having regard to the
                   accounts of the assessee of a previous year, is not satisfied
                   with—
                   (a) the correctness of the claim of expenditure made by the
                   assessee; or
                   (b) the claim made by the assessee that no expenditure has
                   been incurred,
                   in relation to income which does not form part of the total
                   income under the Act for such previous year, he shall
                   determine the amount of expenditure in relation to such
                   income in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (2).
                   (2) The expenditure in relation to income which does not form
                   part of the total income shall be the aggregate of following
                   amounts, namely:—
4                             In Civil Appeal No. 2165 of 2012 (Commissioner of Income Tax,
Mumbai v. M/s. Essar Teleholdings Ltd. through its Manager pronounced on January 31, 2018,
this Court has held that Rule 8D is prospective in nature.

                                        13
             (i) the amount of expenditure directly relating to income which
             does not form part of total income;
             (ii) in a case where the assessee has incurred expenditure by
             way of interest during the previous year which is not directly
             attributable to any particular income or receipt, an amount
             computed in accordance with the following formula, namely:—
             Where A = amount of expenditure by way of interest other
             than the amount of interest included in clause (i) incurred
             during the previous year;
             B = the average of value of investment, income from which
             does not or shall not form part of the total income, as
             appearing in the balance sheet of the assessee, on the first
             day and the last day of the previous year;
             C = the average of total assets as appearing in the balance
             sheet of the assessee, on the first day and the last day of the
             previous year;
             (iii) an amount equal to one-half per cent of the average of the
             value of investment, income from which does not or shall not
             form part of the total income, as appearing in the balance
             sheet of the assessee, on the first day and the last day of the
             previous year.
             (3) For the purposes of this rule, the “total assets” shall mean,
             total assets as appearing in the balance sheet excluding the
             increase on account of revaluation of assets but including the
             decrease on account of revaluation of assets.”
  13)     With the aforesaid statutory scheme in mind, we traverse through
    the judgments of the Delhi High Court in Maxopp Investment Ltd. and
    that of Punjab and Haryana High Court in State Bank of Patiala.
JUDGMENT OF DELHI HIGH COURT IN MAXOPP INVESTMENT LTD.
  14)     Three questions fell for consideration before the High Court. For

                                      14
  the purpose of these appeals, it is only question No. 1 which is relevant,
  and formulation thereof by the High Court was as under:
           “1. Whether expenditure (including interest paid on funds
           borrowed) in respect of investment in shares of operating
           companies for acquiring and retaining a controlling interest
           therein is hit by section 14A of the Income tax Act, 1961
           inasmuch as the dividend received on such shares does not
           form part of the total income?”
15)     On facts, it was noted that the assessee company is in the
  business of finance, investment and was dealing in shares and
  securities. The assessee held shares and securities, partly as
  investments on the “capital account” and partly as “trading assets” for
  the purpose of acquiring and retaining control over its group companies,
  primarily Max India Ltd. As per the assessee, any profit resulting on the
  sale of shares held as trading assets was duly offered to tax as business
  income of the assessee. During the previous year relevant to the
  assessment year 2002-03, the assessee incurred total interest
  expenditure of Rs. 1,61,21,168/-, which was claimed as business
  expenditure under section 36(1)(iii) of the Income Tax Act, 1961
  (hereinafter referred to as “the said act”). According to the assessee, the
  expenditure claimed was not hit by section 14A of the Act, on the ground
  that although borrowed funds were partly utilised for investment in
  shares held as trading assets, such investment was made with the
  intention to acquire and retain a controlling interest in the aforesaid
  company and that the receipt of dividend thereon was merely incidental.

                                   15
The High Court then took note of legislative history of Section 14A of the
Act and Rule 8D of the Rules. Thereafter, the Court went on to discuss
the law which stood prior to insertion of Section 14A. Taking note of
certain judgments, the High Court observed that prior to the insertion of
Section 14A in the Act, the law was that when an assessee had a
composite and indivisible business, which had elements of both taxable
and non-taxable income, the entire expenditure in respect of the said
business was deductible and, in such a case, the principle of
apportionment of the expenditure relating to the non-taxable income did
not apply. However, where the business was divisible, the principle of
apportionment of the expenditure was applicable and the expenditure
apportioned to the ‘exempt’ income or income not exigible to tax, was
not allowable as a deduction. The High Court, then, took cognizance of
the legislative intent and objective behind the insertion of Section 14A by
referring to the Memorandum Explaining the Provisions of the Finance
Bill, 2001.    It also reproduced passages from few judgments of this
Court. Since, for the purpose of the present case, it is necessary to
keep in mind the objectives behind this provision, we reproduce that part
of the discussion hereunder:
          “Objective behind insertion of section 14A
          15. The object behind the insertion of section 14A in the said
          Act is apparent from the Memorandum explaining the
          provisions of the Finance Bill 2001 which is to the following
          effect:-

                            16
    “Certain incomes are not includable while computing
    the total income as these are exempt under various
    provisions of the Act. There have been cases where
    deductions have been claimed in respect of such
    exempt income. This in effect means that the tax
    incentive given by way of exemptions to certain
    categories of income is being used to reduce also the
    tax payable on the non-exempt income by debiting the
    expenses incurred to earn the exempt income against
    taxable income. This is against the basic principles of
    taxation whereby only the net income, i.e., gross
    income minus the expenditure is taxed. On the same
    analogy, the exemption is also in respect of the net
    income. Expenses incurred can be allowed only to the
    extent they are relatable to the earning of taxable
    income.
    It is proposed to insert a new section 14A so as to
    clarify the intention of the Legislature since the
    inception of the Income-tax Act, 1961, that no deduction
    shall be made in respect of any expenditure incurred by
    the assessee in relation to income which does not form
    part of the total income under the Income-tax Act.
    The      proposed     amendment      will   take   effect
    retrospectively from April 1, 1962 and will accordingly,
    apply in relation to the assessment year 1962-63 and
    subsequent assessment years.”
16. As observed by the Supreme Court in the case
of CIT v. Walfort Share and Stock Brokers P Ltd: 326 ITR 1
(SC), the insertion of section 14 A with retrospective effect
reflects the serious attempt on the part of Parliament not to
allow deduction in respect of any expenditure incurred by the
assessee in relation to income, which does not form part of
the total income under the said act against the taxable
income. The Supreme Court further observed as under:-
    “.. In other words, section 14 A clarifies that expenses
    incurred can be allowed only to the extent that they are
    relatable to the earning of taxable income. In many
    cases the nature of expenses incurred by the assessee
    may be relatable partly to the exempt income and partly
    to the taxable income. In the absence of section 14A,
    the expenditure incurred in respect of exempt income
    was being claimed against taxable income. The
    mandate of section 14A is clear. It desires to curb the
    practice to claim deduction of expenses incurred in

                            17
    relation to exempt income against taxable income and
    at the same time avail of the tax incentive by way of an
    exemption of exempt income without making any
    apportionment of expenses incurred in relation to
    exempt income…”
    “..Expenses allowed can only be in respect of earning
    taxable income. This is the purport of section 14A. In
    section 14A, the first phrase is “for the purposes of
    computing the total income under this Chapter” which
    makes it clear that various heads of income as
    prescribed in the Chapter IV would fall within section
    14A. The next phrase is, “in relation to income which
    does not form part of total income under the Act”. It
    means that if an income does not form part of total
    income, then the related expenditure is outside the
    ambit of the applicability of section 14A..
                                          (Emphasis supplied)”
17. The Supreme Court also clearly held that in the case of an
income like dividend income which does not form part of the
total income, any expenditure/deduction relatable to such
(exempt or non-taxable) income, even if it is of the nature
specified in sections 15 to 59 of the said Act, cannot be
allowed against any other income which is includable in the
total income. The exact words used by the Supreme Court
are as under:-
    “Further, section 14 specifies five heads of income
    which are chargeable to tax. In order to be chargeable,
    an income has to be brought under one of the five
    heads. Sections 15 to 59 lay down the rules for
    computing income for the purpose of chargeability to
    tax under those heads. Sections 15 to 59 quantify the
    total income chargeable to tax. The permissible
    deductions enumerated in sections 15 to 59 are now to
    be allowed only with reference to income which is
    brought under one of the above heads and is
    chargeable to tax. If an income like dividend income is
    not     a    part    of     the     total   income,    the
    expenditure/deduction though of the nature specified in
    sections 15 to 59 but related to the income not forming
    part of the total income could not be allowed against
    other income includable in the total income for the
    purpose of chargeability to tax. The theory of
    apportionment of expenditure between taxable and
    non-taxable has, in principle, been now widened under

                                     18
               section 14 A.
                                                (emphasis supplied)”
16)     The High Court then undertook the exercise of analysing the
  provisions of Section 14A of the Act and, in the process, examined the
  contours and scope of the expressions ‘in relation to’ and ‘expenditure
  incurred’ occurring therein. The High Court pointed out that contention
  of the assessees, in this behalf, was that the word ‘incurred’ must be
  taken literally in the sense that the expenditure must have actually taken
  place. Moreover, the expenditure must also have taken place in relation
  to income which does not form part of total income. Further, the
  expression “in relation to” implies that there must be a direct and
  proximate connection with the subject matter. In other words, only that
  actual expenditure which is made directly and for the object of earning
  exempt income (in the present appeals - dividend income) could be
  disallowed under section 14A of the Act.        If the dominant and main
  objective of spending was not the earning of ‘exempt’ income then, the
  expenditure could not be disallowed under section 14A of the Act
  provided it was otherwise allowable under sections 15 to 59 of the said
  Act.   The High Court, however, did not agree with the aforesaid
  propositions advanced by the learned counsel for the assessees which
  according to it was mired by several difficulties. Distinguishing the case
  law cited by the assessees where the expression ‘in relation to’ was
  interpreted by this Court, as not applicable in the present context, the

                                          19
    High Court, instead, referred to the judgment in the case of Doypack
    Systems Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India5 wherein this Court has held that
    expressions ‘pertaining to’, ‘in relation to’ and ‘arising out of’ used in the
    deeming provisions, are used in an expansive sense. It also referred to
    the judgment of this Court in CIT v. Walfort Share and Stock Brokers
    P Ltd.6 wherein this Court has held that the basic principle of taxation is
    to tax the net income, i.e., gross income minus the expenditure and on
    the same analogy the exemption is also in respect of net income. In
    other words, where the gross income would not form part of total
    income, it's associated or related expenditure would also not be
    permitted to be debited against other taxable income.
  17)      Likewise, explaining the meaning of ‘expenditure incurred’, the
    High Court agreed that this expression would mean incurring of actual
    expenditure and not to some imagined expenditure. At the same time,
    observed the High Court, the ‘actual’ expenditure that is in contemplation
    under section 14A(1) of the said Act is the ‘actual’ expenditure in relation
    to or in connection with or pertaining to exempt income. The corollary to
    this is that if no expenditure is incurred in relation to the exempt income,
    no disallowance can be made under section 14A of the said Act. On the
    basis of the aforesaid discussion, the High Court answered the question
    formulated by it in the affirmative.
5                       (1988) 2 SCC 299
6                       (2010) 326 ITR 1 (SC)

                                      20
JUDGMENT OF PUNJAB AND HARYANA HIGH COURT IN STATE BANK
OF PATIALA
  18)     This case arose in the context where exempt income in the form of
    dividend was earned by the Bank from securities held by it as its stock in
    trade.   The assessee filed its return declaring an income of about
    Rs.670 crores which was selected for scrutiny. The return showed
    dividend income exempt under section 10(34) and (35) of about
    Rs.11.07 crores and net interest income exempt under section 10(15)(iv)
    (h) of about Rs.1.12 crores. The total exempt income claimed in the
    return was, therefore, Rs.12,19,78,015/-. The assessee while claiming
    the exemption contended that the investment in shares, bonds, etc.
    constituted its stock-in-trade; that the investment had not been made
    only for earning tax free income; that the tax free income was only
    incidental to the assessee’s main business of sale and purchase of
    securities and, therefore, no expenditure had been incurred for earning
    such exempt income; the expenditure would have remained the same
    even if no dividend or interest income had been earned by the assessee
    from the said securities and that no expenditure on proportionate basis
    could be allocated against exempt income. The assessee also
    contended that in any event it had acquired the securities from its own
    funds and, therefore, section 14A was not applicable. The AO restricted
    the disallowance to the amount which was claimed as exempt income by

                                    21
applying the formula contained in Rule 8D holding that Section 14A
would be applicable. The CIT(A) issued notice of enhancement under
Section 251 of the Act and held that in view of Section 14A of the Act,
the assessee was not to be allowed any deduction in respect of income
which is not chargeable to tax.        Therefore, he disallowed the entire
expenditure claimed instead of restricting the disallowance to the
amount which was claimed as exempt income as done by the AO. The
ITAT set aside the order of the AO as well as CIT(A). It referred to a
CBDT Circular No.18/2015 dated 02.11.2015 which states that income
arising from investment of a banking concern is attributable to the
business of banking which falls under the head “Profits and gains of
business and profession”. The circular states that shares and stock held
by the bank are ‘stock-in-trade’ and not ‘investment’. Referring to certain
judgments (which we will also refer to) and the earlier orders of the
Tribunal, it was held that if shares are held as stock-in-trade and not as
investment even the disallowance under rule 8D would be nil as rule
8D(2)(i) would be confined to direct expenses for earning the tax exempt
income.     In the aforesaid factual backdrop, in appeal filed by the
Revenue, the High Court noted that following substantial question of law
arose for consideration:
         “Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the
         Hon’ble ITAT is right in law in deleting the addition made on
         account of disallowance under section 14A of the Income Tax
         Act, 1961?”

                                      22
19)      In its analysis, the High Court accepted the contention of the
  counsel for the assessee that the assessee is engaged in the purchase
  and sale of shares as a trader with the object of earning profit and not
  with a view to earn interest or dividend. The assessee does not have an
  investment      portfolio.  The    securities    constitute   the   assessee’s
  stock-in-trade. The Department, in fact, rightly accepted, as a matter of
  fact, that the dividend and interest earned was from the securities that
  constituted the assessee’s stock-in-trade. The same is, in any event,
  established. The assessee carried on the business of sale and purchase
  of securities. It was supported by Circular No.18, dated November 02,
  2015, issued by the CBDT, which reads as under:-
            “Subject: Interest from Non-SLR securities of Banks – Reg.
            It has been brought to the notice of the Board that in the case
            of Banks, field officers are taking a view that, “expenses
            relatable to investment in non-SLR securities need to be
            disallowed u/s 57(i) of the Act as interest on non-SLR
            securities is income from other sources.”
            2. Clause (id) of sub-section (1) of Section 56 of the Act
            provides that income by way of interest on securities shall be
            chargeable to income-tax under the head “Income from Other
            Sources”, if, the income is not chargeable to income-tax
            under the head “Profits and Gains of Business and
            Profession”.
            3. The matter has been examined in light of the judicial
            decisions on this issue. In the case of CIT Vs Nawanshahar
            Central Cooperative Bank Ltd. [2007] 160TAXMAN 48(SC),
            the Apex Court held that the investments made by a banking
            concern are part of the business of banking. Therefore, the
            income arising from such investments is attributable to the
            business of banking falling under the head “Profits and Gains
            of Business and Profession”.

                                       23
            3.2 Even though the abovementioned decision was in the
            context of co-operative societies/Banks claiming deduction
            under section 80P(2)(a)(i) of the Act, the principle is equally
            applicable to all banks/commercial banks, to which Banking
            Regulation Act, 1949 applies.
            4. In the light of the Supreme Court’s decision in the matter,
            the issue is well settled. Accordingly, the Board has decided
            that no appeals may henceforth be filed on this ground by the
            officers of the Department and appeals already filed, if any, on
            this ground before Courts/Tribunals may be withdrawn/not
            pressed upon. This may be brought to the notice of all
            concerned.
                                                      (emphasis supplied)”
20)     The High Court pointed out that the Circular carves out a
  distinction between stock-in-trade and investment and provides that if
  the motive behind purchase and sale of shares is to earn profit then the
  same would be treated as trading profit and if the object is to derive
  income by way of dividend then the profit would be said to have accrued
  from the investment. If the assessee is found to have treated the shares
  and securities as stock-in-trade, the income arising therefrom would be
  business income. A loss would be a business loss. Thus, an assessee
  may have two portfolios, namely, investment portfolio and a trading
  portfolio. In the case of the former, the securities are to be treated as
  capital assets and in the latter as trading assets.
21)     Further, as a banking institution, the assessee was also statutorily
  required to place a part of its funds in approved securities, as held in

                                            24
    CIT v. Nawanshahar Central Co-operative Bank Ltd. 7.                     Since, the
    shares, bonds, debentures purchased by the assessees constituted its
    stock-in-trade, the provisions of Section 14A were not applicable. Here,
    the Court noted distinction between stock-in-trade and investment and
    made the following observations:
               “17. Under section 14A, an expenditure can be disallowed
               only if it is incurred by the assessee in relation to income
               exempt from tax. The dividend or interest from the assessee’s
               stock-in-trade i.e. the securities was exempt from tax in view
               of sections 10(15)(iv)(h),(34) and (35). This was incidental to
               its business of banking. The business income on account of
               the assessee trading in the securities is assessable under the
               head “Profits and gains of business and profession”. The
               expenditure incurred in relation to stock-in-trade arising as a
               result of investment in shares and debentures is deductible
               under sections 28 to 37. There is a distinction between
               stock-in-trade and investment. The object of earning profit
               from trading in securities is different from the object of earning
               income, such as, dividend and interest arising therefrom. The
               object of trading in securities does not constitute the activity of
               investment where the object is to earn dividend or interest.”
  22)     The High Court then discussed in detail the judgment in Walfort
    Share and Stock Brokers P Ltd. which related to dividend stripping.
    After explaining the objective behind Section 14A of the Act (which is
    already noted above), this Court in the facts of that case, had held that a
    payback does not constitute an ‘expenditure incurred’ in terms of Section
    14A as it does not impact the profit and loss account. This expenditure,
    in fact, is a payout.
  23)     According to the High Court, what is to be disallowed is the
7                         (2007) 289 ITR 6 (SC)

                                       25
  expenditure incurred to “earn” exempt income. The words ‘in relation to’
  in Section 14A must be construed accordingly. Applying that principle to
  the facts at hand, the High Court concluded as under:
            “Now, the dividend and interest are income. The question
            then is whether the assessee can be said to have incurred
            any expenditure at all or any part of the said expenditure in
            respect of the exempt income viz. dividend and interest that
            arose out of the securities that constituted the assessee’s
            stock-in-trade. The answer must be in the negative. The
            purpose of the purchase of the said securities was not to earn
            income arising therefrom, namely, dividend and interest, but
            to earn profits from trading in i.e. purchasing and selling the
            same. It is axiomatic, therefore, that the entire expenditure
            including administrative costs was incurred for the purchase
            and sale of the stock-in-trade and, therefore, towards earning
            the business income from the trading activity of purchasing
            and selling the securities. Irrespective of whether the
            securities yielded any income arising therefrom, such as,
            dividend or interest, no expenditure was incurred in relation to
            the same.”
24)     We may also note here that the High Court referred to the
  judgment of the Karnataka High Court in CCI Ltd. case and concurred
  therewith. This judgment in CCI Ltd. is, however, a very short judgment
  which records the submission of counsel for the parties very briefly and
  thereafter the entire discussion is contained in para 5 that reads as
  under:
        “5. When no expenditure is incurred by the assessee in
         earning the dividend income, no notional expenditure could be
         deducted from the said income. It is not the case of the
         assessee retaining any shares so as to have the benefit of
         dividend. 63% of the shares, which were purchased, are sold
         and the income derived therefrom is offered to tax as business
         income. The remaining 37% of the shares are retained. It has
         remained unsold with the assessee. It is those unsold shares
         have yielded dividend, for which, the assessee has not
         incurred any expenditure at all. Though the dividend income is

                                         26
           exempted from payment of tax, if any expenditure is incurred in
           earning the said income, the said expenditure also cannot be
           deducted. But in this case, when the assessee has not
           retained shares with the intention of earning dividend income
           and the dividend income is incidental to his business of sale of
           shares, which remained unsold by the assessee, it cannot be
           said that the expenditure incurred in acquiring the shares has
           to be apportioned to the extent of dividend income and that
           should be disallowed from deductions. In that view of the
           matter, the approach of the authorities is not in conformity with
           the statutory provisions contained under the Act. Therefore,
           the impugned orders are not sustainable and require to be set
           aside.”
  25)     At this stage, it will also be useful to refer a judgment of Calcutta
    High Court in Commissioner of Income Tax v. G.K.K. Capital Markets
    (P.) Ltd.8 which has also agreed with the view taken by the Karnataka
    High Court. In that case, the assessee was engaged in the business of
    share trading.     In the computation of income, the assessee claimed
    long-term capital gains as exempt income and declared expenditure
    disallowable against it under Section 14A of the Act. The AO treated the
    long-term capital gains as business income.            The Appellate Tribunal
    found that the assessee did not have any investment and all the shares
    were held as stock-in-trade as was evident from the orders of the lower
    authorities. On those facts it held that once the assessee had kept the
    shares as stock-in-trade, Rule 8D of the Rules would not apply. On the
    questions whether the Appellate Tribunal was justified in deleting the
    disallowance under Section 14A computed in accordance with Rule 8D
8                       (2017) 392 ITR 196 (Cal)

                                       27
    and in holding the investments as shares stock-in-trade, the High Court
    held that the AO had accepted the correctness of the disallowable
    expenditure offered by the assessee on its claim of the amount as
    long-term capital gains. He had not allowed the claim itself treating the
    amount as business income to thereafter disallow the offered
    expenditure. According to the High Court, since the finding of fact was
    recorded by the AO regarding the exempt income claimed being treated
    as business income and the shares held by the assessee having been
    treated as stock-in-trade, there could not have been disallowance of
    expenditure under Section 14A of the Act and that provision had no
    application.
  26)     It would be pertinent to mention that earlier judgment of the same
    High Court in the case of Dhanuka and Sons v. CIT9 was cited by the
    Revenue. However, this judgment was distinguished on the ground that,
    in that case, there was no dispute that part of the income of the
    assessee from its business was from dividend whereas the assessee
    was unable to produce any material before the authorities below
    showing the source from which such shares were acquired. For better
    understanding, it would be necessary to note the discussion in the case
    of Dhanuka and Sons, which was reproduced by the High Court in
    G.K.K. Capital Markets (P.) Ltd. Para 6 to para 9 of Dhanuka and
9                     (2011) 339 ITR 319 (Cal)

                                    28
Sons read as under:
    “6. Mr. Sarkar, the learned advocate appearing on behalf of the
     revenue, has, on the other hand, supported the order passed
     by the Tribunal and has contended that the assessee itself
     having failed to produce material in support of its contention,
     the Assessing Officer rightly assessed the deductible income
     on proportionate basis. Mr. Sarkar submits that the same is in
     conformity with Rule 8D of the Income tax Rule and thus, we
     should not interfere with the order passed by the Tribunal.
     7. After hearing the learned counsel appearing for the parties
     and after going through the materials on record and the
     decisions cited by Mr. Khaitan, we find that the Supreme Court
     in the cases of CIT v. Maharastra Sugar Mills Ltd. [1971] 82
     ITR        452      and Rajasthan        State       Warehousing
     Corpn. v. CIT [2000] 242 ITR 450/109 Taxman 145 having held
     that where there is one indivisible business giving rise to
     taxable income as well as exempt income, the entire
     expenditure incurred in relation to that business would have to
     be allowed even if a part of the income earned from the
     business is exempt from tax, section 14A of the Act was
     enacted to overcome those judicial pronouncements. The
     object of section 14A of the Act is to disallow the direct and
     indirect expenditure incurred in relation to income which does
     not form part of the total income.
     8. In the case before us, there is no dispute that part of the
     income of the assessee from its business is from dividend
     which is exempt from tax whereas the assessee was unable to
     produce any material before the authorities below showing the
     source from which such shares were acquired. Mr. Khaitan
     strenuously contended before us that for the last few years
     before the relevant previous year, no new share has been
     acquired and thus, the loan that was taken and for which the
     interest is payable by the assessee was not for acquisition of
     those old shares and, therefore, the authorities below erred in
     law in giving benefit of proportionate deduction.
     9. In our opinion, the mere fact that those shares were old
     ones and not acquired recently is immaterial. It is for the
     assessee to show the source of acquisition of those shares by
     production of materials that those were acquired from the
     funds available in the hands of the assessee at the relevant
     point of time without taking benefit of any loan. If those shares
     were purchased from the amount taken in loan, even for
     instance, five or ten years ago, it is for the assessee to show
     by the production of documentary evidence that such loaned

                                      29
        amount had already been paid back and for the relevant
        assessment year, no interest is payable by the assessee for
        acquiring those old shares. In the absence of any such
        materials placed by the assessee, in our opinion, the
        authorities below rightly held that proportionate amount should
        be disallowed having regard to the total income and the
        income from the exempt source. In the absence of any material
        disclosing the source of acquisition of shares which is within
        the special knowledge of the assessee, the assessing authority
        took a most reasonable approach in assessment.”
27)     We have already stated as to how the two divergent opinions have
  emerged from different High Courts and the respective reasons in
  support of these conflicting outcome. Obviously, assessees are banking
  upon the reasons which prevailed with the High Courts that have taken
  the view which are favourable to the assessees and the Revenue is
  relying upon the reasoning given by Delhi High Court as well as Calcutta
  High Court in Dhanuka and Sons case.               Therefore, it may not be
  necessary to give a detailed narrative of the arguments which were
  advanced by various counsel appearing for the assessees as well as
  counsel for the Revenue. A brief resume of their submissions would
  serve the purpose.
28)     Insofar as assessees are concerned, their arguments are
  recapitulated in brief hereinbelow:
  (i)   The holding of investment in group companies representing
        controlling interest, amounts to carrying on business, as held in the
        various cases.
  (ii)  Notwithstanding that dividend income is assessable under the

                                     30
        head “income from other sources”, in view of the mandatory
        prescription in Section 56 of the Act, the nature of dividend income
        has to be ascertained on the facts of the case. Where dividend is
        earned on shares held as stock-in-trade/shares purchased for
        acquiring/retaining controlling interest, dividend income is in the
        nature of business income.
  (iii) Interest paid on loans borrowed for acquiring shares representing
        controlling interest in the investee company is allowable business
        expenditure in terms of Section 36(1)(iii) of the Act, since acquiring
        controlling interest in companies and managing, administering,
        financing and rehabilitating such companies are for business
        and/or professional purposes and not for earned dividend.
  (iv)  Conversely, interest paid on funds borrowed for investment in
        shares representing controlling interest does not represent
        expenditure incurred for earning dividend income and is not
        allowable under Section 57(iii) of the Act (prior to introduction of
        Section 14A).
29)     Basing their case on the aforesaid principles, it was argued that
  when the shares were acquired, as part of promoter holding, for the
  purpose of acquiring controlling interest in the company, the dominant
  object is to keep control over the management of the company and not
  to earn the dividend from investment in shares. Whether dividend is

                                   31
  declared/earned or not is immaterial and, in either case, the assessee
  would not liquidate the shares in investee companies. Therefore, no
  expenditure was made ‘in relation to’ the income i.e. the dividend income
  and, therefore, Section 14A would not be attracted. In this hue, it was
  submitted that Section 14A was to be accorded plain and grammatical
  interpretation meaning thereby mandating and requiring a direct and
  proximate nexus/link between the expenditure actually incurred and the
  earning of the exempt income.         It was also argued that even if
  contextual/purposive interpretation is to be given, that also called for
  direct and proximate connection between the expenditure incurred and
  earning of dividend. According to the learned counsel appearing for the
  assessees, the legislative intention behind inserting Section 14A in this
  statute was to exclude both, viz. the receipts which are exempt under
  the provisions of the Act as well as expenditure actually incurred ‘in
  relation thereto’ from entering into the computation of assessable
  income, so as to remove the double benefit to the assessee (i) in the
  form of exempt income, on which no tax is leviable; and (ii) providing
  deduction in respect of expenditure actually incurred which directly
  resulted in the earning of exempt income by the assessee.
30)      Mr. K. Radhakrishnan, learned senior counsel appearing for the
  Revenue, on the other hand, made a fervent plea to accept the view
  taken by the Delhi High Court. He submitted that the objective behind

                                      32
  insertion of Section 14A of the Act manifestly pointed out that
  expenditure incurred in respect of income earned, which is exempted
  from tax, has to be disallowed. He also pointed out that this message
  was eloquently brought out by this Court in Walfort Share and Stock
  Brokers P Ltd. case. Otherwise, argued the learned senior counsel, the
  assessee will get double benefit, one, in the form of exemption from
  income tax insofar as dividend income is concerned and other by getting
  deduction on account of expenditure as well. He, thus, submitted that
  expression ‘in relation to’ had to be given expansive meaning in order to
  sub-serve the purpose of the said provision. He also emphasised that
  literal meaning of Section 14A of the Act pointed towards that and that
  was equally the purpose behind the insertion of Section 14A as well.
31)      We have given our thoughtful consideration to the argument of
  counsel for the parties on both sides, in the light of various judgments
  which have been cited before us, some of which have already been
  taken note of above.
32)      In the first instance, it needs to be recognised that as per section
  14A(1) of the Act, deduction of that expenditure is not to be allowed
  which has been incurred by the assessee “in relation to income which
  does not form part of the total income under this Act”. Axiomatically, it is
  that expenditure alone which has been incurred in relation to the income

                                     33
  which is includible in total income that has to be disallowed.         If an
  expenditure incurred has no causal connection with the exempted
  income, then such an expenditure would obviously be treated as not
  related to the income that is exempted from tax, and such expenditure
  would be allowed as business expenditure. To put it differently, such
  expenditure would then be considered as incurred in respect of other
  income which is to be treated as part of the total income.
33)      There is no quarrel in assigning this meaning to section 14A of the
  Act. In fact, all the High Courts, whether it is the Delhi High Court on the
  one hand or the Punjab and Haryana High Court on the other hand,
  have agreed in providing this interpretation to section 14A of the Act.
  The entire dispute is as to what interpretation is to be given to the words
  ‘in relation to’ in the given scenario, viz. where the dividend income on
  the shares is earned, though the dominant purpose for subscribing in
  those shares of the investee company was not to earn dividend. We
  have two scenarios in these sets of appeals. In one group of cases the
  main purpose for investing in shares was to gain control over the
  investee company. Other cases are those where the shares of investee
  company were held by the assessees as stock-in-trade (i.e. as a
  business activity) and not as investment to earn dividends.          In this
  context, it is to be examined as to whether the expenditure was incurred,
  in respective scenarios, in relation to the dividend income or not.

                                    34
34)     Having clarified the aforesaid position, the first and foremost issue
  that falls for consideration is as to whether the dominant purpose test,
  which is pressed into service by the assessees would apply while
  interpreting Section 14A of the Act or we have to go by the theory of
  apportionment. We are of the opinion that the dominant purpose for
  which the investment into shares is made by an assessee may not be
  relevant. No doubt, the assessee like Maxopp Investment Limited may
  have made the investment in order to gain control of the investee
  company. However, that does not appear to be a relevant factor in
  determining the issue at hand. Fact remains that such dividend income
  is non-taxable. In this scenario, if expenditure is incurred on earning the
  dividend income, that much of the expenditure which is attributable to
  the dividend income has to be disallowed and cannot be treated as
  business expenditure. Keeping this objective behind Section14A of the
  Act in mind, the said provision has to be interpreted, particularly, the
  word ‘in relation to the income’ that does not form part of total income.
  Considered in this hue, the principle of apportionment of expenses
  comes into play as that is the principle which is engrained in Section 14A
  of the Act. This is so held in Walfort Share and Stock Brokers P Ltd.,
  relevant passage whereof is already reproduced above, for the sake of
  continuity of discussion, we would like to quote the following few lines
  therefrom.

                                        35
               “The next phrase is, “in relation to income which does
               not form part of total income under the Act”. It means
               that if an income does not form part of total income,
               then the related expenditure is outside the ambit of the
               applicability of section 14A..
               xxx           xxx          xxx
               The theory of apportionment of expenditure between
               taxable and non-taxable has, in principle, been now
               widened under section 14 A.”
35)      The Delhi High Court, therefore, correctly observed that prior to
  introduction of Section 14A of the Act, the law was that when an
  assessee had a composite and indivisible business which had elements
  of both taxable and non-taxable income, the entire expenditure in
  respect of said business was deductible and, in such a case, the
  principle of apportionment of the expenditure relating to the non-taxable
  income did not apply.          The principle of apportionment was made
  available only where the business was divisible. It is to find a cure to the
  aforesaid problem that the Legislature has not only inserted Section 14A
  by the Finance (Amendment) Act, 2001 but also made it retrospective,
  i.e., 1962 when the Income Tax Act itself came into force. The aforesaid
  intent was expressed loudly and clearly in the Memorandum explaining
  the provisions of the Finance Bill, 2001. We, thus, agree with the view
  taken by the Delhi High Court, and are not inclined to accept the opinion
  of Punjab & Haryana High Court which went by dominant purpose
  theory. The aforesaid reasoning would be applicable in cases where

                                     36
  shares are held as investment in the investee company, may be for the
  purpose of having controlling interest therein.      On that reasoning,
  appeals of Maxopp Investment Limited as well as similar cases where
  shares were purchased by the assessees to have controlling interest in
  the investee companies have to fail and are, therefore, dismissed.
36)      There is yet another aspect which still needs to be looked into.
  What happens when the shares are held as ‘stock-in-trade’ and not as
  ‘investment’, particularly, by the banks? On this specific aspect, CBDT
  has issued circular No. 18/2015 dated November 02, 2015.
37)      This Circular has already been reproduced in Para 19 above. This
  Circular takes note of the judgment of this Court in Nawanshahar case
  wherein it is held that investments made by a banking concern are part
  of the business or banking. Therefore, the income arises from such
  investments is attributable to business of banking falling under the head
  ‘profits and gains of business and profession’.      On that basis, the
  Circular contains the decision of the Board that no appeal would be filed
  on this ground by the officers of the Department and if the appeals are
  already filed, they should be withdrawn. A reading of this circular would
  make it clear that the issue was as to whether income by way of interest
  on securities shall be chargeable to income tax under the head ‘income
  from other sources’ or it is to fall under the head ‘profits and gains of

                                     37
  business and profession’. The Board, going by the decision of this Court
  in Nawanshahar case, clarified that it has to be treated as income
  falling under the head ‘profits and gains of business and profession’. The
  Board also went to the extent of saying that this would not be limited
  only to co-operative societies/Banks claiming deduction under Section
  80P(2)(a)(i)   of  the Act     but   would   also  be   applicable   to all
  banks/commercial banks, to which Banking Regulation Act, 1949
  applies.
38)      From this, Punjab and Haryana High Court pointed out that this
  circular carves out a distinction between ‘stock-in-trade’ and ‘investment’
  and provides that if the motive behind purchase and sale of shares is to
  earn profit, then the same would be treated as trading profit and if the
  object is to derive income by way of dividend then the profit would be
  said to have accrued from investment. To this extent, the High Court
  may be correct. At the same time, we do not agree with the test of
  dominant intention applied by the Punjab and Haryana High Court,
  which we have already discarded. In that event, the question is as to on
  what basis those cases are to be decided where the shares of other
  companies are purchased by the assessees as ‘stock-in-trade’ and not
  as ‘investment’. We proceed to discuss this aspect hereinafter.
39)      In those cases, where shares are held as stock-in-trade, the main

                                    38
  purpose is to trade in those shares and earn profits therefrom. However,
  we are not concerned with those profits which would naturally be treated
  as ‘income’ under the head ‘profits and gains from business and
  profession’. What happens is that, in the process, when the shares are
  held as ‘stock-in-trade’, certain dividend is also earned, though
  incidentally, which is also an income. However, by virtue of Section 10
  (34) of the Act, this dividend income is not to be included in the total
  income and is exempt from tax. This triggers the applicability of Section
  14A of the Act which is based on the theory of apportionment of
  expenditure between taxable and non-taxable income as held in Walfort
  Share and Stock Brokers P Ltd. case.           Therefore, to that extent,
  depending upon the facts of each case, the expenditure incurred in
  acquiring those shares will have to be apportioned.
40)     We note from the facts in the State Bank of Patiala cases that the
  AO, while passing the assessment order, had already restricted the
  disallowance to the amount which was claimed as exempt income by
  applying the formula contained in Rule 8D of the Rules and holding that
  section 14A of the Act would be applicable. In spite of this exercise of
  apportionment of expenditure carried out by the AO, CIT(A) disallowed
  the entire deduction of expenditure. That view of the CIT(A) was clearly
  untenable and rightly set aside by the ITAT. Therefore, on facts, the
  Punjab and Haryana High Court has arrived at a correct conclusion by

                                 39
affirming the view of the ITAT, though we are not subscribing to the
theory of dominant intention applied by the High Court. It is to be kept in
mind that in those cases where shares are held as ‘stock-in-trade’, it
becomes a business activity of the assessee to deal in those shares as
a business proposition. Whether dividend is earned or not becomes
immaterial. In fact, it would be a quirk of fate that when the investee
company declared dividend, those shares are held by the assessee,
though the assessee has to ultimately trade those shares by selling
them to earn profits. The situation here is, therefore, different from the
case like Maxopp Investment Ltd. where the assessee would continue to
hold those shares as it wants to retain control over the investee
company. In that case, whenever dividend is declared by the investee
company that would necessarily be earned by the assessee and the
assessee alone. Therefore, even at the time of investing into those
shares, the assessee knows that it may generate dividend income as
well and as and when such dividend income is generated that would be
earned by the assessee. In contrast, where the shares are held as
stock-in-trade, this may not be necessarily a situation.        The main
purpose is to liquidate those shares whenever the share price goes up in
order to earn profits. In the result, the appeals filed by the Revenue
challenging the judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in State
Bank of Patiala also fail, though law in this respect has been clarified

                                       40
  hereinabove.
41)     Having regard to the language of Section 14A(2) of the Act, read
  with Rule 8D of the Rules, we also make it clear that before applying the
  theory of apportionment, the AO needs to record satisfaction that having
  regard to the kind of the assessee, suo moto disallowance under
  Section 14A was not correct.           It will be in those cases where the
  assessee in his return has himself apportioned but the AO was not
  accepting the said apportionment.          In that eventuality, it will have to
  record its satisfaction to this effect.       Further, while recording such a
  satisfaction, nature of loan taken by the assessee for purchasing the
  shares/making the investment in shares is to be examined by the AO.
42)     Civil Appeal No. 1423 of 2015 is filed by M/s. Avon Cycles Limited,
  Ludhiana, wherein the AO had invoked section 14A of the Act read with
  Rule 8D of the Rules and apportioned the expenditure. The CIT(A) had
  set aside the disallowance, which view was upturned by the ITAT in the
  following words:
            “...Admittedly the assessee had paid total interest of Rs.2.92
            crores out of which interest paid on term loan raised for
            specific purpose totals to Rs.1.70 crores and balance interest
            paid by the assessee is Rs.1.21 crores. The funds utilized by
            the assessee being mixed funds and in view of the provisions
            of Rule 8D(2)(ii) of the Income Tax Rules the disallowance is
            confirmed at Rs.10,49,851/-, we find no merit in the ad hoc
            disallowance made by the CIT (Appeals) at Rs.5,00,000/-.
            Consequently, ground of appeal raised by the Revenue is
            partly allowed and ground raised by the assessee in
            cross-objection is allowed...”

                                      41
        Taking note of the aforesaid finding of fact, the High Court has
  dismissed the appeal of the assessee observing as under:
           “In the present case, after examining the balance-sheet of the
           assessee, a finding of fact has been recorded that the funds
           utilized by the assessee being mixed funds, therefore, the
           interest paid by the assessee is also an interest on the
           investments made. Such being a finding of fact, we do not
           find that any substantial question of law arises for
           consideration of this Court.”
        After going through the records and applying the principle of
  apportionment, which is held to be applicable in such cases, we do not
  find any merit in Civil Appeal No. 1423 of 2015, which is accordingly
  dismissed.
43)     Few appeals are filed by the Revenue against the assessees
  which pertained to the period prior to the introduction of Rule 8D of the
  Rules. Here, the case is decided in favour of the assessees also on the
  ground that Rule 8D of the Rules is prospective in nature and could not
  have been made applicable in respect of the Assessment Years prior to
  2007 when this Rule was inserted. This view has already been upheld
  by this Court in Civil Appeal No. 2165 of 2012 (Commissioner of
  Income Tax, Mumbai v. M/s. Essar Teleholdings Ltd. through its
  Manager), pronounced on January 31, 2018, that the said Rule is
  prospective in nature.      On this ground alone, these appeals of the
  Revenue fail as it is not necessary to go into the other issues.

                                    42
  44)     To sum up:
    (a)   Appeals of the assessees, i.e. Civil Appeal Nos. 104-109, 110-112,
       130, 1423 of 2015, are dismissed.
    (b)   Appeals of the Revenue, i.e. Civil Appeal Nos. 3267, 19614, 10096
       of 2013, 8596 of 2014, 18019 of 2017, 115, 123, 6590 of 2015, Civil
       Appeals arising out of SLP (C) Nos. 27054, 31417 of 2016, 20475,
       23123, 32405 of 2017, Diary Nos. 36413, 39820, 39823, 41890,
       41903, 41922 of 2017 and 1146 of 2018 are dismissed.
    (c)   Appeal of the Revenue, i.e. Civil Appeal arising out of Diary No.
       41203 of 2017, is allowed.
                                                .............................................J.
                                                                            (A.K. SIKRI)
                                                .............................................J.
                                                              (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 12, 2018.


