                                                                    REPORTABLE
                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4981 OF 2012
THE SECRETARY, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA &
ORS.                                                            .....APPELLANT(S)
                                         VERSUS
DHARAMBIR SINGH                                             .....RESPONDENT(S)
                                JUDGMENT
HEMANT GUPTA, J.
1)     The challenge in the present appeal is to an order dated March 7,
       2011 passed by the Armed Forces Tribunal, Chandigarh, Regional
       Bench at Chandimandir1, granting disability pension to the
       respondent Dharambir Singh, as the injury was found to be
       attributed to military service.
2)     The undisputed facts are that the respondent joined Territorial
       Army on December 28, 1981 and was discharged on December 13,
       1999.       He was granted two days casual leave from January 25,
       1999 to January 26, 1999 when posted at Jalandhar Cantt. During
       the leave period, he met with an accident while riding a scooter
       and suffered head injury with Faciomaxillary and compound
       fracture 1/3rd Femur (LT).      A Court of Inquiry 2 was conducted to
       investigate into the circumstances under which the respondent
1  for short, ‘Tribunal’
2  for short, ‘COI’
                                                                               1

       sustained injuries. The Brigade Commander has given its Report
       dated August 18, 1999 that the injuries, occurred in peace area,
       are attributable to military service.      One of the findings of the
       Report recorded under Column 3(c) is reproduced hereunder:
      “(c) Was anyone else to blame        No one is to be blamed. In fact, he
      for the accident? (If so,            lost control of his own scooter.”
      indicate how and to what
      extent).
3)     After rendering pensionable service of 17 years and 225 days, the
       respondent was discharged from service on December 13, 1999
       pursuant to the report of the Medical Board dated November 29,
       1999 which held the disability to be 30%. However, the claim for
       disability pension was rejected by the Medical Board on the ground
       that the disability was neither attributable to nor aggravated by
       military service.    An appeal filed by the respondent against the
       rejection of his claim for disability pension was rejected by the
       Additional Directorate General, Personnel Services. It is thereafter
       the respondent invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal.              The
       learned Tribunal referred to the judgment of this Court in Madan
       Singh Shekhawat v. Union of India & Ors. 3 and held that the
       respondent is entitled to disability pension.
4)    Learned counsel for the appellants argued that though the
      respondent would be treated to be on duty even if he was on
      casual leave or annual leave but the injuries suffered must have
      causal connection as attributable to or aggravated by military
      service.    The respondent in this case was admittedly going on a
3  (1999) 6 SCC 459
                                                                               2

      scooter to purchase electrical goods for his sister when he lost
      control while saving a cyclist, therefore, there is no causal
      connection between the injuries resulting in disability and military
      service. Learned counsel for the appellants relied upon two recent
      judgments of this Court in Renu Devi v. Union of India & Ors.4
      and Union of India & Ors. v. Vijay Kumar No.3989606 P, Ex-
      Naik5. This Court in Vijay Kumar examined the admissibility of
      disability pension, when personnel of Armed Forces are on leave.
      The Court declined the claim with the following findings:
                    “23. In the light of the above discussion, it is clear that
                    the injury suffered by the respondent has no causal
                    connection with the military service. The Tribunal failed
                    to appreciate that the accident resulting in the injury to
                    the respondent was not even remotely connected to his
                    military duty and it falls in the domain of an entirely
                    private act and therefore the impugned orders cannot
                    be sustained.”
5)    Per contra, Mr. Rajesh Sehgal, learned counsel for the respondent,
      argued that the claim of disability pension arises under two heads:
      one, under ‘injury’ and the other, under ‘disease’ cases.                          It is
      argued that the opinion of the Medical Board in respect of disease
      cases is final but, in respect of injury cases, the finding of the COI is
      final and is to be made basis of grant of disability pension.                        He
      refers to Para 520 of the Defence Services Regulations published in
      the year 1986, which we shall reproduce at the relevant stage. The
      reliance is placed upon various judgments of the Tribunal as also
      Full Bench judgment of Punjab & Haryana High Court in Union of
4  Decided on July 03, 2019 in Civil Appeal arising out of Diary No.37356 of 2017 & Anr.
5  (2015) 10 SCC 460
                                                                                             3

       India & Ors. v. Khushbash Singh6 followed by Division Bench
       judgment in Barkat Masih v. Union of India & Ors.7 delivered by
       one of us (Justice Hemant Gupta) as a Judge of Punjab & Haryana
       High Court. It is argued that any injury caused by an activity which
       is not an “unmilitary activity” has to be deemed to be an injury
       attributed to or aggravated by military service. The Division Bench
       in Barkat Masih concluded as under:
                    “20. In view of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court
                    in Madan      Singh   Shekhawat's case     (supra), Balbir
                    Singh's case (supra) and that of Full Bench judgment of
                    this court in Khushbhash Singh's case (supra), we find
                    that the injuries suffered by the petitioner when on
                    casual leave entitles the petitioner for a disability
                    pension as the injury would be deemed to have been
                    attributed to military service. Consequently, the writ
                    petition is allowed.”
6)     Before we consider the respective arguments of learned counsel for
       the parties, the provisions of the Army Act, 1950 8, Notification
       issued by the Central Government on November 29, 1962, Rules
       and Regulations which are applicable in respect of grant of
       disability pension need to be extracted hereunder:
                    “Army Act, 1950
                    Section 3 (i)
                    (i) “active service”, as applied to a person subject to
                    this Act, means the time during which such person –
                    (a) is attached to, or forms part of, a force which is
                    engaged in operations against an enemy, or
                    (b) is engaged in military operations in, or is on the line
                    of march to, a country or place wholly or partly
6  2010 (3) SLR 103
7  2014 SCC OnLine P&H 10564
8  for short, ‘Act’
                                                                                4

occupied by an enemy, or
(c) is attached to or forms part of a force which is in
military occupation of a foreign country.”
“Section 9
Power to declare persons to be on active service.
Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i) of
section 3, the central Government may, by notification,
declare that any person or class of persons subject to
this Act shall, with reference to any area in which they
may be serving or with reference to any provision of
this Act or of any other law for the time being in force,
be deemed to be on active service within the meaning
of this Act.”
“Notification dated 29.11.1962
S.R.O. 6.E - New Delhi, the 28th November 1962
In exercise of the powers conferred by section 9 of the
Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the Central Government
hereby declares that all persons subject to that Act,
who are not on active service under clause (I) of section
3 thereof, shall, wherever they may be serving, be
deemed to be on active service within the meaning of
that Act for the purposes of the said Act and of any
other law for the time being in force.”
“Leave Rules for the Services, Volume-I (Army)
Rule 10. Casual leave counts as duty except as
provided for in Rule 11 (a).
It cannot be utilized to supplement any other form of
leave or absence, except as provided for in clause (A) of
Rule 72 for personnel participating in sporting events
and tournaments.
Casual leave due in a year can only be taken within that
year. If, however, an individual is granted casual leave
at the end of the year extending to the next year, the
period failing in the latter year will be debited against
the casual leave entitlement of that year.
                                                          5

Rule 11 (a) - Annual leave, for the year may at the
discretion of the sanctioning authority, be extended to
the next calendar year without prejudice to the annual
leave authorised for the year in which the extended
leave expires;
(b) Annual leave may be taken in instalments within the
same year.
(c) The annual leave year is the calendar year, viz., 1st
January to 31st December.
(Leave 11 substituted. Auth: MoD letter No. B/33922/AG/PS-
(b)/642/D(AG) dated 4th April 2011).”
“Disability Element for Disability at the time of
Discharge/Retirement (2008)
Regulation 53(a) – An individual released/retired
/discharged on completion of term of engagement or on
completion of service limits or on attaining the
prescribed age (irrespective of his period of
engagement), if found suffering from a disability
attributable to or aggravated by military service and so
recorded by Release Medical Board, may be granted
disability element in addition to service pension or
service gratuity from the date of retirement/discharge,
if the accepted degree of disability is assessed at 20
percent or more.”
Regulation 82 - For determining the pensionary
benefits on death or disability which is attributable to or
aggravated by Military service under different
circumstance, the cases shall be broadly categorized as
follows: -
Category A
Death or disability due to natural causes neither
attributable to nor aggravated by military service as
determined by the competent medical authorities.
Examples would be ailments of nature of constitutional
diseases as assessed by medical authorities, chronic
ailments like heart and renal diseases, prolonged
illness, accidents while not on duty.
Explanation:
The cases of death or disability due to natural causes
falling under Category A entitles ordinary family
pension or invalid pension or invalid gratuity as the
case may be.
                                                            6

Category B
Death or disability due to causes which are accepted as
attributable to or aggravated by military service as
determined by the competent medical authorities.
Disease contracted because of continued exposure to
hostile work environments subject to extreme weather
conditions or occupational hazards resulting in death or
disability would be examples.
Category C
Death or disability due to accidents in the performance
of duties such as:
(i) Accidents while travelling on duty in Government
vehicles or public/private
transport.
(ii) Accidents during air journeys
(iii) Mishaps at sea while on duty.
(iv) Electrocution while on duty etc.
(v) Accidents during participation in organised sports
events/adventure activities/expeditions or training.
Explanation:
Invalidment case falling under Category B and Category
C due to disease contracted or injury sustained or cause
of death if accepted by medical authority and/ or
competent authority attributable to or aggravated by
Military service the individual may be granted disability
pension or special family pension as the case may be.
Category D
Death or disability due to acts of violence /attack by
terrorists, anti – social elements etc. whether on duty
other than operational duty or even when not on duty.
Bomb blasts in public places or transport, indiscriminate
shooting incidents in public etc. would be covered
under this category, besides death/disability occurring
while employed in aid of civil power and also while
dealing with natural calamities.
Explanation:
Cases falling under Category D entitles liberalised
disability pension or liberalised family pension as the
case may be.
Category E
Death or disability arising as a result of: -
(i) Enemy action in international war
(ii) Action during deployment with a peace keeping
                                                          7

            mission abroad
            (iii) Border skirmishes
            (iv) During laying or clearance of mines including
            enemy mines as also mine sweeping operations.
            (v) On account of accidental explosions of mines while
            laying operationally oriented mine field or lifting or
            negotiating mine field laid by the enemy or own forces
            in operational areas near international borders or the
            line of control.
            (vi) War like situations, including cases which are
            attributable to/aggravated by:-
            (1) extremist acts, exploding mines etc, while on way to
            an operational area
            (2)     battle    inoculation  training     exercises   or
            demonstration with live
            ammunition
            (3) Kidnapping by extremists while on operational duty
            (vii) An act of violence/attack by extremists, anti-social
            elements etc. while on operational duty.
            (viii) Action against extremists, antisocial elements etc.
            death/disability while employed in the aid of civil power
            in quelling agitation, riots or revolt by demonstrators
            shall be covered under this category.
            (ix) Operations specially notified by the Government
            from time to time.
            Explanation :
            Death or injury sustained in the circumstances falling
            under Category E entitles liberalised family pension or
            war-injury pension as the case may be.
            Note: The illustrations given in each category above
            from ‘A’ to ‘E’ are not exhaustive. Case not covered
            under these categories shall be dealt with as per
            Entitlement Rules for Casualty Pensionary Awards, 1982
            as contained in APPENDIX IV of these Regulations.”
7) Pension Regulations for Army, 1961, have now been substituted by
   Pension Regulations for the Army, 2008.         Pension Regulations for
   Army, 1961 and Pension Regulations for the Army, 2008 are
   substantially same in respect of admissibility of disability pension.
   Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961,
                                                                         8

      reads as under:
                “173. The grant of pensionary awards to personnel of
                the Defence Security Corps shall be governed by the
                same Regulations as are applicable to Personnel Below
                Officer Rank of the Army, except where they are
                inconsistent with the provisions of the Regulations in
                this chapter.”
8)    The Entitlement Rules for Casualty Pensionary Awards, 1982 9 apply
      to service personnel who become non-effective on or after January
      1, 1982. Prior to 1982 Rules, the Entitlement Rules of 1950 were in
      force which are similar to the 1982 Rules as far as factors
      considering disablement as attributable to military service are
      concerned.     Rules 12, 13, 17 and 19 of the 1982 Rules are
      reproduced hereunder:
                “12. A person subject to the disciplinary code of the
                Armed Forces is on “duty”:-
                (a)    When performing an official task or a task, failure
                       to do which would constitute an offence triable
                       under the disciplinary code applicable to him.
                (b)    When moving from one place of duty to another
                       place of duty irrespective of the mode of
                       movement.
                (c)    During the period of participation in recreation
                       and other unit activities organized or permitted
                       by Service Authorities and during the period of
                       travelling in a body or single by a prescribed or
                       organized route.
                NOTE: 1
                (a)    xxx                   xxx
                (b)    xxx                   xxx
                (c)    xxx                   xxx
9  1982 Rules
                                                                           9

NOTE: 2
          xxx                 xxx
(d)    When proceeding from his leave station or
       returning to duty from his leave station, provided
       entitled to travel at public expenses i.e. on
       railway warrants, on concessional voucher, on
       cash TA (irrespective of whether railway
       warrant/cash TA is admitted for the whole journey
       or for a portion only), in government transport or
       when road mileage is paid/payable for the
       journey.
(e)    XXX                             XXX
(f)    An accident which occurs when a man is not
       strictly on duty as defined may also be
       attributable to service, provided that it involved
       risk which was definitely enhanced in kind or
       degree by the nature, conditions, obligations or
       incidents of his service and that the same was
       not a risk common to human existence in modern
       conditions in India. Thus, for instance, where a
       person is killed or injured by another party by
       reason of belonging to the Armed Forces, he shall
       be deemed ‘on duty’ at the relevant time. This
       benefit will be given more liberally to the
       claimant in cases occurring on active service as
       defined in the Army/Navy/Air Force Act.”
“13. In respect of accidents or injuries, the following
rules shall be observed:-
(a)    Injuries sustained when the man is “on duty” as
       defined, shall be deemed to have resulted from
       military service, but in cases of injuries due to
       serious negligence/misconduct the question of
       reducing the disability pension will be considered.
(b)    In cases of self-inflicted injuries whilst on duty,
       attributability shall not be conceded unless it is
       established that service factors were responsible
       for such action; in cases where attributability is
       conceded, the question of grant of disability
       pension at full or at reduced rate will be
       considered.”
               xx             xx           xx
                                                           10

             “17. Medical Opinion: At initial claim stage, medical
             views on entitlement and assessment are given by the
             IMB/RMB.       Normally, these views shall prevail for
             decisions in accepting or rejecting the claim. In cases
             of doubt the Ministry/CCDA (Pensions) may refer such
             cases for second medical opinion to MA (Pensions)
             Sections in the office of the DGAFMS/Office of CCDA(P),
             Allahabad, respectively. At appeal stage, appropriate
             appellate medical authorities can review and revise the
             opinion of the medical boards on entitlement and
             assessment.”
                            xx               xx         xx
             “19. Aggravation: if it is established that the disability
             was not caused by service, attributability shall not be
             conceded. However, aggravation by service is to be
             accepted unless any worsening in his condition was not
             due to his service or worsening did not persist on the
             date of discharge/claim.”
9) Regulation 423 of the Medical Regulations also explains the injuries
   which are attributable to service. Such Regulation reads as under:
             “Regulation 423. Attributability of Service
            a) For the purpose of determining whether the cause of
                a disability or death is or is not attributable to
                service, it is immaterial whether the cause giving rise
                to the disability or death occurred in an area declared
                to be a field service/active service area or under
                normal peace conditions. It is, however, essential to
                establish whether the disability or death bore a
                causal connection with the service conditions…
           b) The cause of a disability or death resulting from
                wound or injury, will be regarded as attributable to
                service if the wound/injury was sustained during the
                actual performance of ‘duty’ in armed forces. In case
                of injuries which were self-inflicted or due to an
                individual’s own serious negligence or misconduct,
                the Board will also comment how far the disability
                resulted      from    self-inflection, negligence    or
                misconduct.
                                xxx          xxx        xxx
           d) The question, whether a disability or death is
                attributable to or aggravated by service or not, will
                                                                        11

                 be decided as regards its medical aspects by a
                 Medical Board or by the medical officer who signs the
                 death certificate. The Medical Board/medical officer
                 will specify reasons for their/his opinion. The opinion
                 of the Medical Board/medical officer, insofar as it
                 relates to the actual cause of the disability or death
                 and the circumstances in which it originated will be
                 regarded as final. The question whether the cause
                 and the attendant circumstances can be attributed to
                 service will, however, be decided by the pension
                 sanctioning authority.
             e) To assist the medical officer who signs the death
                 certificate or the Medical Board in the case of an
                 invalid, the CO unit will furnish a report on:
                    (i) AFMS F-81 in all cases other than those due to
                         injuries.
                    (ii) IAFY 2006 in all cases of injuries other than
                         battle injuries.
             f)  In cases where award of disability pension or
                 reassessment of disabilities is concerned, a Medical
                 Board is always necessary and the certificate of a
                 single medical officer will not be accepted except in
                 case of stations where it is not possible or feasible to
                 assemble a regular Medical Board for such purposes.
                 The certificate of a single medical office in the latter
                 case will be furnished on a Medical Board form and
                 countersigned       by   the    ADMS     (Army)/   DMS
                 (Navy)/DMS(Air).”
10) In view of the provisions reproduced above, we find that the
    following questions arise for consideration:
    (i)       Whether, when armed forces personnel proceeds on
              casual leave, annual leave or leave of any other kind, he is
              to be treated on duty?
    (ii)      Whether the injury or death caused even if, the armed
              forces personnel is on duty, has to have some causal
              connection with military service so as to hold that such
              injury or death is either attributable to or aggravated by
              military service?
                                                                          12

    (iii)      What is the effect and purpose of COI into an injury
               suffered by armed forces personnel?
Answer to Question No.1
11) In terms of Section 3(i) of the Act, the active service means time
    during which a person who is subject to the Act, is attached to, or
    forms part of, a Force which is engaged in operations against an
    enemy engaged in military operations in, or is on the line of march
    to, a country or place wholly or partly occupied by an enemy, or is
    attached to or forms part of a Force which is in military occupation
    of a foreign country. The present is not the case covered by the
    definition of Section 3(i) of the Act.
12) Section 9 of the Act empowers the Central Government to declare
    that any person or class of persons subject to the Act, with
    reference to any area in which they may be serving or with
    reference to any provision of this Act or of any other law for the
    time being in force, will be deemed to be on active service within
    the meaning of the Act. In pursuance of such provision, the Central
    Government has notified that all persons who are subject to the Act
    shall, wherever they may be serving, be deemed to be in active
    service within the meaning of the Act and of any other law for the
    time being in force.
13) Still further, in terms of leave rules, the casual leave and annual
    leave count as duty. However, in terms of Rule 11(a) of the Leave
    Rules for the Services, Volume-I (Army), an individual on casual
                                                                      13

    leave is not deemed to actually perform duty during such leave.
    1982 Rules provide that a person is on duty when he is proceeding
    from his leave station or returning to duty from his leave station.
    Still further, in terms of clause (f) of Rule 12 of the 1982 Rules, an
    accident can be said to be attributable to service when a man is
    not strictly ‘on duty’ as defined, provided that it involved risk which
    was definitely enhanced in kind or degree by the nature,
    conditions, obligations or incidents of his service and that the same
    was not a risk common to human existence in modern conditions in
    India.   Therefore, a person if killed or injured by another person for
    the reason he belongs to the Armed Forces, he shall be deemed to
    be ‘on duty’.
14) Thus, it is held that when Armed Forces personnel is availing casual
    leave or annual leave, is to be treated on duty.
Answer to Question No.2
15) The 1982 Rules give expansive definition to the expression ‘duty’
    being undertaken by the personnel of the Armed Forces. It includes
    the period when Armed Forces personnel is proceeding from his
    leave station or returning to duty from his leave station. It includes
    even an accident which occurs when a man is not strictly on duty
    provided that it involved risk which was definitely enhanced in kind
    or degree by the nature, conditions, obligations or incidents of his
    service and that the same was not a risk common to human
    existence in modern conditions in India.             However, as per
                                                                         14

    Regulation 423 of the Medical Regulations, such injury has to have
    causal connection with military service or such injury is aggravated
    by military service.
16) In Regulation 423(a) of the Medical Regulations, it has been
    specifically mentioned that it is immaterial whether the cause
    giving rise to the disability or death occurred in an area declared to
    be a field service or active service area or under normal peace
    conditions, will be deemed to be duty. Regulation 423(a) mandates
    that it is essential to establish whether the disability or death bore
    a causal connection with the service conditions. All evidence, both
    direct and circumstantial, will be taken into account and benefit of
    reasonable doubt, if any, will be given to individual. For the sake of
    repetition, the said clause reads as under:
               “a) For the purpose of determining whether the cause
               of a disability or death is or is not attributable to
               service, it is immaterial whether the cause giving rise to
               the disability or death occurred in an area declared to
               be a field service/active service area or under normal
               peace conditions. It is, however, essential to establish
               whether the disability or death bore a causal
               connection with the service conditions…”
17) Clause (b) of Regulation 423 of the Medical Regulations presumes
    that disability or death resulting from wound or injury, will be
    regarded as attributable to service if the wound or injury was
    sustained during actual performance of ‘duty’ in Armed Forces.
    This is in contradiction to “deemed to be duty” as per Rule 12(f) of
    1982 Rules, as the Rule is when a man is not strictly on duty.
                                                                          15

    However, the injuries which are self-inflicting or due to individual’s
    own serious negligence or misconduct even in the cases of active
    duty, are not to be conceded unless, it is established that service
    factors were responsible for such action.
18) The question whether a disability or death is attributable to or
    aggravated by military service or not, is to be decided by the
    Medical Board. The opinion of Medical Board with regard to actual
    cause of disability or death and the circumstances under which it
    originated will be regarded as final in terms of Rule 17 of 1982
    Rules which is to the effect that at initial claim stage, medical views
    on entitlement and assessment shall prevail for decisions in
    accepting or rejecting the claim.
19) Regulation 423(d) provides that the question whether a disability
    or death is attributable to or aggravated by service or not, will be
    decided as regards to its medical aspects by a Medical Board/
    medical officers. Such opinion of the Medical Board insofar as it
    relates to the actual cause of disability or death and the
    circumstances in which originality will be regarded as final.       The
    Commanding Officer has to record his opinion as to whether
    injured person was on duty and whether he or she was to blame in
    a COI. Therefore, the scope of COI is to examine the conduct of the
    injured person to determine whether the person has made himself
    liable to be proceeded against departmentally. In respect of the
    injury, causal connection of injury to the army service is not final in
                                                                         16

     the COI proceedings.
20) In view of Regulation 423 clauses (a), (b) and (d), there has to be
    causal connection between the injury or death caused by the
    military service.    The determining factor is a causal connection
    between the accident and the military duties. The injury or death
    must be connected with military service howsoever remote it may
    be. The injury or death must be intervention of armed service and
    not an accident which could be attributed to risk common to
    human beings. When a person is going on a scooter to purchase
    house hold articles, such activity, even remotely has no causal
    connection with the military service.
Answer to Question No.3
21) Before we answer Question No.3, para 520 of the Defence Services
    Regulations needs to be reproduced, which is as under:
              “520. Injury to a Person Subject to Army Act.-(a)
              When an officer, JCO, WO, OR or nurse, whether on or
              off duty, is injured (except by wounds received in
              action), a certificate on IAFY-2006 will be forwarded by
              the medical officer in charge of the case to the injured
              person’s CO as soon as possible after the date on which
              the patient has been placed on the sick list, whether in
              quarters or in hospital. In the case of injuries which are
              immediately fatal, a report of the court of inquiry
              proceedings referred to in sub-para (c) (i) will take the
              place of IAFY-2006.
              (b) If the medical officer certifies that the injury is of a
              trivial character, unlikely to cause permanent ill-effects,
              no court of inquiry need be held, unless considered
              necessary under sub-para (c) (ii), (iii), (iv) or (v). In any
              event, however, IAFY-2006 will be completed and in all
              cases, except those of JCOs, WOs and OR will be
              forwarded through the prescribed channels to Army
              Headquarters, Org Dte in the case of non-medical
                                                                            17

officers and Medical Dte in other cases, a copy being
retained at command or other headquarters. In the
case of a JCO, WO or OR, IAFY-2006 will be forwarded to
the officer i/c records for custody with the original
attestation, after the necessary entry, stating whether
he was on duty and whether he was to blame, has been
made by the CO in the Primary Medical examination
report (AFMSF-2A).
(c)In the following cases a court of inquiry will be
assembled to investigate the circumstances:-
(i) If the injury is fatal or certified by the medical officer
to be of a serious nature. Where an inquest is held, a
copy of the coroner’s report of the proceedings will be
attached to the court of inquiry proceedings.
(ii) If, in the opinion of the CO, doubt exists as to the
cause of the injury.
(iii) If, in the opinion of the CO, doubt exists as to
whether the injured person was on or off duty at the
time he or she received the injury.
(iv) If, for any reason, it is desirable thoroughly to
investigate the cause of the injury.
(v) If the injury was caused through the fault of some
other person.
    In cases where the injured person is a JCO, WO or OR,
the court may consist of one officer as presiding officer,
with two JCOs, WOs or senior NCOs as members.
(d) The court of inquiry will not give an opinion, but the
injured person’s CO will record his opinion on the
evidence, stating whether the injured person was on
duty and whether he or she was to blame. When no
evidence as to the circumstances attending the injury
beyond that of the injured person is forthcoming it
should be stated in the proceedings. The proceedings
will then be sent to the brigade commander or the
officer who has been authorised under Section 8 of the
Army Act to exercise the legal and disciplinary powers
of a brigade commander who will record thereon his
decision whether disability or death was attributable to
military service and whether it occurred on field service.
After confirmation, the medical officer will, in all cases
                                                               18

except those of JCOs, WOs and OR, record his opinion in
the proceedings as to the effect of the injury on the
injured person’s service. The proceedings will then be
forwarded by the CO through the prescribed channel to
Army Headquarters, Org Dte in the case of non-medical
officers and Medical Dte in other cases, a copy being
retained at command or other headquarters. In the
case of a JCO, WO or OR a record will be made in the
primary medical examination report (AFMSF-2A) by the
CO that a court of inquiry has been held, and also as to
whether the man was on duty and whether he was to
blame. The primary medical examination report will
then be passed to the medical officer who will record his
opinion as to the effect of the injury on the man’s
service. The proceedings of the court of inquiry will
then be forwarded to the officer i/c records for
enclosure with the injured person’s original attestation
(see sub-para (b) above), except in the case of a court
of inquiry under sub-para (c)(v) above, in which case
the proceedings, together with a copy of the medical
opinion as to the effect of the injury on the man’s
service, will be forwarded without delay to Army
Headquarters.
(e) When an officer, JCO, WO, OR or nurse, not on duty,
is injured in any way by or through the fault of a civilian
or civilians, and receives compensation from such
civilian or civilians, in lieu of any further claim, this will
be recorded in the proceedings of the court of inquiry.
(f) A Court of inquiry need not necessarily be held to
investigate deaths or injuries sustained through taking
part in organized games, sports and other physical
recreations as defined in para 271.
    In all cases where a court of enquiry is not held, IAFY-
2006 will be completed with the statements of
witnesses as required by item 4 thereon and when
applicable, the CO will certify that the games, sports, or
physical recreations were organized ones.
(g) The injury report will be submitted to the brigade
commander or the officer who has been authorised
under Section 8 of the Army Act to exercise the legal
and disciplinary powers of a brigade commander only if
the injury is severe or moderately severe or if a court of
inquiry to enquire into the causes of injury has been
held. The brigade commander or the officer who has
                                                               19

               been authorised under Section 8 of the Army Act to
               exercise the legal and disciplinary powers of a brigade
               commander will record on the form his decision whether
               or not the injury was attributable to military service,
               and whether it occurred on field service. In all other
               cases, the CO will record his opinion.”
22) In terms of para 520 of the Defence Services Regulations, a
    certificate on I.A.F.Y.-2006 is required to be forwarded by the
    Medical Officer In-charge to the Commanding Officer. The COI is
    assembled to investigate the circumstances leading to injury
    (clause c). The Commanding Officer has to record his opinion as to
    whether injured person was on or off duty including as to whether
    he or she was to blame. The proceedings are then to be sent to
    Brigade Commander or the officer authorized under Section 8 of
    the Act to record reasons as to whether disability or death was
    attributable to military service and whether it occurred on field
    service. The Commanding Officer has reported that the injury is
    not attributable to military service, but I.A.F.Y.-2006 produced
    before the Court at the time of hearing of the present appeal shows
    that the Brigade Commander has endorsed that the injury is
    attributable to military service. We find that there was no material
    available to the Brigade Commander to return a finding that
    disability was attributable to military service when the evidence of
    the witnesses and the conclusion given by the Commanding Officer
    is that no one is to be blamed for the accident as per column 3 (c)
    reproduced in the earlier part of this order. Since the accident has
    occurred when the respondent was purchasing house hold articles,
                                                                       20

    it cannot be said that there is any causal connection between the
    injury and the military service.          Though, the attributability
    assessment of injury cases is different than the disease cases but,
    we are unable to accept the argument raised by Mr. Sehgal that in
    injury cases, the finding of COI is final. Therefore, we are unable to
    hold that the opinion of the Brigade Commander in all situations
    will be final in respect of an injury suffered.      We have held in
    Answer to Question No. 2 that the opinion of Medical Board is final
    in terms of Rule 17 of 1982 Rules and Regulation 423 (d) of the
    Medical Regulations.
23) The purpose of investigation by the COI is to examine nature of
    injuries whether such injuries were suffered on or off duty.
    However, para 520 is not to the effect that the opinion of the
    Brigade Commander is final on the basis of which the grant of
    disability pension is dependent.      The percentage of disability as
    well as whether the disability is attributed to or aggravated by
    military service has to be assessed by the Medical Board.         The
    purpose of COI is to examine the conduct of the personnel of the
    Armed Forces, whereas, the Medical Board examines, the causal
    connection with the injury with the military services and also the
    extent of disability. Thus, the COI and the opinion of the Medical
    Board both have different objects and purposes to achieve.
24) Having considered the provisions of the statutes, rules and
    regulations, we now refer to the judgments referred to by the
                                                                        21

       learned counsel for the parties.
25) The       judgments     in   Madan      Singh   Shekhawat,      Pension
       Sanctioning Authority, PCDA(P), Allahabad & Ors. v. M.L.
       George, Ex. SGT10, Nand Kishore Mishra v. Union of India &
       Ors.11 and Union of India & Anr. v. Surendra Pandey12, are the
       cases where the Armed Forces personnel have suffered injuries
       while returning from or going on leave. In terms of Rule 12 Note 2
       (d) of 1982 Rules read with Regulation 423(a), any injury or death
       while returning from or going to duty has a causal connection with
       the military service and, thus, such injury or death is considered
       attributable to or aggravated by military service.
26) The Full Bench judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court in
       Khushbash Singh has devised a new expression ‘unmilitary
       activity’.   Since the rules and regulations framed under the Act
       provide for disability pension only if there is causal connection of
       injuries with the military service, thus warranting a positive finding.
       The ‘unmilitary activity’ is not an expression used in the rules or
       regulations and is based on negative proof.       What is unmilitary
       activity is vague, indefinite and is based upon surmises and
       conjectures. Therefore, we find that in terms of the provisions of
       the Act, Rules and instructions keeping in view the policy decisions
       of the appellants, the disability pension is admissible only if injury
       is either attributable to or aggravated by military service and not
10 (2015) 15 SCC 319
11 JT 2013 (10) SC 466
12 (2015) 13 SCC 625
                                                                            22

      that any activity which is unmilitary activity.
27) Mr. Sehgal has relied upon Division Bench judgment of Delhi High
      Court in Vardip Singh & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.13. It was
      a case where a Captain saved 150-160 lives in a tragic fire incident
      in Uphaar Cinema, New Delhi. The High Court has considered it
      appropriate to grant disability pension to the family of the
      deceased Major. Said judgment is in the peculiar facts of that case.
28) However, the reliance of Mr. Sehgal upon Division Bench judgment
      in Barkat Masih is not tenable. We find that the judgment is
      correct to the limited extent that personnel of Armed Forces when
      on leave are also on duty.     However, the subsequent question,
      whether an injury or death suffered by a personnel has some
      causal connection with military service, was not examined except
      referring to Full Bench judgment of that Court wherein, it was held
      that unmilitary service activity alone will be excluded from the
      expression ‘death’ or ‘injury’ caused by military service or
      aggravated to military service. We find that such conclusion is not
      sustainable as per the applicable rules and regulations.
29) In Barkat Masih, such Armed Forces person was riding a scooter
      which was hit by army truck in the cantonment area.            Such
      accident with the army truck has no causal connection with the
      military service as the deceased was on casual leave.        Even a
      civilian could meet with an accident with the army truck within or
13 2004 (3) SLR 500
                                                                        23

      outside the cantonment area. Such accident has no causal
      connection with the military service of an injured or the deceased.
      Therefore, the Full Bench judgment of Punjab & Haryana High Court
      in Khushbash Singh and that of the Division Bench of that Court
      in Barkat Masih are not the good law.        It may be noticed that
      special leave petition in the Barkat Masih order was dismissed
      but it was dismissed on the ground of delay, therefore, in view of
      the judgment of this Court in Khoday Distilleries Limited & Ors.
      v. Sri Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane Limited,
      Kollegal14, it does not amount to merger of the order passed by
      the High Court with that of this Court.
30) Another order referred by the respondent is Lance Dafedar
      Joginder Singh v. Union of India & Ors.15.        In that case, this
      Court granted disability pension when no rules or regulations were
      produced that the appellant was not entitled to disability pension.
31) The judgments in Union of India & Ors. v. Keshar Singh16,
      Union of India & Anr. v. Baljit Singh17, Union of India & Ors. v.
      Dhir    Singh      China, Colonel   (Retd.)18 and Controller      of
      Defence Accounts (Pension) & Ors. v. S. Balachandran Nair19
      are the cases arising out of disability on account of some disease
      which, in the opinion of the Medical Board, was said to be
      paramount.       Such judgments are not applicable in the cases of
14 (2019) 4 SCC 376
15 1995 Supp (3) SCC 232
16 (2007) 12 SCC 675
17 (1996) 11 SCC 315
18 (2003) 2 SCC 382
19 (2005) 13 SCC 128
                                                                          24

      injuries.
32) In Secretary, Ministry of Defence & Ors. v. Ajit Singh20, the
      personnel had suffered disability on account of electric shock in his
      house, when on leave.       It was held that such disability is not
      attributable to or aggravated by military service.
33) In Sukhwant Singh v. Union of India & Ors.21, the Armed Forces
      personnel suffered injury in a scooter accident which rendered him
      unsuitable for any further military service. It was held that there
      was no causal connection between the injuries suffered and the
      services in the army referring to judgment of this Court in Union
      of India & Ors. v. Jujhar Singh22.
34) In Vijay Kumar, the person was climbing stairs of the house of his
      sister. He accidentally slipped on account of darkness on account
      of failure of electricity supply. This Court held that the injuries
      sustained were accidental in nature and nobody can be blamed for
      the same. Thus, the order of the Tribunal granting disability pension
      was set aside.
35) Another judgment referred to by the learned counsel for the
      appellants is Renu Devi. It is a case of special family pension on
      account of death of the Armed Forces personnel during casual
      leave in a road accident. The principles laid down are in tune with
      the judgments where the causal connection of the injury with the
20 (2009) 7 SCC 328
21 (2012) 12 SCC 228
22 (2011) 7 SCC 735
                                                                         25

       military service was not found and, therefore, the disability pension
       cannot be granted.
36) We find that summing up of the following guiding factors by the
       Tribunal in Jagtar Singh v. Union of India & Ors 23 and approved
       in Sukhwant Singh and in Vijay Kumar do not warrant any
       change or modification and the claim of disability pension is
       required to be dealt with accordingly:-
               “(a) The mere fact of a person being on 'duty' or otherwise, at the
                     place of posting or on leave, is not the sole criteria for
                     deciding attributability of disability/death. There has to be a
                     relevant and reasonable causal connection, howsoever
                     remote,      between      the    incident     resulting in   such
                     disability/death and military service for it to be attributable.
                     This conditionality applies even when a person is posted and
                     present in his unit. It should similarly apply when he is on
                     leave; notwithstanding both being considered as 'duty'.
               (b)   If the injury suffered by the member of the Armed Force is the
                     result of an act alien to the sphere of military service or in no
                     way be connected to his being on duty as understood in the
                     sense contemplated by Rule 12 of the Entitlement Rules
                     1982, it would not be legislative intention or nor to our mind
                     would be permissible approach to generalise the statement
                     that every injury suffered during such period of leave would
                     necessarily be attributable.
               (c)   The act, omission or commission which results in injury to the
                     member of the force and consequent disability or fatality
                     must relate to military service in some manner or the other,
                     in other words, the act must flow as a matter of necessity
                     from military service.
               (d)   A person doing some act at home, which even remotely does
                     not fall within the scope of his duties and functions as a
                     Member of Force, nor is remotely connected with the
                     functions of military service, cannot be termed as injury or
                     disability attributable to military service. An accident or injury
                     suffered by a member of the Armed Force must have some
23 T.A. No. 61 of 2010 decided on November 2, 2010 by the Tribunal
                                                                                     26

                casual connection with military service and at least should
                arise from such activity of the member of the force as he is
                expected to maintain or do in his day-to-day life as a member
                of the force.
           (e)  The hazards of Army service cannot be stretched to the
                extent of unlawful and entirely un-connected acts or
                omissions on the part of the member of the force even when
                he is on leave. A fine line of distinction has to be drawn
                between the matters connected, aggravated or attributable
                to military service, and the matter entirely alien to such
                service. What falls ex-facie in the domain of an entirely
                private act cannot be treated as legitimate basis for claiming
                the relief under these provisions. At best, the member of the
                force can claim disability pension if he suffers disability from
                an injury while on casual leave even if it arises from some
                negligence or misconduct on the part of the member of the
                force, so far it has some connection and nexus to the nature
                of the force. At least remote attributability to service would
                be the condition precedent to claim under Rules 173. The act
                of omission and commission on the part of the member of the
                force must satisfy the test of prudence, reasonableness and
                expected standards of behaviour.
           (f)  The disability should not be the result of an accident which
                could be attributed to risk common to human existence in
                modern conditions in India, unless such risk is enhanced in
                kind or degree by nature, conditions, obligations or incidents
                of military service.”
37) In view of the above discussion and the conclusions drawn by the
    Tribunal in T.A. No. 61 of 2010, we find that the order of the Tribunal
    is not sustainable. Consequently, the appeal is allowed. The Order
    passed by the Tribunal is set aside and the Original Application filed
    by the respondent is dismissed.
                                        .............................................J.
                                                       (L. NAGESWARA RAO)
                                                                                    27

                    .............................................J.
                                         (HEMANT GUPTA)
NEW DELHI;
SEPTEMBER 20, 2019.
                                                                28


