                                                                  NON­REPORTABLE
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1620 OF 2018
                             (arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No.3383 of 2018)
           NAMAN SINGH ALIAS
           NAMAN PRATAP SINGH AND ANOTHER ....APPELLANT(S)
                                                VERSUS
           STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
           AND OTHERS                                         ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                               ORDER
                       NAVIN SINHA, J.
                       Leave granted.
           2.          The appellants are aggrieved by the denial to quash the
           criminal prosecution against them under Sections 420, 406, 467,
           468, 471, 504, 506, 34 IPC in F.I.R. No.22/2018 dated
           31.01.2018.
           3.          Learned counsel for the appellants submits that no
           objection certificate has been obtained from the Chatrapati
Signature Not Verified
           Sahuji Maharaj University, Kanpur for establishment of the
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
Date: 2018.12.13
16:47:08 IST
Reason:
           three­year Law course. Affiliation has also been granted by the
                                                    1

University.   The appellants have also deposited a sum of
Rs.3,50,000/­    with   the   Bar    Council  of  India and   await
permission from it for starting the law course. The question of
any fraudulent misrepresentation by the appellants, persuading
students to take admission in an unauthorised institution simply
does not arise.   Several students have taken admission in full
awareness of the existent facts with no grievances and have
sworn affidavits to that effect.
4.   Learned counsel for the respondents submits that the
appellants by misrepresentation and cheating have persuaded
respondent    no.4    and    others   to  take   admission  in  an
unrecognised institution. There are several students who are
aggrieved.  In any event, such enquiries cannot be held in a
quashing application by examining the defence of the appellants.
The impugned order merits no interference.
5.   We have considered the submissions on behalf of the parties
and are satisfied that the application deserves to be allowed,
though on different grounds.           Respondent no.4 lodged a
complaint   with    the   Sub­Divisional    Magistrate, Unnao   on
31.01.2018 that she had been duped into taking admission in an
                                   2

unrecognised institution.       The Sub­Divisional Magistrate, the
very same day, without furthermore, directed the police to
register a first information report.     The only question for our
consideration is whether the Sub­Divisional Magistrate was
competent to do so, and whether such an F.I.R. can be said to
have been registered in accordance with the Code of Criminal
Procedure,1973 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Code’).
6.    Section 154 of the Code provides for registration of a first
information report at the instance of an informant, reduced into
writing and signed by the person giving it.         Section 154(3)
stipulates that in the event of a refusal on part of an officer in
charge of a police station to record such information, it may be
sent in writing and by post to the Superintendent of Police who
will direct investigation into the same.
7.    Section 190 of the Code provides for taking of cognizance by
a Magistrate either on a complaint or upon a police report.
Similarly, Section 156(3) provides that any Magistrate empowered
under Section 190 may order such an investigation, and which
also includes the power to direct the lodgement of an F.I.R. The
Code in Section 200 provides for lodging of a complaint before the
                                   3

Magistrate, who after examination of the complainant and
witnesses, if any, can take cognizance.
8.    It is therefore apparent that in the scheme of the Code, an
Executive Magistrate has no role to play in directing the police to
register an F.I.R. on basis of a private complaint lodged before
him. If a complaint is lodged before the Executive Magistrate
regarding an issue over which he has administrative jurisdiction,
and the Magistrate proceeds to hold an administrative inquiry, it
may be possible for him to lodge an F.I.R. himself in the matter.
In such a case, entirely different considerations would arise. A
reading of the F.I.R. reveals that the police has registered the
F.I.R on directions of the Sub­Divisional Magistrate which was
clearly impermissible in the law. The Sub­Divisional Magistrate
does not exercise powers under Section 156(3) of the Code. The
very institution of the F.I.R. in the manner done is contrary to the
law and without jurisdiction.
9.    Nothing prevented respondent no.4 from lodging an F.I.R.
herself before the police under Section 154 of the Code or
proceeding under Section 154(3) if circumstances so warranted.
Alternately the respondent could have moved the Magistrate
                                    4

concerned under Section 156(3) of the Code in the event of the
refusal of the police to act.   Remedy was also available to the
respondent by filing a complaint under Section 200 of the Code
before the jurisdictional Magistrate.
10.   In view of the scheme of the Code as discussed, we have
purposely refrained from going into the merits of the case so as
not to prejudice either parties and also keeping in mind the
nature of the jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code. Any
application by respondent no.4 hitherto under the Code will
therefore have to be considered by the appropriate authority or
forum in accordance with law. For the reasons discussed, the
impugned order is held to be unsustainable and is set aside. The
First Information Report therefore also stands quashed for the
reasons discussed, but with liberty as aforesaid.
11.   The appeal is allowed.
                                           …………...................J.
                                                  [R.F. NARIMAN]
                                           …………...................J.
                                                   [NAVIN SINHA]
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER 13, 2018
                                 5


