                                                                                REPORTABLE
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.1749 OF 2008
                       THE ESTATE OFFICER, PUNJAB
                       URBAN PLANNING & DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY              ...Appellant
                                                       VS.
                       JAGTAR SINGH AND ORS.                               ...Respondents
                                                    JUDGMENT
                       KURIAN, J.
                    1.      The appellant is aggrieved by the impugned order
                    dated    7th  December,    2006  passed    in   C.O.C.P.No.1286   of
                    2005.    It may be necessary to refer to the bare facts.
                    2.      The   respondent     No.1-contempt      petitioner/allottee
                    has approached the High Court with a grievance that the
                    appellant-Punjab Urban Planning and Development Authority
                    (for short “PUDA”) through its successor Greater Mohali
                    Area    Development      Authority    (for    short   “GMADA”)   has
                    charged excess        rates for allotment of plots.        Pursuant
                    to the directions issued by the High Court, the rate was
                    reduced     from   Rs.3600/-   to  Rs.1400/-     per  square   yard.
                    Thereafter,      the   respondent-contempt      petitioner/allottee
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ANITA MALHOTRA
Date: 2017.10.03
                    filed Civil Writ Petition No.2851 of 2005 for payment of
16:17:58 IST
Reason:
                    interest which has been disposed of by judgment dated 21st
                                                        1

March, 2005.   The judgment reads as follows:-
           “We have heard the learned counsel for the
      petitioner. The petitioner has invoked the
      jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226/227
      of the Constitution of India for issuance of a
      writ of mandamus directing the respondents to pay
      the interest upon the amount which has been
      refunded.
           We are afraid that such kind of indulgence
      cannot be granted unless justice demand notice is
      served upon the respondents.
           Learned counsel for the petitioner further
      states that the petition be dismissed as
      withdrawn with liberty to serve justice demand
      notice upon the respondents. If such a notice is
      served upon the respondents within 15 days from
      today, the respondents shall take conscious and
      cautious decision thereon within two months from
      the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
           Disposed of.”
3.    Since there was no response from the PUDA within
the   time    stipulated    by    the    High    Court,    the
respondent-allottee   filed  Contempt   Petition   No.1286  of
2005.    During  the  pendency   of  the  Contempt   Petition,
order  dated  20th  January,2006   was  passed  declining   to
grant interest saying that there was no policy to make
payment for interest.   The order reads as follows:-
      “To
           Col.Jagtar Singh (Retd.)
           D-89,D Block,
           Ranjit Avenue, Amritsar.
      No.  /2006/1677-78 dated 20.01.2006
      Subject: Regarding allotment of Plot No.69, Sector-
                69, Mohali-CWP No.2851 of 2005.
                               2

           In connection with the above cited subject
    it is intimated that PUDA doesn't have any policy
    according   to  which   interest   could    be    paid.
    Accordingly, the Justice Demand Notice sent by you
    has been filed after due consideration.
                                          Sd/-
                                    Estate Officer,
                                    PUDA, Mohali.”
4.    It appears that the High Court directed the PUDA to
file an affidavit on the following terms. The order reads
as follows:-
           “As requested by learned counsel       for   the
    respondents, adjourned to 25.09.2006.
           Meanwhile, the affidavit, if any, be filed
    explaining:-[i] what was the rate of interest
    charged from the petitioner;[ii] whether the said
    interest has been included in the refund made to
    the petitioner in terms of the order passed by
    this Court; and [iii] why the respondents are not
    liable to pay interest on the refund amount.
           Affidavit, if any, be filed within one week
    from today.”
Accordingly, the Estate Officer, PUDA filed an affidavit.
The affidavit reads as follows:-
           “I, the deponent above named        do   hereby
      solemnly affirm and state as under:-
      1.   That the case mentioned supra had come up
      for hearing on 1.8.2016, on which date, a
      direction for filing an affidavit on the issues
      mentioned therein, was made.      Subsequently, by
      means of another order dated 9.10.2006, the
      matter was adjourned to 7.12.2006 and the
      requisite affidavit was directed to be filed.
                              3

      2.   That it is clarified that interest @ 15%
      p.a.   was   charged   from   the   petitioner   in
      consonance with the provisions of the Allotment
      letter.    No interest has been paid on the
      refunded amount. The respondents are not liable
      to pay any interest on the refunded amount
      because no policy exists in PUDA for paying
      interest on the refund amount.
      3.   That it is pertinent to mention here that in
      consonance with the orders dated 21.3.2005 passed
      by this Hon'ble Court in CWP No.2851 of 2005, a
      letter   dated    20.1.2006   was   sent   to   the
      petitioner, wherein the decision of the Justice
      Demand Notice was conveyed to him. A copy of the
      same is appended herewith as Annexure CR-1.
      4.   That it is not out of place to mention here
      that the decision to reduce the amount payable by
      the petitioner, from Rs.3600/- to Rs.1400/- was
      made by the authorities themselves on 24.4.2003,
      on a representation having been made by the
      petitioner on 15.03.2002 for being considered
      similarly as Subedar Anokh Singh in CWP No.11871
      of 1997.    The petitioner did not have to go
      through   any   protracted   litigation   on   that
      account.        Accordingly,    the    amount    of
      Rs.14,28,713/- was immediately refunded to the
      petitioner on 20.06.2003 by means of Cheque
      No.057376.    As such, PUDA is not liable to pay
      any interest on the same, more so in view of the
      fact that PUDA does not have any policy of paying
      interest on any refund amount as also the fact
      that no such clause for paying interest on refund
      amount exists in the Allotment letter.”
5.    When the matter came up before the High Court in
the contempt jurisdiction, based on the affidavit, the
following order was passed:
           “The facts are hardly in dispute. It is
    admitted that the petitioner was charged interest @
    15% per annum but no interest has been paid on the
    refund amount “because no policy exists in PUDA for
    paying interest on the refund amount”.
                               4

            The plea taken by the respondents that the
    interest is not payable because there exists no
    policy, can neither be sustained in law nor in
    equity.    Once, this Court found that the rate of
    Rs.3600/- fixed by PUDA for the plots in question
    was excessive and it could not have been more than
    Rs.1400/- per sq.yard, there can be no exception
    but to hold that the petitioner was unauthorizedly
    charged at a higher rate.        Admittedly, he paid
    interest @ 15% per annum.      The respondents cannot
    take    advantage  of   their    own   wrongs.      The
    petitioner, therefore, is entitled for the refund
    of the excess amount at the same rate of interest
    which he had paid to the respondents.
            At the same time, there being a serious
    dispute with regard to the interpretation of the
    orders passed by this Court, respondents cannot be
    said to be guilty of willful and deliberate breach
    of such orders.
            Consequently, this petition is disposed of
    with a clarificatory direction that on the excess
    amount, which has already been refunded to the
    petitioner, he shall be paid interest @ 15% per
    annum, within a period of three months from the
    date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
            Rule discharged.”
6.     Aggrieved the Estate Officer, Greater Mohali Area
Development Authority has filed this appeal.
7.     Having  heard  learned   counsel  appearing   on  both
sides,   we do  not think   it necessary    to refer  to the
contentions or to the legal position except to reiterate
the   settled   position  that    normally   in  a   contempt
jurisdiction the Court shall not enter upon adjudication
of a dispute. Maybe the applicant in a contempt petition
is entitled to some relief but relief has to be granted
after   proper adjudication   of the   dispute because   only
                               5

after a proper adjudication, it will be clear as to what
will be the actual relief, if any and if at all, that has
to be granted to the aggrieved person.           Apparently, in
the  instant   case,   no   such  adjudication   has   been   made
except to pass an order in equity. The situation would
have   been   different     had   it   been   a  case   of    mere
implementation or execution of an otherwise clear order
or direction.     In the instant case there is       no    decree
or order on entitlement for interest.
8.    Having    regard    to  the    submissions   made   by   the
learned counsel appearing for the appellant, we are of
the view that this matter needs adjudication regarding
the   entitlement     of    interest.       Therefore,    without
expressing any opinion on the various submissions made by
the counsel on both sides, we set aside the impugned
judgment passed by the High Court.
9.    Further, liberty is granted to the respondent to
challenge the order dated 20th January, 2006 before the
appropriate forum.      We, therefore, make it clear that in
case such a challenge is made within a period of one
month from today, the same may not be dismissed on the
ground of delay.       If such a challenge is made, having
regard   to  the    fact   that   the   parties   have   been   in
litigation for more than a decade, we request the forum
concerned   to   dispose   of   the   matter  expeditiously    and
preferably within a period of one year from the date of
institution.     Needless also to say that it will be open
                                  6

to  the  parties  to  raise   all   contentions  which  are
available to them as per law.
10.   The civil appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
                                .........................J.
                                 [KURIAN JOSEPH]
                                .........................J.
                                 [R.BANUMATHI]
New Delhi;
July 19, 2017.
                              7


