                                                     1
                                                                       REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.3571 OF 2019
                       SARV JAN KALYAN SEWA SAMITI                  APPELLANT(s)
                                                  VERSUS
                       UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                        RESPONDENT(s)
                                                O R D E R
                        Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J
                            Appeal admitted.
                            On 8 February 2019, the following order was passed by
                        this Court, when a challenge was addressed to the order
                        of the National Green Tribunal1 dated 5 December 2018:
                            “Since the proceedings are still pending before
                            the National Green Tribunal, it is not necessary
                            for this Court to entertain the civil appeal at
                            this stage. The earlier order dated 30 October
                            2018 and the subsequent order dated 5 December
                            2018 (the latter is impugned in the present
                            appeal) are interlocutory.    Any decision by the
                            Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
                            Change, Government of India and by the Forest
                            Department of the Government of Haryana must be
                            in accordance with law.
                            Since the OA is still pending before the
                            Tribunal, this shall not come in the way of the
                            appellant pursuing its remedies in the pending
                            proceedings.
                            The appeal    is  accordingly  disposed  of.    No
                            costs.”
                            On 5 December 2018, the NGT had, while adverting to
Signature Not Verified
                        its earlier order dated 30 October 2018, reiterated that
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.04.24
17:01:04 IST
Reason:                 the fourth respondent herein may submit a proposal to the
      1 NGT

                                      2
       Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change2 and
       to   the   State  Government.       The  proposal   was  to  be
       considered by the State of Haryana and by the MOEF&CC.
           When the earlier Civil Appeal came up before this
       Court on 8 February 2019, as the order indicates, it was
       disposed of since the direction contained in the order
       dated    5  December   2018   was   interlocutory   in  nature.
       However, this Court observed that:
       (i)        Any decision by the MOEF&CC and by the Forest
       Department    of  the   Government   of  Haryana   must  be  in
       accordance with law;
       (ii)       Since the Original Application3 was still pending
       before the NGT, this shall not come in the way of the
       appellant     pursuing    its    remedies   in    the   pending
       proceedings.
           Following the order passed by this Court, a two-Judge
       Bench   of   the  NGT   passed   the  following   order  on  11
       February 2019:
           “At the outset, we have been informed that the
           order dated on 05.12.2018 was challenged by the
           applicant before the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
           However, the said civil appeal has been decided
           without any interference by the Hon’ble Court.
           Therefore, the steps to be taken in furtherance
           of the proposal given on 05.12.2018 should be
           expedited.     The State of Haryana, before which
           the proposal is pending for consideration, to
           decide the same within two weeks from today.
           Thereafter, the matter be sent to Regional
           Officer, MoEF at Chandigarh who shall consider
           and decide within two weeks from date of receipt
           of the proposal from State of Haryana.
2 MOEF&CC
3 OA

                               3
    Accordingly, Original Application No.124 of 2017
    stands disposed of, with no order as to cost.
    M.A. No.208 of 2017
    This    application      does     not    survive      for
    consideration as the main appeal itself stands
    dismissed.
    M.A.   No.208    of    2017     stands    disposed     of
    accordingly.”
    The above order dated 11 February 2019 is the subject
matter of the present Civil Appeal.
    On behalf of the appellant, it has been submitted
that as a result of the impugned order of the NGT, the
appellant  has   been   completely     shut  out   from   seeking
redress in the proceedings which were pending before the
NGT.  It has been urged that the clear intendment of the
order of this Court was that all objections which the
appellant has in regard to the proposal for the exchange
of land with forest land alleged to have been encroached
upon would have to be considered by the NGT.         The NGT has
obviated  that  process    by    simply  disposing    of  the   OA
without considering the objections.
    On the other hand, Mr. C.U. Singh, learned senior
counsel appearing on behalf of the fourth respondent,
submits  that  the  fourth    respondent    has   already   taken
steps to dismantle and shift the wall and the impugned
order  of  the  NGT   was   in    furtherance   of  the   earlier
directions which have already been issued on 30 October
2018  and  5   December   2018.       Moreover,    it   has   been
submitted that the Court may at best delete the last

                               4
sentence of the order of the NGT by which the OA has been
disposed of so that the OA may be restored to file for
consideration of such objections as the appellant may
have.    Alternatively,    it  has    been  submitted  that   the
appellant may be left at liberty to pursue its remedies
once a final decision has been arrived at by the State of
Haryana and by the MOEF&CC.
    At the outset, it is necessary to observe that the
order of this Court dated 8 February 2019 indicates that
the  reason  why   the  Court    did   not  interfere,  at   that
stage, with the order dated 5 December 2018 was because
it was of an interlocutory nature.           At the same time,
this Court observed that any decision by the MOEF&CC as
well as by the State Government would have to be in
accordance with law.      More significantly, since the OA
was pending, this Court observed that this shall not come
in the way of the appellant pursuing its remedies in the
pending proceedings.     We find from the impugned order of
the NGT dated 11 February 2019 that it proceeded on the
basis of what it was informed as the crux of the order of
this Court.   Had the NGT awaited a copy of the order of
this  Court,   it   would    have    been   in  a   position   to
appreciate the contents of the order which was passed on
8 February 2019.     The consequence of the impugned order
is to effectively shut out the appellant from addressing
its objections to the proposed exchange before the NGT.
In  our  view,   this  course     of   action,  which  has   been

                                5
  followed by the NGT, is indefensible.        The NGT ought to
  have, in deference to the order passed by this Court,
  allowed the process which had been initiated before the
  State   and  MOEF&CC   to   continue,   but   to    permit   the
  appellant   in  the  pending    proceedings   to   address   its
  objections in accordance with law.
      We are, therefore, unimpressed with the submissions
  which have been urged on behalf of the fourth respondent
  and, for that matter, on behalf of the State of Haryana.
  The NGT was duty bound to follow the order of this Court
  and we are constrained to observe that this has not been
  done.
      For the above reasons, we allow the appeal and set
  aside the impugned order of the NGT dated 11 February
  2019 in its entirety.     We accordingly restore OA 124 of
  2017 to the file of the NGT and now expect that the NGT
  shall  abide   by the  order    passed  by  this   Court   on  8
  February 2019.
      The Appeal is accordingly disposed of.       No costs.
                             .............................J.
                            (DR DHANANJAYA Y CHANDRACHUD)
                             .............................J.
                            (HEMANT GUPTA)
NEW DELHI
APRIL 16, 2019

                                    6
ITEM NO.15                 COURT NO.11               SECTION XVII
                S U P R E M E C O U R T O F     I N D I A
                         RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.3571 OF 2019
     SARV JAN KALYAN SEWA SAMITI                   APPELLANT(s)
                                 VERSUS
     UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                         RESPONDENT(s)
         (WITH IA No.59463/2019-EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T. )
Date : 16-04-2019 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
CORAM :
          HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE D.Y. CHANDRACHUD
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE HEMANT GUPTA
For Appellant(s)     Mr. N. Hariharan, Sr. Adv.
                     Mr. Varun Mahalawat, Adv.
                     Mr. Siddharth S. Yadav, Adv.
                     Mr. Nishant Anand, Adv.
                     Mr. Varun Deswal, Adv.
                     Ms. Mallika, Adv.
                     Mr. Prateek, Adv.
                     Abhigya, AOR
                     Adity Vaibhav Singh, Adv.
                     Ms. Rekha Ahgara, Adv.
                     Ms. Sneha Siddharth, Adv.
For Respondent(s)    Mr.  C.U. Singh, Sr. Adv.
                     Ms.  Shyel Trehan, Adv.
                     Mr.  Raghav Anand, Adv.
                     Mr.  Aman Shukla, Adv.
                     Ms.  Liz Mathew, AOR
                     Mr.  Anil Grover, AAG
                     Ms.  Noopur Singhal, Adv.
                     Mr.  Rahul Khurana, Adv.
                     Mr.  Sanjay Kumar Visen, Adv.
        UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                                O R D E R
           Appeal admitted.
           The Appeal is disposed of in terms of the signed
      reportable order.    No costs.

                          7
  Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
(SANJAY KUMAR-I)                    (SAROJ KUMARI GAUR)
   AR-CUM-PS                           COURT MASTER
  (Signed reportable order is placed on the file)


