                                                     1
                                                                         NON-REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NOs. 992-993 OF 2016
      SAMIR AHMED RAFIQAHMED ANSARI                                        ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                   VERSUS
       THE STATE OF GUJARAT                                                ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                           J U D G M E N T
                    R. BANUMATHI, J.
                    1.    These   appeals   arise    out    of   the   conviction   of   the
                    appellant-accused under Section 25(1AA) of the Arms Act, 1959
                    and the High Court enhancing the sentence of imprisonment from
                    two years to seven years.
                    2.    The case of the prosecution is that on 18.10.2002 at
                    about 8.00 p.m. when the police personnel were on patrolling
                    duty  the   appellant-accused      and   others   were    found  to   be
                    travelling in scooter carrying country made pistol loaded with
                    live  cartridges   and   were  in    possession    of  two  other   live
                    cartridges.     After  completion     of   the  investigation,   charge
                    sheet  was  filed   against   the    accused   and   two  others   under
                    Section 399 read with 120B IPC and under Section 25(1AA) of
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
MADHU BALA
Date: 2018.10.09
17:44:36 IST
Reason:             Arms Act.
                    3.    The Trial Court acquitted the appellant-accused of the
                    offences  under   Indian   Penal    Code;   but  convicted   him   under

                                 2
Section 25(1AA) of the Arms Act and sentenced him to undergo
R.I. for two years.      The Trial Court acquitted the accused
nos. 2 and 3 from all the charges.
4.    Being   aggrieved,   the     appellant-accused   preferred   the
appeal before the High Court and the State has also preferred
the appeal for enhancement of the sentence. The High Court
dismissed the appeal preferred by the appellant-accused and
allowed the appeal preferred by the State thereby enhancing the
sentence  of   imprisonment   from    two  years  to  seven  years  as
aforesaid.
5.    We   have   heard  Ms.    Kamini    Jaiswal,   learned   counsel
appearing for the appellant as well as Ms. Jesal Wahi, learned
counsel appearing for the respondent-State.
6.    Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, learned counsel appearing for the
appellant, inter alia,      submitted that the conviction of the
appellant is not maintainable in view of want of sanction under
Section 39 of the Arms Act. Since we are mainly concerned with
the correctness of the conviction under Section 25(1AA), we do
not propose to go into the question on want of sanction.
7.    Section 25(1AA) of the Arms Act deals with manufacture,
sale, transfer etc. of the prohibited arms. In this case, the
prosecution   has  not  adduced     any  evidence  to  show  that  the
appellant-accused   had  indulged     in   manufacturing  of  arms  or
prohibited   ammunition in contravention of section 7. Since the
prosecution has not adduced any evidence to substantiate           the
allegation of manufacture, in our view, the conviction of the
appellant-accused under Section 25(1AA) cannot be sustained.

                                 3
8.    The question falling for consideration is that what is
the offence for which the appellant is to be convicted for the
possession    of   the   country   made  pistol   loaded   with  live
cartridges and for possession of two other live cartridges.
Section 3 deals with licence for acquisition and possession of
firearms and ammunition. As per Section 3(1)         no person shall
acquire,   have   in   his  possession,  or   carry  any  firearm  or
ammunition unless he holds a licence issued in accordance with
the provisions of the Arms Act and the Rules made thereunder.
Contravention of Section 3 is punishable under Section 25(1B)
(a) with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
one year but which may extend to three years and also be liable
to fine. Both the Courts recorded concurrent findings that the
appellant was found in possession of country made pistol loaded
with  live   cartridges    and  in  possession   of  two  other  live
cartridges which act is clearly in violation of Section 3 of
the Act. It is not the case of the appellant that he has a
licence for possession of country made pistol. The possession
of the country made pistol without licence is punishable under
Section 25(1B)(a) of the Arms Act.        The appellant is said to
have undergone the sentence of imprisonment for 1 ½ years (vide
this Court order dated 17.10.2016).
9.    In  the    result,   the conviction   of  the  appellant  under
Section 25(1AA) of the Arms Act is modified to Section 25(1B)
(a) and the sentence of imprisonment is modified to the period
already undergone.       The appellant is on bail. His bail bonds

                                  4
    shall stand discharged.
    10.   The appeals are partly allowed.
                                        ….......................J.
                                        [R. BANUMATHI]
                                        …......................J.
                                        [INDIRA BANERJEE]
NEW DELHI
4TH OCTOBER, 2018


