                                                 1
                                                             NON­REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 834 of 2017
           The Commissioner of Police & Ors.                     .. Appellants
                                              Versus
           Devender Anand & Ors.                                 .. Respondents
                                        JUDGMENT
           M. R. Shah, J.
           1.          Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned
           judgment and order dated 13.01.2017 passed by the High Court
           of Delhi in Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 299 of 2016, the original
           respondents – appellants – Commissioner of Police and Others
           have preferred the present appeal.
           2.          That respondent No. 1 herein – original complainant entered
           into an agreement to sell in respect of house situated at WZ­
Signature Not Verified
           1179, Plot No. 11, Rani Bagh, Shakur Basti, Delhi with
Digitally signed by
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2019.08.08
17:05:15 IST
Reason:
           respondent Nos. 2 to 3 herein for a consideration of Rs.54 lakhs.

                                  2
That the agreement to sell, general power of attorney etc. were
executed and the entire amount of consideration of Rs.54 lakhs
was paid to the agreement sellers. According to respondent No. 1
– original complainant, subsequently on 31.07.2013, he learnt
that the said property had been mortgaged to Andhra Bank when
a notice by the said bank was affixed on the property.
According to respondent No. 1 – original complainant, thereafter
he was compelled to settle the claim of Andhra Bank to the tune
of Rs.16,93,059/­ for release of the mortgaged documents.
Respondent    No.   1   –  original complainant   also  paid   the
registration charges of Rs,7,81,941/­ for registration of the sale
deed in his favour. That, thereafter he lodged a complaint with
the Karol Bagh police station against respondent Nos. 2 and 3
herein for the offence under Section 420/34 of the Indian Penal
Code alleging, inter alia, that though the property was put as a
mortgage with the Andhra Bank, the same was not disclosed to
him and without disclosing the same the property in question
was sold.     Therefore, it was the case of respondent No. 1 –
original complaint that he was cheated by respondent Nos. 2 and
3 herein.   That a preliminary inquiry was conducted on the said

                                 3
complaint by the Sub­Inspector of the Police posted at the Karol
Bagh    police station.    According   to  the  complainant,  on
20.05.2015, the Sub­Inspector submitted his report that a prima
facie offence under Section 420/34 IPC is made out. He sought
permission to register a case under Section 420/34 IPC for
further investigation.  According to the complainant, the SHO
concurred with the aforesaid conclusion in his noting dated
21.05.2015 and put up the matter before the ACP concerned.
According to the complainant, the ACP also concurred with the
said conclusion in his noting dated 25.05.2015.     According to
the complainant, despite the above, the FIR was not registered
and the same Sub­Inspector Yogender Kumar of Karol Bagh
police station started a fresh process of preliminary inquiry on
the same set of facts.  He concluded that since the complainant
had given his consent to the registration of the sale deed and
discharge of the liability of the bank, even though the said
mortgage as revealed to him on 31.07.2013, therefore, no police
action is required.   The said file noting was concurred by the
SHO with the diametrically opposite view taken by the Sub­
Inspector Yogender Kumar earlier.        The ACP also concurred

                                   4
with the view that only a dispute of civil nature has arisen and
that a complaint be filed.    It appears that thereafter the matter
was placed before the Additional DCP who also concurred with
the subsequent view that no case is made out against the
accused, vide his noting dated 07.08.2015.       That the said view
was carried by the DCP/C and JCP/CR as well.
2.1  As the FIR was not registered against the accused for the
offence under Section 420/34 IPC as alleged, respondent No. 1
herein approached the High Court by way of writ petition and
prayed for the following reliefs:
    “1.    Pass    appropriate    writ/order/direction   thereby
    ordering appropriate action to be taken against the erring
    police officers, including but not limited respondents No.
    2 to 5, who are responsible for non­registration of the FIR
    in spite of a preliminary enquiry dated 20.5.2015 clearly
    submitting a finding that a cognizable offence under
    Section 420/34 of IPC was made out against respondents
    no. 6 and 7.
    2.     Pass    appropriate    writ/order/direction   thereby
    quashing and declaring to be null and void the so­called
    second/subsequent       undated     report  of   preliminary
    enquiry, and the subsequent endorsements of the SHO,
    PS Karol Bagh dated 16 July 2015, the undated

                              5
endorsement of the ACP (Karol Bagh Sub­Division) and
the endorsement of DCP (Central) dated 7 August 2015
as the same are without any legal sanctity and have been
created and brought into existence against the settled
provisions of law and without following due process of
law and without following due process of law and in
contravention of the procedure laid down by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in its judgment ‘Lalita Kumari vs.
Government of U.P.
3.     xxx xxx xxx
4.     Pass   appropriate    writ/order/direction  thereby
calling upon the office of the Commissioner of Police, New
Delhi, to submit a report with respect to the relevant
provisions of law under which his office has empowered
the area ACP and DCP to approve registration of FIR, and
upon submission of such a report, the vires and legality
of the same be scrutinised as the same is in violation of
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure and the
procedural guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case ‘Lalita Kumar vs. Government of U.P.
5.     Pass   appropriate    writ/order/direction  thereby
directing the respondent no. 1 to hold an appropriate
enquiry/investigation into the said circumstances under
which the illegal and uncalled for second line of
preliminary enquiry was initiated and carried out by the
same officers, on the same facts and he may further be
directed to submit a report of the said enquiry before this

                                  6
    Hon’ble Court and take appropriate action by way of
    registration of cases, if required, and take all other
    necessary and proper actions in the mater against the
    officials found guilty in the matter.”
2.2   That the aforesaid prayers/reliefs were opposed by the
appellants herein and respondent Nos. 2 and 3 herein. It was
submitted that the original complainant had earlier preferred an
application under Section 156(3) of the Cr.P.C. which came to be
rejected by the learned Magistrate, vide order dated 27.03.2015
and that the said order was not assailed by the complainant and
thereafter a fresh private complaint under Section 200 Cr.P.C.
has been preferred which is pending before the learned
Magistrate.     It was also submitted on behalf of the original
accused that the dispute is of a civil nature which is tried to be
converted into criminal, which is nothing but an abuse of the
process of law.       It was submitted that despite having the
knowledge of the mortgage of the property with the Andhra Bank,
thereafter the complainant himself had paid the mortgage money
to the Andhra Bank and even got the sale deed executed in his
favour. It was submitted that if the complainant was aggrieved,

                                 7
in that case, he would not have got the sale deed executed in his
favour.
2.3   That, by the impugned judgment and order, the High Court
has allowed the said writ petition and has directed that the case
be placed before the Commissioner of Police for taking an action
against respondent Nos. 3 to 5 therein (who are appellant Nos. 3
to 5 herein) for taking a diametrically opposite view. The High
Court has also directed that the Commissioner of Police would be
well advised to resort to course correction by directing that the
earlier preliminary inquiry be taken to its logical conclusion and
the steps in that regard by taken within two weeks. The High
Court has also observed that the complainant shall also be
entitled to costs quantified at Rs.25,000/­ to be paid by the
State.
3.    We have heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the parties at length. We have also considered the material on
record.
4.    Having heard the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
parties at length and considering the material on record, we are
of the opinion that the criminal proceedings initiated by

                                   8
respondent No. 1 – original complainant is nothing but an abuse
of the process of law for settling a civil dispute.
4.1   Even considering the nature of allegations in the complaint,
we are of the firm opinion that no case is made out for taking
cognizance of the offence under Section 420/34 IPC. The case
involves a civil dispute and for settling a civil dispute, the
criminal complaint has been filed, which is nothing but an abuse
of the process of law.
4.2   It is required to be noted that after having come to know
that the property was mortgaged with the Andhra Bank, the
original complainant himself paid the mortgage money and got
the mortgage redeemed.        Not only that, thereafter, he got the
sale deed executed in his name.         Thereafter also, he filed the
complaint with the learned Magistrate, being an application
under Section 156(3) of the Cr.P.C., which came to be rejected by
the learned Magistrate, vide order dated 27.03.2015.        The said
order was not assailed by the complainant.           It appears that
thereafter he filed a private complaint under Section 200 Cr.P.C.
which was pending before the learned Magistrate.         Despite the
above, he filed a writ petition before the High Court, which is

                                  9
nothing but an abuse of the process of law.            The criminal
proceedings have been initiated by the original complainant to
settle the civil dispute. Therefore, in the facts and circumstances
of the case, the Investigating Officer and other police officers were
justified in not registering the FIR and in coming to the
conclusion that the complaint be filed.       The earlier opinion on
preliminary inquiry was never placed before the DCP. Thereafter,
on thorough investigation/inquiry and considering the facts and
circumstances of the case narrated hereinabove, when it was
opined that the dispute between the parties is of a civil nature,
the High Court ought not to have issued further directions.       The
High Court ought to have closed the proceedings. Not only the
High Court has issued further directions, but even has imposed
costs and an action against the appellants 3 to 5 herein which, in
the facts and circumstances of the case, is not sustainable.
4.3   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above and as
observed hereinabove, the initiation of the criminal proceedings
by the original complainant is nothing but an abuse of the
process of law, we not only quash and set aside the impugned
judgment and order, but also quash the criminal proceedings

                                10
pending   before  the  learned   Magistrate     in    respect        of    the
transaction in question.    Consequently, the present appeal is
allowed, the impugned judgment and order dated 13.01.2017
passed by the High Court is hereby quashed and set aside. Even
the criminal proceedings initiated by the original complainant
pending   before  the  learned   Magistrate     in    respect        of    the
transaction in question are hereby quashed and set aside.
                                        ..................................J.
                                        (ARUN MISHRA)
                                        ...................................J.
                                        (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
New Delhi                               ...................................J.
August 08, 2019                         (M. R. SHAH)


