                                                                               REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                          CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9836_OF 2014
                       Pravesh Kumar Sachdeva                                …Appellant
                                                          Versus
                       State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.                         …Respondents
                                                          WITH
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9838 OF 2014
                                                          WITH
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9524 OF 2018
                                (Arising out of S. L.P. (C) No. 21229 OF 2007)
                                                           AND
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 9837 OF 2014
                                                    JUDGMENT
                       Madan B. Lokur, J.
                       1.     Leave granted in S.L.P.(C) No.21229 of 2007.
                       2.     A narrow question arises for consideration in these appeals,
                       namely, whether the Allahabad High Court was right in setting aside a
                       confirmed auction sale despite there being no objection to it. In our
                       opinion, the High Court was in error in setting aside the auction of the
                       land belonging to the private respondents (Alok Mitra, Ashok Mitra,
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
                       Deepak Mitra, Manmohan Mitra and Madhurima Ghosh) and thereby
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2018.09.13
15:24:16 IST
Reason:
                       prejudicing the rights of the appellants.
                       C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                             Page 1 of 9

3.     The private respondents were having businesses under the name
and style of Mitra Prakashan Ltd. and Maya Press Ltd. It appears that the
businesses were not successful and they fell in debt being unable to pay
the workmen or even pay closure compensation.
4.     This led the workmen to approach the Labour Court which decided
in their favour resulting in the private respondents having to shell out a
huge amount of about Rs. 56 lakhs towards unpaid dues. Since the
amounts were not paid despite a citation and recovery certificates, the
property/vacant land of the private respondents being 1877.88 sq. yards in
Plot No.4-A/4(1A/A) Hashimpur Road, Allahabad was attached.
5.     Subsequently, the property/vacant land was put to auction which
took place on 17th November, 2004. One of the appellants Pravesh Kumar
Sachdeva (for short Sachdeva) was the highest bidder having given a bid
of Rs. 70 lakhs.
6.     In terms of the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Zamindari Abolition
and Land Reforms Act, 1950 and the Rules of 1952 framed thereunder,
30 days’ time was given for filing objections to the auction sale under
Rule 285-I which reads as follows:
              “RULE 285-I (i) At any time within thirty days from the
              date of sale, application may be made to the Commissioner
              to set aside the sale on the ground of some material
              irregularity or mistake in publishing or conducting it; but no
              sale shall be set aside on such ground unless the applicant
C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                                      Page 2 of 9

             proves to the satisfaction of the Commissioner that he has
             sustained substantial injury by reason of such irregularity or
             mistake.
             (ii) ***
             (iii) The order of the Commissioner passed under this rule
             shall be final.”
7.     One   of    the   private   respondents    (Alok    Mitra)    filed  an
application/objections on 16th December, 2004. The cause title of the
application/objections mentioned the name of all the private respondents
that is, Alok Mitra, Ashok Mitra, Deepak Mitra, Manmohan Mitra and
Madhurima Ghosh. However, on a perusal of the application/objections
placed before us in original, we found that it was signed only by the
advocate R.K. Pandey. The vakalatnama given to the advocate was signed
only by Alok Mitra. One of the issues raised before us was whether the
application/objections were filed by Alok Mitra or by all the private
respondents.
8.     Be that as it may, in our opinion, the application/objections were
filed only by Alok Mitra and by none of the other private respondents
even though their names find mention in the cause title of the document.
We say this because the vakalatnama was given in favour of the advocate
only by Alok Mitra and there is nothing to indicate that he had given the
vakalatnama as the attorney or representative of the other private
respondents.
C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                                    Page 3 of 9

9.     The    District  Magistrate    was   not    informed    about    the
application/objections having been filed by Alok Mitra and on the belief
that no one had objected to the auction sale, the District Magistrate
confirmed it on 18th December, 2004. Thereafter Alok Mitra prepared an
application dated 31st December, 2004 which was filed by him on 4 th
January, 2005 withdrawing the objections raised by him. The withdrawal
of the objections was allowed by the competent authority on 24 th January,
2005.
10.    Quite independently on 11th January, 2005 and 25th January, 2005
the private respondents (including Alok Mitra) moved two sets of
applications for being paid the difference between the auction sale price
of Rs. 70 lakhs and the dues and liabilities of the private respondents of
about Rs. 56 lakhs. These applications were allowed and the differential
amount was also given to the private respondents.
11.    The position as it stood, therefore, was that the auction sale had
taken place and was confirmed; objections filed to the auction sale by
Alok Mitra were withdrawn; all the private respondents got back the
difference between the auction sale price and the dues and liabilities
incurred by them.
C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                                Page 4 of 9

12.    On or about 1st April, 2005 Sachdeva got the subject land converted
to freehold and a little later in May 2005, he sold a part of it to Pawan
Kumar Agarwal (also an appellant).
13.    After the aforesaid transaction, an application was filed by the
private respondents other than Alok Mitra before the Competent
Authority on 19th May, 2005 in which a prayer was made to recall the
order   of    24th   January,    2005    permitting     withdrawal     of   the
application/objections filed by Alok Mitra. The averments made in the
application in paragraphs 3 and 4 are significant and read as follows:
             “3. That the applicants had never given a power of attorney
             to the opposite party No. 6 Alok Mitra to act for them and on
             their behalf, and were also not ratified the act and action
             taken by said Sri Alok Mitra.
             4. That the applicants never asked, directed and consented
             with Sri Alok Mitra opposite party No. 6 not to press or to
             withdraw the aforesaid objection/application No.5 of 2004.”
14.    A reading of the aforesaid two paragraphs indicates an inherent
self-contradiction. While it is stated in paragraph 3 that the applicants had
not given any power of attorney to Alok Mitra to act for them and on their
behalf whereas in paragraph 4 they say that they had not asked, directed
and consented to the withdrawal of the objections/application filed by
Alok Mitra. The inherent contradiction is that if they had not authorized
Alok Mitra to file an application, there cannot be any question of their
authorizing Alok Mitra to withdraw the application since it was not filed
C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                                    Page 5 of 9

on their behalf. The two paragraphs quoted above confirm that the
application/objections of 16th December, 2004 were not filed by the
private respondents.
15.     Unfortunately, by an order dated 21st November, 2005 the
application filed by the private respondents (other than Alok Mitra) was
allowed by the Competent Authority and the confirmation of sale in
favour of Sachdeva was set aside. This led Sachdeva to file a writ
petition1 in the Allahabad High Court, which came to be dismissed by the
impugned judgement and order dated 23rd March, 2006. This resulted in
Sachdeva and the vendee, Pawan Kumar Agarwal to prefer the present
appeals in this Court.
16.     As mentioned above, on these facts, the only question for our
consideration is whether the High Court was in error in setting aside the
confirmed auction sale.
17.     It is quite clear from the narration of facts that the objections raised
to the auction sale were only by Alok Mitra, who did not communicate
the objections to the District Magistrate in time. No other objection was
raised to the auction sale and it was duly confirmed by the District
Magistrate. Alok Mitra later withdrew his objections.
1 Civil Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 76863 of 2005
C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                                     Page 6 of 9

18.    The other private respondents contended that even they were
parties to the objections filed by Alok Mitra. We cannot agree for the
simple reason that the objections were signed only by R.K.Pandey,
advocate and the vakalatnama given to him was signed only by Alok
Mitra. None of the other private respondents signed the vakalatnama in
favour of R.K.Pandey.        On the contrary, when the other private
respondents objected to the withdrawal of the objections by Alok Mitra,
they categorically stated that they had not given a power of attorney to
Alok Mitra. In that view of the matter, it can hardly lie in the mouth of
these private respondents to contend that the objections filed by Alok
Mitra were also filed on their behalf. The private respondents other than
Alok Mitra have come out with an unbelievable story only to somehow or
other keep the issue alive through litigation and unfortunately, they have
been successful in doing so for the last more than one decade.
19.    We also find that the conduct of all the private respondents is a
clear indication of their acceptance of the validity of the auction sale. It
has come on record that the auction sale resulted in a sale price which
was over and above the dues and liabilities of the private respondents by
an amount of about Rs. 14 lakhs. Through applications filed by the
private respondents on 11th January, 2005 and 25th January, 2005 requests
were made for being given back the excess amount raised by the auction
C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                                 Page 7 of 9

sale. In fact this request was acceded to and the amount was given back
to the private respondents by the Competent Authority. It appears that the
present litigation is being fought by the private respondents on the basis
of the amounts received by them from the Competent Authority. In any
event, the conduct of the private respondents is a clear indication, if any
is required, that they had no objection to the auction sale.
20.    Through their conduct, in failing to file objections to the auction
sale and making an application and accepting the excess amount
recovered from the auction sale, the private respondents have waived off
their rights in respect of the auction sale and have acquiesced in the
auction sale. Today, the private respondents are estopped through their
conduct from challenging the auction sale in any manner whatsoever.
21.    In Waman Shriniwas Kini v. Ratilal Bhagwandas & Co. 2 it was
observed as follows:
              “Waiver is the abandonment of a right which normally everybody
              is at liberty to waive. A waiver is nothing unless it amounts to a
              release. It signifies nothing more than an intention not to insist
              upon the right. It may be deduced from acquiescence or may be
              implied.”
22.    In Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Dr Hakimwadi
Tenants' Association3 it was held that “In order to constitute waiver, there
must be voluntary and intentional relinquishment of a right. The essence
2 1959 Supp (2) SCR 217
3 1988 Supp SCC 55
C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                                     Page 8 of 9

of a waiver is an estoppel and where there is no estoppel, there is no
waiver. Estoppel and waiver are questions of conduct and must
necessarily be determined on the facts of each case.”
23.    Finally, in P. Dasa Muni Reddy v. P. Appa Rao4 this Court held:
              “ … Waiver is an intentional relinquishment of a known right or
              advantage, benefit, claim or privilege which except for such
              waiver the party would have enjoyed. Waiver can also be a
              voluntary surrender of a right. ….. The doctrine which the courts
              of law will recognise is a rule of judicial policy that a person will
              not be allowed to take inconsistent position to gain advantage
              through the aid of courts.”
24.    We are of the clear opinion that in view of the law, the High Court
erred in ignoring the basic and primary facts on record and setting aside
the auction sale in favour of Sachdeva, and thereby also prejudicing
Pawan Kumar Agarwal.
25.    Under the circumstances, the appeals are allowed and the
impugned judgment and order passed by the Allahabad High Court on
23rd March, 2006 is set aside.
                                                          ...……………………J
                                                            (Madan B. Lokur)
                                                          ...……………………J
                                                            (S. Abdul Nazeer)
                                                         ...…………………....J
New Delhi;                                                  (Deepak Gupta)
September 13, 2018
4 (1974) 2 SCC 725
C.A. Nos. 9836 OF 2014 etc. etc.                                       Page 9 of 9


