                                                                         1
                                                                REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 92 OF 2019
           PUNJAB WAKF BOARD                               ...APPELLANT(S)
           SHAM SINGH HARIKE                             ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                             WITH
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 93 OF 2019
           PUNJAB WAKF BOARD                               ...APPELLANT(S)
                                            VERSUS
           TEJA SINGH                                    ...RESPONDENT(S)
                                       J U D G M E N T
           ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
                       These two appeals having been filed against two
           separate judgments of the Punjab and Haryana High
           Court          allowing  the   Civil  Revisions  filed  by  the
           respondents have been heard together and are being
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SANJAY KUMAR
Date: 2019.02.07
13:02:09 IST
           decided by this common judgment.
Reason:

                                                        2
2.  Brief  facts giving    rise to    the above   appeals
which are necessary to be noticed for deciding these
appeals are:
Civil Appeal No.92 of 2019(Punjab Wakf Board vs. Sham
Singh Harike)
    The appellant, Pubjab Wakf Board, claimed to be
owner  of   land    measuring   269   kanals   7  marlas,
comprising in khewat No.462, khatauni Nos.589, 593,
599 and 596 in khasra Nos.103, 105, 102 min, 104,
106, of village Birmi, Tehsil and District Ludhiana.
The appellant had let out the above-mentioned land to
Sham Singh and his wife Kuldeep Kaur for cultivation
of the land. The lessee deposited the rent for few
years and thereafter initiated litigation against the
interest of the Board which was decided in favour of
the Board. The appellant filed Civil Suit No.250 of
2001 in the Court of Civil Judge, Senior Division for
the grant of permanent injunction restraining the
respondents    from   raising    any   construction   and
changing    the    position    from    agricultural    to
residential   of  the   property   in   any  manner.  The
respondents filed written statement challenging the
maintainability    of  the   suit.   The   title  of  the

                                                     3
appellant was denied in the written statement. After
the constitution of the Wakf Tribunal, the suit was
transferred to the Wakf Tribunal and renumbered as
RBT No.84/2006. The respondent filed an application
before the Tribunal for rejection of the plaint on
the ground that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to
entertain the suit and the Civil Court alone has
jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The Wakf Tribunal
by   its   order  dated   17.04.2009    rejected   the
application of the respondent and held that after
01.01.1996 it is only the Wakf Tribunal which has
jurisdiction to try the present suit.
3.  The  respondent  aggrieved  by  the   order  dated
17.04.2009 filed Civil Revision in the High Court.
The High Court relying on the judgment of Ramesh
Gobindram(dead) through LRs. vs. Sugra Humayun Mirza
Wakf, (2010) 8 SCC 726, allowed the Revision. The
High Court held that since the appellant is a non-
muslim, the Wakf Tribunal has no jurisdiction in the
matter and it is only the Civil Court which had the
jurisdiction in the present dispute. The appellant

                                                      4
aggrieved by the said judgment dated 20.09.2010 has
come up in this appeal.
Civil Appeal No.93 of 2019(Punjab Wakf Board vs. Teja
Singh)
4.  The Punjab Wakf Board, the appellant claiming to
be owner of the property measuring 29 Kanals 9 Marlas
comprised in Khewat No.224, khatauni No.277, Khasra
Nos.55, 56, 57 filed Suit No.2 of 2007 in the Court
of Wakf Tribunal, Ludhiana for possession of above
noted  property  and  seeking   relief   for  permanent
injunction    restraining    the     respondent    from
interfering and changing the nature of the property.
Plaintiff’s case in the suit was that the defendant,
Taja Singh took suit property on yearly lease from
Wakf Board till the year 1996-97 and paid lease money
to the plaintiff Board. After 1996-97 lease was not
renewed  and   defendant   having   committed   certain
illegalities, the Wakf Board cancelled the lease on
05.12.1998. Notice to this effect was served upon the
defendant vide which      a request was made to the
defendant to handover the vacant possession of the
leased-out property to the plaintiff Board. After

                                                              5
cancellation    of   the   lease,   the  possession     of  the
defendant over the suit property became illegal.
5.   The defendant had also filed suit for grant of
injunction which was decreed by Civil Judge (Junior
Division), Ludhiana, the Court restrained the Board
from   dispossessing      the    respondent     forcibly    and
illegally except in due course of law. The defendant
having   failed     to   handover    the   possession,      the
appellant filed the suit for possession and the grant
of   permanent     injunction.     The   defendant     entered
appearance     and     filed     written    statement.      The
defendant’s case in the written statement was that
the defendant always remained ready to pay the rent
due to the plaintiff and is still ready to pay and
tender the rent due to the plaintiff even in the
Court but the plaintiff is not accepting the same
intentionally just to seek possession of the tenanted
premises   in   an  illegal    manner.   The   defendant    had
filed   suit   against    the   Wakf   Board   for   permanent
injunction    which   has   been   decreed   by   Civil   Judge

                                                         6
(Junior Division), the appeal against which has also
been dismissed.
6.  The   Wakf   Tribunal     vide  its   judgment   dated
03.06.2009   decreed    the   original   suit.  Following
decree has been passed by the Tribunal:
     “17. Keeping in view the findings on the
     above issues, the suit of the plaintiff is
     decreed for possession of the suit land and
     the same is also decreed for permanent
     injunction restraining the defendant from
     changing the nature of the suit land with
     costs of the suit. Decree sheet be drawn.
     File be consigned to the record room.”
7.  Against    the   judgment    of  the   Wakf  Tribunal
decreeing   the    suit,   the   defendant   filed   Civil
Revision No.6157 of 2009, which has been allowed by
the High court by following order:
         “In view of the judgment delivered by
     the Apex Court in case Ramesh Gobindram
     (dead) through L.Rs. vs. Sugra Humayun
     Mirza Wakf, 2010(2) RCR(Rent) 266, the
     instant petition is accepted, impugned
     order is set aside and the plaint along
     with    documents     is    returned   to    the
     Petitioner to be presented before the
     appropriate court.”

                                                         7
8.   The appellant aggrieved by the judgment of the
High  Court   dated  23.02.2011   has  come   up  in  this
appeal.
9.     We have   heard Shri   Salman Khurshid,     learned
senior counsel for the appellant. Shri Vineet Bhagat
and Shri K.G. Bhagat, learned counsel and Shri S.B.
Upadhyay, learned senior counsel appeared for the
respondents.
10. Shri Salman Khurshid, learned senior counsel for
the appellant submits that Wakf Tribunal was fully
competent   to   entertain   the   suits   filed   by  the
appellant. The defendants in both the suits having
been leased out the land which was Wakf property, the
suit clearly lay before the Wakf Tribunal as per
Section 83 of Wakf Act, 1995.
11. He   submits   that  Wakf   Tribunal   was   conferred
jurisdiction of entertaining every dispute pertaining
to  Wakf   in  the  Wakf   Act,  1954.   After   the  1984
Amendment, under Section 55 of Act, 1954 for any
dispute pertaining to Wakf property suit has to be

                                                       8
filed before the Tribunal and the jurisdiction of the
Civil Court was barred by virtue of Section 55C of
the  Act,  1954,   which  statutory    scheme  has  been
continued under Sections 83 and 85 of Act, 1995. He
submits that judgment of      Ramesh Gobindram (supra)
which  has  been   relied   by  the   High  Court  while
allowing the revisions filed by the respondents was a
case  under   Act,   1954   that   too   prior  to  1984
Amendment. He, however, submits that suits filed by
the appellant were suits for possession, hence, were
fully maintainable before the Wakf Tribunal. Shri
Salman Khurshid relies on the judgment of this Court
in Board of Wakf, West Bengal & another vs. Anis
Fatma Begum & another, (2010) 14 SCC 588, where suit
filed before the Tribunal was held to be maintainable
and   the   judgment     of    Ramesh    Gobindram   was
distinguished.
12. Shri Khurshid has further relied on the judgment
and Order of this Court dated 13.09.2013 in C.A.
No.8194 of 2013 (Punjab Wakf Board vs. Pritpal Singh
& Anr.) where a similar order passed by the High

                                                        9
Court holding that suit of Punjab Wakf Board is not
maintainable has been set aside. He submits that the
present case is similar to the judgment of this Court
in Pritpal Singh. Shri Khurshid has relied on other
judgments which shall be referred to later.
13. Learned counsel for the respondent, Sham Singh
Harike, refuting the submission of the counsel of the
appellant contends that the judgment of this Court in
Anis Fatma Begum (supra) does not overrule Ramesh
Gobindram. The case of respondent is that he is in
possession of property since 1967. In the year 1970
property was verified as Wakf property without any
notice to the Central Government. The respondent has
been opposing the move of appellant Board to seek
mutation of its title over the property before the
Revenue Authority. Punjab Wakf Board in the year 1970
got the suit land notified in the Wakf under the Wakf
Act,  1954   without    serving   any   notice   on   the
respondent.  The   title  of  the   appellant  has   been
refuted by the respondent. The suit filed by the
appellant  was   not  maintainable    before  the   Civil
Court, hence, application was filed by the respondent

                                                          10
under Order VII Rule 10 and 11 CPC for rejecting the
plaint.
14. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the
respondent that Sham Singh Harike and others have
also filed a suit in the Court of Civil Judge, Senior
Division   against    the   Union   of  India   and   others
including Punjab, Wakf Board seeking a declaration
that suit land is not a Wakf property nor Wakf Board
has  right   and   any   interest   nor   forcibly   it  can
dispossess him.
15. Shri   S.B.      Upadhyay,    learned   senior   counsel
appearing for Teja Singh submits that a suit has been
filed by the respondent being Suit No.265 of 1999
which has been decreed by the Civil Judge (Junior
Division)     restraining       the     defendants      from
dispossessing    the   plaintiff   forcibly   or  illegally
subject to payment of dues upto date against which
appeal  filed   by   the   Punjab   Wakf   Board   was  also
dismissed on 09.04.2005. Shri Upadhyay has heavily
relied on Ramesh Gobindram case and he submits that

                                                         11
in view of the judgment of Ramesh Gobindram, the suit
filed by the appellant was not maintainable and the
plaint  has  rightly    been  returned  to  be   presented
before the Civil Court.
16. We   have   considered    the   submissions    of   the
parties and perused the records.
17. The    main     issue    which    has    arisen     for
consideration in these appeals is as to whether suit
filed  by  the   appellant   before   the  Wakf   Tribunal
praying for decree of possession of suit property was
maintainable in Wakf Tribunal or would lie only in a
Civil Court. Although, the Wakf Tribunal has held
that suit was maintainable before it, the High Court
has reversed the order of the Tribunal holding that
the suit is not maintainable before the Wakf Tribunal
relying  on  the   judgment   of  this  Court   in   Ramesh
Gobindram.  Before    we  notice  the  judgment    of  this
Court in Ramesh Gobindram and the judgments relied by
the parties, the statutory provisions pertaining to
Wakf and Wakf property need to be noted.

                                                     12
18. Before the enactment of Wakf Act, 1995 by the
Parliament, the Wakf Act, 1954 was in force. Many
deficiencies in Wakf Act, 1954 were found which led
to comprehensive amendments made by Wakf Amendment
Act, 1984 on the basis of recommendations of Wakf
Inquiry Committee. However, many provisions of 1984
(Amendment) Act could not be enforced. Before we come
to Act, 1995 it is relevant to notice the statutory
regime which was prevalent prior to Act, 1995. The
Wakf (Amendment) Bill, 1984 was moved with detail of
Statement of Objects and Reasons. Paragraph 3(vii)
which   is  relevant   for the  present   purpose is as
follows:
      “3. The Bill seeks to make, inter alia,
      amendments to the Wakf Act, 1954, in
      relation to the following matters, namely:-
                   xxx      xxx      xxx
          (vii) to provide for the appointment of
      Tribunals for the speedy determination of
      the disputes, question or other matters
      relating to wakfs; every such Tribunal is
      to consist of one person who shall be a
      member of the State Judicial Service
      holding a rank not below that of a District
      Judge or of a Civil Judge, First Class;
                    xxx     xxx      xxx”

                                                    13
19. Section   55   of Wakf  Act, 1954 (prior  to  1984
Amendment) was as follows:
     “Section-55. Institution of suits under
     section 92 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
     1908.-
     (1) A suit to obtain any of the reliefs
     mentioned in section 92 of the Code of
     Civil    Procedure,   1908,  (5  of   1908.)
     relating to any Wakf may, notwithstanding
     anything to the contrary contained in that
     section, be instituted by the Board without
     obtaining the consent referred to therein.
     (2) No suit to obtain any of the reliefs
     referred to in section 92 of the Code of
     Civil Procedure, 1908, relating to any Wakf
     shall be instituted by any person or
     authority other than the Board without the
     consent in writing of the Board and for the
     institution of any such suit, it shall not
     be necessary to obtain the consent referred
     to    in    that   section,  notwithstanding
     anything          contained        therein:
     Provided that nothing in this sub-section
     shall apply in relation to any such suit
     against the Board.”
20. Comprehensive amendments were made in Wakf Act,
1954. Section 55 was substituted in the following
manner:
     “55. Appointment, powers and jurisdiction
     of tribunals.--(1) The State Government
     shall, by notification in the Official

                                                 14
Gazette, constitute as many Tribunals as it
may think fit for the determination of any
dispute, question or other matter relating
to a wakf property which such Tribunal is,
or may be, required to determine under this
Act or any rule or order made thereunder,
and   may,   by    the    same   or   subsequent
notification    in    the    Official   Gazette,
define the local limits of the area in
relation to which each Tribunal appointed
by it shall exercise jurisdiction under
this Act.
(2) Any mutawalli of a wakf, person
interested in a wakf or any other person
aggrieved by any order made under this Act
or any rule or order made thereunder, may
make   an   application      within   the   time
specified in this Act or where no such time
has been specified, within such time as may
be prescribed, to the Tribunal for the
determination of any dispute, question or
other matter relating to the wakf.
(3) Where any application made under sub-
section (1) relates to any wakf property
which falls within the territorial limits
of   the   Jurisdiction     of   two   or   more
Tribunals, such application, may be made to
the Tribunal within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction the mutawalli or any one
of the mutawallis of the wakf actually and
voluntarily resides, carries on business or
personally works for gain, and, where any
such application is made to the Tribunal
aforesaid, the other Tribunal or Tribunals
having jurisdiction shall not entertain any
application for the determination of such
dispute, question or other matter:
    Provided that the State Government may,
if it is of opinion that it is expedient in

                                            15
the interests of the wakf or any other
person interested in the wakf or the wakf
property, to transfer such application to
any other Tribunal having jurisdiction for
the determination of the dispute, question
or other matter relating to such wakf or
wakf property, transfer such application to
any other Tribunal having jurisdiction,
and, on such transfer, the Tribunal to
which the application is so transferred
shall deal with the application from the
stage which was reached before the Tribunal
from which the application has been so
transferred, except where the Tribunal is
of opinion that it is necessary in the
interests of justice to deal with the
application afresh.
(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of one
person, who shall be a member of the State
Judicial Service holding a rank, not below
that of a District and Sessions Judge or of
a Civil Judge, Class I, and the appointment
of every such person may be made either by
name or by designation.
(5) The Tribunal shall be deemed to be a
civil court and shall have the same powers
as may be exercised by a civil court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of
1908), while trying a suit, or executing a
decree or order.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of
1908), the Tribunal shall follow such
procedure as may be prescribed:
   Provided that where any procedure,
different from the prescribed procedure, is
specified by this Act, the Tribunal shall
follow the procedure specified by this Act.

                                                         16
     (7) The decision of the Tribunal shall be
     final and binding upon the parties to the
     application and it shall have the force of
     a decree made by a civil court.
     (8) Execution of any decision of the
     Tribunal shall be made by the civil court
     to   which   such     decision    is   sent   for
     execution in accordance with the provisions
     of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of
     1908).
     (9) No appeal shall lie against any
     decision or order whether interim or
     otherwise, given or made by the Tribunal:
         Provided that a High Court may, on its
     own motion or on the application of the
     Board or any person aggrieved, call for and
     examine    the    records   relating     to   any
     dispute, question or other matter which has
     been determined by the Tribunal for the
     purpose of satisfying itself as to the
     correctness, legality or propriety of such
     determination and may confirm, reverse or
     modify such determination or pass such
     other order as it may think fit.”
21. Section   55C   was  inserted    relating   to  bar  of
jurisdiction   of    Civil   Court    which   was  to   the
following effect:
     “55-C. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts
     in   respect     of   matters    determined    by
     Tribunal.    -No     suit    or    other    legal
     proceeding shall lie in any civil court in
     respect of any dispute, question or other
     matter relating to any wakf, wakf property
     or other matter which is required by, or

                                                   17
     under, this    Act  to  be   determined by  a
     Tribunal.”
22. Chapter VIII of the Wakf Act, 1995 deals with
Judicial Proceedings. Sections 83 and 85 which are
relevant for this case are as follows:
     “83. Constitution of Tribunals, etc.— (1)
     The State Government shall, by notification
     in the Official Gazette, constitute as many
     Tribunals as it may think fit, for the
     determination of any dispute, question or
     other matter relating to a waqf or waqf
     property under this Act and define the
     local limits and jurisdiction of such
     Tribunals.
     (2) Any mutawalli person interested in a
     waqf or any other person aggrieved by an
     order made under this Act, or rules made
     thereunder, may make an application within
     the time specified in this Act or where no
     such time has been specified, within such
     time as may be prescribed, to the Tribunal
     for the determination of any dispute,
     question or other matter relating to the
     waqf.
     (3) Where any application made under sub-
     section (1) relates to any waqf property
     which falls within the territorial limits
     of   the   jurisdiction    of   two  or  more
     Tribunals, such application may be made to
     the Tribunal within the local limits of
     whose jurisdiction the mutawalli or any one
     of the mutawallis of the waqf actually and
     voluntarily resides, carries on business or
     personally works for gain, and, where any
     such application is made to the Tribunal
     aforesaid, the other Tribunal or Tribunals
     having jurisdiction shall not entertain any

                                            18
application for the determination of such
dispute, question or other matter:
   Provided that the State Government may,
if it is of opinion that it is expedient in
the interest of the waqf or any other
person interested in the waqf or the waqf
property to transfer such application to
any other Tribunal having jurisdiction for
the determination of the dispute, question
or other matter relating to such waqf or
waqf property, transfer such application to
any other Tribunal having jurisdiction,
and, on such transfer, the Tribunal to
which the application is so transferred,
shall deal with the application from the
stage which was reached before the Tribunal
from which the application has been so
transferred, except where the Tribunal is
of opinion that it is necessary in the
interest of justice to deal with the
application afresh.
(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of one
person who shall be a member of the State
Judicial Service holding a rank, not below
that of a District, Sessions or Civil
Judge, Class I, and the appointment of
every such person may be made either by
name or by designation.
(5) The Tribunal shall be deemed to be a
Civil Court and shall have the same powers
as may be exercised by a Civil Court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while
trying a suit, or executing a decree or
order.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the
Tribunal shall follow such procedure as may
be prescribed.
(7) The decision of the Tribunal shall be
final and binding upon the parties to the

                                                     19
     application and it shall have the force of
     a decree made by a Civil Court.
     (8) The execution of any decision of the
     Tribunal shall be made by the Civil Court
     to   which   such   decision   is   sent   for
     execution in accordance with the provisions
     of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
     (9) No appeal shall lie against any
     decision or order whether interim or
     otherwise, given or made by the Tribunal:
         Provided that a High Court may, on its
     own motion or on the application of the
     Board or any person aggrieved, call for and
     examine    the  records   relating    to   any
     dispute, question or other matter which has
     been determined by the Tribunal for the
     purpose of satisfying itself as to the
     correctness, legality or propriety of such
     determination and may confirm, reverse or
     modify such determination or pass such
     other order as it may think fit.
     85. Bar of jurisdiction of Civil Courts. —
     No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie
     in any Civil Court in respect of any
     dispute, question or other matter relating
     to any waqf, waqf property or other matter
     which is required by or under this Act to
     be determined by a Tribunal.”
23. Reverting back to the facts in these appeals, in
C.A.No.93 of 2019(Punjab Wakf Board vs. Teja Singh),
in  the  suit  filed  by  the  Punjab   Wakf  Board the
plaintiff has claimed for the following reliefs:
         “It is therefore, prayed that a decree
     for possession of property measuring 29K-9M
     comprised    in   Khewat   No.224,    Khatauni

                                                    20
      No.277, Khasra No.55, 56,57 as per the
      Jamabandi for the year 2000-2001 of Village
      Talwara, HB No.149, Tehsil Ludhana West,
      District Ludhiana;
                             AND
      For the grant of permanent injunction
      restraining the defendant, his agents,
      attorneys, associates from interfering and
      changing the nature of the property in any
      manner whatsoever, may kindly be passed in
      favour of the plaintiff.”
24. Plaintiff’s case was that Teja Singh was let out
the suit property, till the year 1996-97, neither
lease   was   renewed  nor   lessee handed   over  the
possession. Teja Singh committed illegalities, the
lease had been cancelled on 05.12.1998 after legal
notice.   Thereafter,    the   suit has   been  filed.
Plaintiff had also stated that Teja Singh failed to
get the lease renewed, and a suit against the Board
was filed where Civil Judge (Junior Division) decreed
the suit restraining the Board from evicting Teja
Singh forcibly or illegally. The case of Teja Singh
in his written statement was that defendant has not
violated any terms and conditions of the allotment
order and rent deed, defendant is still ready to pay

                                                   21
the rent, the lease has not been terminated according
to the provisions of the Wakf Act.
25. Coming to C.A.No.92 0f 2019 (Punjab Wakf Board
vs. Sham Singh Harike), the case of the plaintiff in
the suit was that the suit land was let out to Sham
Singh with his wife, Kuldip Kaur in the year 1972 for
cultivation. Defendant deposited rent for some period
and after that he acted against the interests of the
Board and started a false litigation. The property
was  let  out   to  the  defendant  for  agricultural
purposes having no right to raise construction over
the  property.   Details  of   different  litigations
initiated by the defendant were given in the plaint.
Defendant initiated various proceedings for allotment
of the land from the Revenue Authority which were all
dismissed. The property has been mutated in the name
of Wakf Board. In the written statement filed by the
defendant, Sham Singh, the title of Wakf Board itself
was disputed, and it was pleaded that the suit is not
maintainable and liable to be dismissed. Until and
unless the suit property is declared to be that of

                                                   22
the plaintiff no suit is maintainable. Mutation in
the name of the plaintiff does not confer any title.
Thus, in both the suits filed by the appellant, the
maintainability of the suit in the Wakf Tribunal was
questioned. In the written statement filed by Sham
Singh the title of the appellant to the suit property
was questioned and challenged.
26. Now, we need to notice the judgment of this Court
in Ramesh Gobindram(supra) on which the High Court as
well  as  learned  counsel  for  the respondent  have
placed heavy reliance. In the above case, the Andhra
Pradesh Wakf Tribunal has passed an order of eviction
against the appellant. Revision Petition filed before
the Andhra Pradesh High Court was dismissed against
which the appeal was filed. The issue involved in
that case has been noticed in paragraph 2 of the
judgment which is to the following effect:
     “2. The question is: whether the Wakf
     Tribunal constituted under Section 83 of
     the Wakf Act, 1995 was competent to
     entertain and adjudicate upon disputes
     regarding eviction of the appellants who
     are occupying different items of what are
     admittedly   wakf   properties?  The   Wakf

                                                   23
     Tribunal before whom the suits for eviction
     of the tenants were filed answered the
     question regarding its jurisdiction in the
     affirmative and decreed the suit filed
     against the appellant.”
27. This Court noticed in the aforesaid judgment that
there is a cleavage in the judicial opinion expressed
on the question of jurisdiction of Wakf Tribunal by
the different High Courts in the country. The view of
the Andhra Pradesh High Court, Rajasthan High Court,
Madhya  Pradesh  High Court,  Kerala  High  Court and
Punjab and Haryana High Court has been noticed where
High Courts have taken the view that jurisdiction of
the Wakf Tribunal is wide enough to entertain and
adjudicate upon all kinds of disputes which relate to
any Wakf Property. The contrary view of the High
Court of Karnataka, High Courts of Madras, Allahabad
and Bombay was also noticed. This Court proceeded to
examine the scheme of Wakf Act, 1995. After noticing
the scheme of Sections 6, 7, 25 and other provisions
with respect to Section 85 of the Act, following was
stated by this Court in paragraphs 24 and 28:

                                                   24
     “24. …………A plain reading of the above would
     show that the civil court’s jurisdiction is
     excluded only in cases where the matter in
     dispute is required under the Act to be
     determined by the Tribunal. The words
     “which is required by or under this Act to
     be determined by a Tribunal” holds the key
     to the question whether or not all disputes
     concerning the wakf or wakf property stand
     excluded from the jurisdiction of the civil
     court.
     28. Section 85 of the Act clearly bars
     jurisdiction   of  the   civil   courts   to
     entertain any suit or proceedings in
     relation to orders passed by or proceedings
     that may be commenced before the Tribunal.
     It follows that although Section 85 is
     wider than what is contained in Sections 6
     and 7 of the Act, the exclusion of
     jurisdiction of the civil courts even under
     Section 85 is not absolute. It is limited
     only to matters that are required by the
     Act to be determined by a Tribunal. So long
     as the dispute or question raised before
     the civil court does not fall within the
     four corners of the powers vested in the
     Tribunal, the jurisdiction of the former to
     entertain a suit or proceedings in relation
     to any such question cannot be said to be
     barred.”
28. This Court noticing the provisions of Section 83
has observed that Section 83 does not deal with the
exclusion  of the  jurisdiction  of  Civil  Courts to
entertain the civil suits generally or suit of any
particular class or category. It interpreted Section

                                                   25
83  as  a  provision   which  does  not  exclude  the
jurisdiction of the Civil Court. Following was stated
in paragraph 29:
     “29. ………………………Section 83 of the Act,
     however, does not deal with the exclusion
     of the jurisdiction of the civil courts to
     entertain civil suits generally or suit of
     any particular class or category. The
     exclusion of the civil court’s jurisdiction
     is dealt with by Section 6(5) and Section
     85 of the Act. To interpret Section 83 as a
     provision that excludes the jurisdiction of
     the civil courts is not, therefore, legally
     correct, for that provision deals with
     constitution of Tribunals, the procedure
     which the Tribunals would follow and
     matters relating thereto.”
29. On an interpretation of Section 83 following has
been laid down by this Court in paragraphs 31, 32 and
33:
     “31. It is clear from sub-section (1) of
     Section 83 above that the State Government
     is empowered to establish as many Tribunals
     as it may deem fit for the determination of
     any dispute, question or other matter
     relating to a wakf or wakf property under
     the Act and define the local limits of
     their jurisdiction. Sub-section (2) of
     Section 83 permits any mutawalli or other
     person interested in a wakf or any person
     aggrieved of an order made under the Act or
     the Rules framed thereunder to approach the
     Tribunal for determination of any dispute,
     question or other matter relating to the
     wakf. What is important is that the

                                            26
Tribunal can be approached only if the
person doing so is a mutawalli or a person
interested in a wakf or aggrieved by an
order made under the Act or the Rules. The
remaining provisions of Section 83 provide
for the procedure that the Tribunal shall
follow and the manner in which the decision
of a Tribunal shall be executed. No appeal
is, however, maintainable against any such
order although the High Court may call for
the    records    and   decide   about  the
correctness, legality or propriety of any
determination made by the Tribunal.
32. There is, in our view, nothing in
Section 83 to suggest that it pushes the
exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil
courts extends (sic) beyond what has been
provided for in Section 6(5), Section 7 and
Section 85 of the Act. It simply empowers
the Government to constitute a Tribunal or
Tribunals for determination of any dispute,
question of other matter relating to a wakf
or wakf property which does not ipso facto
mean that the jurisdiction of the civil
courts    stands   completely  excluded  by
reasons of such establishment.
33. It is noteworthy that the expression
“for the determination of any dispute,
question or other matter relating to a wakf
or wakf property” appearing in Section
83(1) also appears in Section 85 of the
Act. Section 85 does not, however, exclude
the jurisdiction of the civil courts in
respect of any or every question or
disputes only because the same relates to a
wakf or a wakf property. Section 85 in
terms provides that the jurisdiction of the
civil   court    shall  stand  excluded  in
relation to only such matters as are
required by or under this Act to be
determined by the Tribunal.”

                                                  27
30. The ultimate conclusion by this Court has been
recorded  in  paragraphs  34   and 35  which  are as
follows:
     “34. The crucial question that shall have
     to be answered in every case where a plea
     regarding exclusion of the jurisdiction of
     the civil court is raised is whether the
     Tribunal is under the Act or the Rules
     required to deal with the matter sought to
     be brought before a civil court. If it is
     not, the jurisdiction of the civil court is
     not excluded. But if the Tribunal is
     required   to   decide    the  matter   the
     jurisdiction of the civil court would stand
     excluded.
     35. In the cases at hand, the Act does not
     provide for any proceedings before the
     Tribunal for determination of a dispute
     concerning the eviction of a tenant in
     occupation of a wakf property or the rights
     and obligations of the lessor and the
     lessees of such property. A suit seeking
     eviction of the tenants from what is
     admittedly wakf property could, therefore,
     be filed only before the civil court and
     not before the Tribunal.”
31. The crux of the judgment as noticed in paragraph
34 is that “whether the Tribunal is under the Act or
the Rules required to deal with the matter sought to
be brought before a Civil Court. If it is not, the

                                                       28
jurisdiction of the Civil Court is not excluded. But
if the Tribunal is required to decide the matter the
jurisdiction   of   the   Civil    Court    would   stand
excluded.” Thus, the ratio of the judgment as noticed
above is “as to whether the Tribunal is under the Act
or the Rules required to deal with the matter sought
to be brought”.
32. After  the   judgment  of   this  Court    in  Ramesh
Gobindram, there are several two-Judge judgments of
this  Court   either   following    Ramesh    Gobindram’s
judgment or distinguishing the same on one or other
reasons. This Court in Bhanwar Lal and another vs.
Rajasthan Board of Muslim Wakf and others, (2014) 16
SCC 51, elaborately noticed the judgment of Ramesh
Gobindram’s case. This Court ultimately in the facts
of that case held that since the suit was filed much
before the enforcement of the Act i.e. 1.1.1996, in
view of the dictum laid down in Sardar Khan & others
v. Syed Nazmul Hasan (Seth) and others, (2007) 10 SCC
727, the Civil Court where the suit was filed shall
continue  to   have  jurisdiction.    In   paragraph   30
following has been laid down:

                                            29
“30. The suit is for cancellation of sale
deed, rent and for possession as well as
rendition of accounts and for removal of
trustees. However, pleadings in the suit
are not filed before us and, therefore, the
exact nature of relief claimed as well as
the averments made in the plaint or written
statements are not known to us. We are
making these remarks for the reason that
some of the reliefs claimed in the suit
appeared to be falling within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the Tribunal whereas for
other reliefs the civil court would be
competent. Going by the ratio of Ramesh
Gobindram (2010) 8 SCC 726, suit for
possession and rent is to be tried by the
civil court. However, the suit pertaining
to removal of trustees and rendition of
accounts would fall within the domain of
the   Tribunal.   Insofar   as   relief  of
cancellation of sale deed is concerned this
is to be tried by the civil court for the
reason that it is not covered by Section 6
or 7 of the Act whereby any jurisdiction is
conferred upon the Tribunal to decide such
an issue. Moreover, relief of possession,
which can be given by the civil court,
depends upon the question as to whether the
sale deed is valid or not. Thus, the issues
of   sale    deed    and   possession   are
inextricably mixed with each other. We have
made these observations to clarify the
legal position. Insofar as the present case
is concerned, since the suit was filed much
before the Act came into force, going by
the dicta laid down in Sardar Khan case, it
is the civil court where the suit was filed
will continue to have the jurisdiction over
the issue and the civil court would be
competent to decide the same.”

                                                           30
33. In   Faseela    M.    vs.   Munnerul    Islam    Madrasa
Committee and another, (2014) 16 SCC 38, the Madrasa
Committee filed suit for eviction of the appellant
before  the   Wakf   Tribunal   with   regard   to   a   Wakf
property.  The   Tribunal   directed   the   plaint    to  be
returned to the Civil Court which order was recalled
on  18.09.2010.    The   appellant   had   filed    revision
before the High Court for declaration that the Wakf
Tribunal has no jurisdiction in the matter which was
dismissed   by   the   High   Court   relying    on   Ramesh
Gobindram. This Court held that suit for eviction
against the tenant relating to a Wakf property is
exclusively triable by the Civil Court. In paragraph
16 following has been held:
     “16. The matter before us is wholly and
     squarely covered by Ramesh Gobindram. The
     suit for eviction against the tenant
     relating to a wakf property is exclusively
     triable by the civil court as such suit is
     not covered by the disputes specified in
     Sections 6 and 7 of the Act.”
34. There are few judgments of this Court in which
Ramesh Gobindram has been distinguished and it was
held that in those cases the suit was maintainable

                                                     31
before the Wakf Tribunal. In     Board of Wakf, West
Bengal and another vs. Anis Fatma Begum and another,
(2010) 14 SCC 588, a suit was filed in the Calcutta
High  Court   in  its  original  summons   jurisdiction
questioning he demarcation of the Wakf property. In
Paragraph 4 of the judgment this Court noticed the
issues raised before the High Court. It was contended
before this Court that only the Wakf Tribunal has
jurisdiction in the matter under Wakf Act, 1995 and
the   suit  before    the  High   Court   was   without
jurisdiction.   The said  submission  was  accepted  by
this Court. In paragraphs 6 and 7 following has been
laid down:
     “6. It was submitted by Dr. Rajeev Dhavan,
     learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
     appellant, that only the Wakf Tribunal has
     jurisdiction in the matter under the Wakf
     Act, 1995 and hence the suit filed in the
     High Court was without jurisdiction. We
     agree.
     7. The dispute in the present case relates
     to a wakf. In our opinion, all matters
     pertaining to wakfs should be filed in the
     first instance before the Wakf Tribunal
     constituted under Section 83 of the Wakf
     Act, 1995 and should not be entertained by
     the civil court or by the High Court
     straightaway under Article 226 of the
     Constitution of India. It may be mentioned

                                                    32
     that the Wakf Act, 1995 is a recent
     parliamentary statute which has constituted
     a Special Tribunal for deciding disputes
     relating to wakfs. The obvious purpose of
     constituting such a Tribunal was that a lot
     of cases relating to wakfs were being filed
     in the courts in India and they were
     occupying a lot of time of all the courts
     in the country which resulted in increase
     in pendency of cases in the courts. Hence,
     a Special Tribunal has been constituted for
     deciding such matters.”
35. After noticing the provisions of Section 83 this
Court held that words “any dispute, question or other
matter relating to a Wakf or Wakf property” are words
of  wide  connotation  and  any  dispute,  question or
other matter whatsoever and in whatever manner which
arises relating to a Wakf or Wakf property can be
decided by the Wakf Tribunal. Following has been laid
down in paragraph 10:
     “10. Thus, the Wakf Tribunal can decide all
     disputes,    questions   or   other   matters
     relating to a wakf or wakf property. The
     words “any dispute, question or other
     matters   relating   to   a  wakf   or   wakf
     property” are, in our opinion, words of
     very    wide   connotation.    Any   dispute,
     question or other matters whatsoever and in
     whatever manner which arises relating to a
     wakf or wakf property can be decided by the
     Wakf Tribunal. The word “wakf” has been
     defined in Section 3(r) of the Wakf Act,
     1995 and hence once the property is found

                                                   33
     to be a wakf property as defined in Section
     3(r), then any dispute, question or other
     matter relating to it should be agitated
     before the Wakf Tribunal.”
36. This Court also held that when there is special
law  providing  for a  special  forum, then  recourse
cannot be taken to the general law. In paragraphs 14,
15 and 16 following was laid down:
     “14. It is well settled that when there is
     a special law providing for a special
     forum, then recourse cannot be taken to the
     general law, vide Justice G.P. Singh’s
     Principles of Statutory Interpretation (9th
     Edn., 2004, pp. 133-34).
     15. In Chief Engineer, Hydel Project v.
     Ravinder Nath, (2008)2 SCC 350, this Court
     held that when the matter fell in the area
     covered by the Industrial Disputes Act, the
     civil court would have no jurisdiction. In
     the above decision the Court has referred
     to several earlier decisions on this point.
     16. In view of the above, we are of the
     opinion that since the matter fell under
     the purview of the Wakf Act, only the Wakf
     Tribunal has jurisdiction in the matter,
     and not the civil court. However, in view
     of the decision of this Court in Sardar
     Khan v. Syed Najmul Hasan (Seth), (2007) 10
     SCC 727, the Wakf Act will not be
     applicable                               to
     suits/appeals/revisions/proceedings
     commenced prior to 1-1-1996 when the Wakf
     Act came into force.”

                                                     34
37. Distinguishing   the  judgment   of  this  Court in
Ramesh  Gobindram  (supra)   following   was  stated in
paragraph 17:
     “17. Learned counsel for the respondent,
     however, relied on the decision of this
     Court in Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun
     Mirza Wakf. In the aforesaid decision it
     was held that eviction proceedings can only
     be decided by the civil court and not by
     the Wakf Tribunal. The dispute in the
     present case is not an eviction dispute.
     Hence, the aforesaid decision in Ramesh
     Gobindram case is distinguishable.”
38. It is to be noticed that although two-Judge Bench
in  the  above  case  has  observed   that  judgment of
Ramesh Gobindram is distinguishable but the ratio of
the judgment of West Bengal Wakf Board as can be
culled from paragraph 10 of the judgment, sounds a
substantially different note from Ramesh Gobindram’s
case. Two-Judge Bench in West Bengal Wakf Board case
held
     “10. ………………The words “any dispute, question
     or other matters relating to a wakf or wakf
     property” are, in our opinion, words of
     very    wide   connotation.    Any    dispute,
     question or other matters whatsoever and in
     whatever manner which arises relating to a

                                                      35
     wakf or wakf property can be decided by the
     Wakf Tribunal………………………”
39. In Haryana Wakf Board vs. Mahesh Kumar, (2014) 16
SCC 45, two-Judge Bench of this Court had occasion to
consider again the provisions of Sections 7 and 85 of
Wakf Act, 1995. In the above case suit was filed by
Haryana   Wakf Board  seeking  possession   of  property
which was given on lease to different persons. It is
alleged that earlier lessee illegally created a lease
deed in favour of the respondent and treated it as
illegal encroachment by the respondent. The appellant
requested him to vacate the premises and when he did
not do so, suit was filed in the Court of Civil
Judge,   Junior   Division,   Karnal.   The   respondent
appeared and raised various objections and one of the
issues framed was that the suit is not maintainable
in the present forum. The trial court decreed the
suit   against  which  appeal   was  filed   before  the
Additional District Judge. The Additional District
Judge held that since the claim of the suit by the
Wakf Board was on the basis that suit property was
Wakf property and since the respondent had denied it

                                                    36
to be the Wakf property, such a question could be
decided only by the Tribunal constituted under the
Wakf Act. The appeal court, therefore, returned the
plaint for presentation to the Court of competent
jurisdiction, namely, the Tribunal. The decree by the
trial court was set aside. The second appeal filed by
the defendant was dismissed hence appeal was filed.
This Court after examining Sections 7, 83 and 85 laid
down that wherever there is a dispute regarding the
nature  of  the property,  namely,  whether  the suit
property is Wakf property or not, it is the Tribunal
which has the exclusive jurisdiction to decide the
same. In paragraph 13 following has been laid down:
     “13. The present suit was instituted in the
     year 2000 i.e. after the Wakf Act, 1995
     came into force. Therefore, the present
     case is not covered by exception to Section
     7(5) of the Wakf Act. Thus, on a plain
     reading of Section 7 read with Section 85
     of the Act, it becomes manifest that
     wherever there is a dispute regarding the
     nature of the property, namely, whether the
     suit property is wakf property or not, it
     is the Tribunal constituted under the Wakf
     Act, which has the exclusive jurisdiction
     to decide the same. We need not delve into
     this issue any longer, inasmuch as in a
     recent judgment by this very Bench of this
     Court in Bhanwar Lal v. Rajasthan Board of

                                                       37
      Muslim Wakf, (2014) 16 SCC 51, decided on
      9-9-2013, this Court took the same view,
      after taking note of earlier judgments on
      the subject, namely, Sardar Khan v. Syed
      Najmul Hasan, (2007) 10 SCC 727, Ramesh
      Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun Mirza Wakf,
      (2010) 8 SCC 726. This view has been
      reaffirmed    in   Akkode    Jumayath    Palli
      Paripalana Committee v. P.V. Ibrahim Haji,
      (2014) 16 SCC 65.”
    The view of the High Court was approved upholding
the jurisdiction of the Wakf Tribunal.
40. In Akkode Jumayath Palli Paripalana Committee vs.
P.V. Ibrahim Haji and others, (2014) 16 SCC 65, this
Court again had occasion to consider Sections 83 and
84 of the Wakf Act. The question which arose in the
above   case is   whether  the   Wakf  Tribunal  has  got
jurisdiction   to   entertain   a  suit   for  injunction
restraining the defendants from interfering with the
administration, management and peaceful enjoyment of
the mosque and madarsa run by it and all the assets
attached to the mosque. The appellant had filed suit
for injunction before the Court of Munsif. It was
transferred   to   the  Wakf   Tribunal.   The  suit  was
decreed. Civil Revision was filed in the High Court

                                                       38
challenging the decree of the Wakf Tribunal. The High
Court setting aside the judgment and decree of the
Wakf Tribunal held that suit for injunction is not
maintainable   before    the   Wakf    Tribunal   placing
reliance on the judgment of this Court in          Ramesh
Gobindram(supra). Following was noticed in paragraph
3 of the judgment:
     “3. The respondents herein filed a civil
     revision petition as CRP No. 1362 of 2004
     under Section 83(9) of the Wakf Act before
     the Kerala High Court. The High Court vide
     its judgment dated 10-11-2010 set aside the
     judgment and decree passed by the Wakf
     Tribunal holding that a suit for injunction
     is not maintainable before a Wakf Tribunal
     placing reliance on the judgment of this
     Court in Ramesh Gobindram v. Sugra Humayun
     Mirza   Wakf.    The    Court    also   granted
     permission to the appellant to take back
     the plaint for presenting before the
     appropriate court. Later, the appellant
     preferred a review petition which was also
     dismissed by the High Court on 4-2-2011.
     The legality of the orders is under
     challenge        in        this        appeal.”
41. This Court disapproved the view of the High Court
and held that suit was maintainable. Two-judge Bench
has  further  observed   that  the   judgment  in  Ramesh
Gobindram  (supra)  later   came   up  for  consideration
before this Court in Board of Wakf, West Bengal v.

                                                   39
Anis Fatma Begum (supra) and the judgment in Ramesh
Gobindram was held to be distinguishable. Following
was laid down by this Court in paragraphs 5 and 6:
     “5.   The   ratio    laid   down   in   the
     abovementioned judgment in Ramesh Gobindram
     case later came up for consideration before
     this Court in W.B. Wakf Board v. Anis Fatma
     Begum, (2010) 14 SCC 588 and the judgment
     in   Ramesh   Gobindram   case   was   held
     distinguishable. That was a case where the
     dispute related to the wakf estate which
     was created by a registered deed of wakf
     dated 22-9-1936. The question raised was
     with regard to the demarcation of the wakf
     property, which this Court held is a matter
     which fell under the purview of the Wakf
     Act. The judgment of the Calcutta High
     Court which held otherwise was set aside
     and this Court held that the Wakf Tribunal
     has jurisdiction to decide those disputes.
     6. We are of the view that the dispute that
     arises for consideration in this case is
     with regard to the management and peaceful
     enjoyment of the mosque and madarsa and the
     assets which relate to wakf. Nature of the
     relief clearly shows that the Wakf Tribunal
     has got jurisdiction to decide those
     disputes. We, therefore, find no error in
     the Wakf Tribunal entertaining OS No. 53 of
     2003 filed by the appellant and the High
     Court has committed an error in holding
     otherwise. Consequently, the impugned order
     passed by the High Court is set aside and
     the matter is remitted to the High Court to
     consider the revision on merits. The
     appeals are disposed of as above, with no
     order as to costs.”

                                                      40
42. Two-Judge Bench of this Court in the above case
held the suit to be maintainable in the Wakf Tribunal
and noted that the ratio of Ramesh Gobindram has been
distinguished in Anis Fatima case. But as per ratio
of Ramesh Gobindram unless there is any provision in
the Wakf Act, 1995 to entertain the said dispute only
then Wakf Tribunal has jurisdiction, the suit filed
for  injunction  was   not  maintainable  in  the  above
case. Thus, what is held in the above judgment by the
two-Judge Bench is not in accord with the ratio of
Ramesh Gobindram. Only one more judgment of two-Judge
Bench of this Court be noticed, where the suit filed
by the Punjab Wakf Board before the Wakf Tribunal
praying for mesne profits and possession was held to
be maintainable, i.e, judgment in Punjab Wakf Board
vs.  Pritpal  Singh  &   Anr.(Civil  Appeal  No.8194  of
2013) decided on 13.09.2013. The facts of the case
have been noticed in the following manner:
         “Petitioner herein filed a suit before
     the Wakf Tribunal, Ludhiana, inter alia
     praying for possession as also for mesne
     profits. The Wakf Tribunal by its order
     dated 08.05.2009 decreed the suit for
     possession as also for recovery of mesne
     profits.

                                                      41
         Aggrieved by the same, the respondents
     preferred a writ petition before the High
     Court for quashing the said order. By
     impugned order dated 16.12.2010, the Punjab
     & Haryana High Court had set aside the
     order of the Wakf Tribunal on its finding
     that the Wakf Tribunal had no jurisdiction
     to entertain a suit for ejectment. It is
     against this order that the petitioner has
     preferred this special leave petition.”
43. After   considering  the  submissions,  this   Court
laid down:
     “Having heard learned counsel for the
     parties, we are of the opinion that the
     High Court had erred in holding that the
     suit was for ejectment and that being so
     the Wakf Tribunal has no jurisdiction. As
     we have observed earlier, the suit filed
     before the Wakf Tribunal was for possession
     and mesne profits and, therefore, the High
     Court had erred in setting aside the order
     of the Wakf Tribunal.”
44. Section 83 sub-section (1) has been substituted
by Act 27 of 2013. Substituted sub-section (1) is as
follows:
     “Section    83(1).-  The   State   Government
     shall, by notification in the Official
     Gazette, constitute as many Tribunals as it
     may think fit, for the determination of any
     dispute, question or other matter relating
     to a waqf or waqf property, eviction of a
     tenant or determination of rights and
     obligations of the lessor and the lessee of
     such property, under this Act and define

                                                             42
     the local limits and jurisdiction of such
     Tribunals.”
45. Section 83 sub-section (1) specifically includes
eviction of a tenant or determination of rights or
obligations   of   the    lessor    and    lessee     of   such
property.
46. In both the suits giving rise to these appeals
the suits were filed much before the amendment of
Section  83  by  Act   27   of   2013.   We,   thus,    in  the
present  case   has  to    interpret    Section     83   as  it
existed prior to the above Amendment, 2013.
47. In  sub-section    (1)    of   Section    83   the    State
Government  shall   by   notification     in    the   Official
Gazette, constitute as many Tribunals as it may think
fit. The words following the above sentence are “for
the determination of any dispute, question or other
matter relating to a wakf or wakf property under this
Act….”. The Constitution of Tribunal is, thus, for
the determination of any dispute, question or other
matter relating to wakf or wakf property under the
Act, 1995. The “dispute, question or other matter

                                                      43
relating to wakf or wakf property”, thus, has to
arise under the Act, 1995. Various provisions of the
Act, 1995 refer to the Tribunal and the questions
which are to be decided by the Tribunal. In this
context sub-section (1) of Section 6 refers to the
questions which are to be decided by the Tribunal.
Sub-section (1) of Section 6 is as follows:
     “Section   6(1).-If   any   question    arises
     whether a particular property specified as
     wakf property in the list of wakfs is wakf
     property or not or whether a wakf specified
     in such list is a Shia wakf or Sunni Wakf,
     the Board or the mutawalli of the wakf or
     any person interested therein may institute
     a suit in a Tribunal for the decision of
     the question and the decision of the
     Tribunal in respect of such matter shall be
     final:
         Provided that no such suit shall be
     entertained by the Tribunal after the
     expiry of one year from the date of the
     publication of the list of wakfs.”
48. Similarly,   sub-section  (1)  of  Section   7  also
refers to decision of the question by the Tribunal.
Sub-section (1) of Section 7 is quoted below:
     “Section 7(1).-If, after the commencement
     of this Act, any question arises, whether a
     particular   property   specified    as   wakf
     property in a list of wakf, is wakf
     property or not or whether a wakf specified
     in such list is a Shia wakf or a Sunni

                                                     44
     wakf, the Board or the mutawalli of the
     wakf, or any person interested therein, may
     apply to the Tribunal having jurisdiction
     in relation to such property, for the
     decision of the question and the decision
     of the Tribunal thereon shall be final:”
49. Section   33  contemplates  filing   of  an  appeal
before  the   Tribunal  against  orders   passed  under
Section 33. Section 33 sub-section (4) is as follows:
     “Section 33(4) A mutawalli or other person
     aggrieved by such order may, within thirty
     days of the receipt by him of the order,
     appeal to the Tribunal:
         Provided that no such appeal shall be
     entertained by the Tribunal unless the
     appellant first deposits with the Chief
     Executive Officer the amount which has been
     determined under sub-section (3) as being
     payable by the appellant and the Tribunal
     shall have no power to make any order
     staying pending the disposal of the appeal,
     the operation of the order made by the
     Chief Executive Officer under sub-section
     (3).”
50. Similar provision of appeal to Tribunal is also
contained under Section 51 sub-section (5). Section
52 sub-section (4) is again a provision to file an
appeal before the Tribunal. Section 54 deals with
removal  of  encroachment  from  Wakf  property.  Under
Section 54(4) any person aggrieved by an order passed

                                                      45
by the Chief Executive Officer directing removal of
encroachment and delivering possession of the land,
building, space or other property can institute a
suit in a Tribunal to establish his right, title or
interest. Section 54(4) is as follows:
     “Section 54(4) Nothing contained in sub-
     section (3) shall prevent any person
     aggrieved by the order made by the Chief
     Executive Officer under that sub-section
     from instituting a suit in a Tribunal to
     establish that he has right, title or
     interest in the land, building, space or
     other property:
         Provided that no such suit shall be
     instituted by a person who has been let
     into possession of the land, building,
     space or other property as a lessee,
     licence or mortgagee by the mutawalli of
     the wakf or by any other person authorised
     by him in this behalf.”
51. Section   54(4)   contemplates  an   appeal  to  the
Tribunal by the mutawalli who is aggrieved by an
order of removal. Sub-section (6) of Section 64 is
again a power of the Tribunal to appoint a suitable
person  as   receiver    to  manage  the   Wakf.  On  an
application   filed    by   the  Board   in   an  appeal
challenging   his   removal   order  the   Tribunal  can
appoint a receiver. These are provisions in the Act

                                                   46
which refer to the Tribunal and refer to the subject
matter which can be brought before the Tribunal by
mutawalli or Board or any aggrieved person. The use
of the word “under this Act”, under Section 83(1)
relates to the words “for the determination of any
dispute, question or other matter relating to a Wakf
or  Wakf   property”.   Section  83(1)  provides  for
constitution of Tribunal. Other provisions of Section
83 deals with the procedure including bar of appeal
against the order of the Tribunal except power of the
High Court to revise the order of the Tribunal.
52. Coming to Section 83 which relates to bar of
jurisdiction of Civil Court, the relevant words are
“any dispute, question or other matter relating to a
wakf or wakf property” which is required by or under
this Act to be determined by the Tribunal. Thus, bar
of jurisdiction of Civil Court is confined only to
those matters which are required to be determined by
the Tribunal under this Act. Thus, Civil Court shall
have jurisdiction to entertain suit and proceedings
which are not required by or under the Act, 1995 to
be  determined.   Thus,  answering  the  question  of

                                                    47
jurisdiction, question has to be asked whether the
issue raised in the suit or proceeding is required to
be decided under the Act, 1995 by the Tribunal, under
any provision or not. In the event, the answer is
affirmative, the bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court
shall operate.
53. In the judgment in Ramesh Gobindram (supra) this
Court after considering Sections 83 and 85 as noted
above has explained the provisions. We now have to
apply the proposition of the law as noted above in
facts before us in both the appeals.
54.   In Civil Appeal No.92 of 2019(Punjab Wakf Board
vs.  Sham   Singh  Harike)  suit  for  injunction  was
initiated by the Board in the Civil Court against the
defendant. In the written statement filed by Sham
Singh Harike it was pleaded that suit property is not
a  Wakf  property.   In paragraph  2  of  the  written
statement following was stated:
     “2.    Para 2 of the plaint is wrong and
     denied. It is wrong that land measuring
     269K-7M is a Wakf property. Mutation does
     not confer any title on any person.
     Mutation is under challenge as detailed in
     the preliminary objections. Plaintiff has

                                                          48
     intentionally concealed the said fact. The
     plaintiff has also not disclosed the fact
     that the notification on the basis of which
     the alleged mutation has been sanctioned,
     does not confer any right, title or
     interest.    The     property   can     only   be
     transferred by a registered instrument duly
     registered      under    the     provision     of
     Registration Act. Thus, plaintiff has no
     right, title or interest in the suit
     property nor is competent to file the
     present suit qua the said property.”
55. The suit was transferred to the Wakf Tribunal and
the  same   was   renumbered    as  RBT    No.84/2006.    An
application was filed by the defendant for rejection
of the plaint on the ground that the Tribunal has no
jurisdiction   to   entertain   the  suit.    The  Tribunal
rejected   the   application.    Against    the   order   of
rejecting application, civil revision was filed by
the  defendant   in   the  High  Court.   The   High   Court
relying on judgment of this Court in Ramesh Gobindram
has  given   the  following    reason   for   allowing   the
revision:
         “In view of the aforesaid authoritative
     pronouncement by the Apex Court, where in
     it has been held that the right, title and
     interest of a non-muslim to the Wakf in a
     property cannot be put in jeopardy because
     that property is included in the list of

                                                      49
     Wakf,    the   impugned   order    cannot   be
     sustained.
         Thus, the present revision petition is
     allowed and the impugned order is set aside
     holding that since the Petitioner is a non-
     muslim,    the    Wakf   Tribunal     has   no
     jurisdiction in the matter and it is only
     the Civil Court which had the jurisdiction
     in the present dispute.”
56. The   High  Court   had  noticed   that  portion  of
judgment of Ramesh Gobindram where this Court had
noticed an earlier judgment of this Court in Board of
Muslim Wakfs, Rajasthan v. Radha Kishan and others,
(1979)  2  SCC  468.    Paragraphs   20  and  21 of  the
judgment of Ramesh Gobindram have been relied which
are to the following effect:
       “20.   From a conjoint reading of the
     provisions of Sections 6 and 7 (supra) it
     is clear that the jurisdiction to determine
     whether or not a property is a wakf
     property or whether a wakf is a Shia wakf
     or a Sunni wakf rests entirely with the
     Tribunal and no suit or other proceeding
     can be instituted or commenced in a civil
     court in relation to any such question
     after the commencement of the Act. What is
     noteworthy is that under Section 6 read
     with Section 7 (supra) the institution of
     (sic a suit in) the civil court is barred
     only in regard to questions that are
     specifically enumerated therein. The bar is
     not complete so as to extend to other

                                                  50
     questions that may arise in relation to the
     wakf property.
       21. We may at this stage usefully digress
     from the core issue only to highlight the
     fact that Section 6(1) and the proviso
     thereto have fallen for interpretation of
     this Court on a few occasions. In Board of
     Muslim Wakfs v. Radha Kishan,(1979) 2 SCC
     468, one of the questions that fell for
     determination was, who are the parties that
     could be taken to be concerned in a
     proceeding under sub-section (1) of Section
     6 of the Act. This Court held that under
     Section 6(1) the Board or the mutawalli of
     the wakf or any person interested therein
     is entitled to file a suit but the word
     “therein” following the expression “any
     person interested” must necessarily refer
     to the word “wakf” which immediately
     precedes it. The object underlying the
     proviso, observed this Court, was to
     confine the power to file a suit to the
     mutawalli and persons interested in the
     wakf. It did not extend to persons who are
     not   persons  interested   in   the  wakf.
     Consequently, the right, title and interest
     of a stranger, (a non-Muslim), to the wakf
     in a property cannot be put in jeopardy
     merely because that property is included in
     the list of wakfs. The special rule of
     limitation prescribed by the proviso to
     Section 6(1) was itself held inapplicable
     to him and a suit for declaration of title
     to any property included in the list of
     wakfs held maintainable even after the
     expiry of the period of one year.”
57. This Court in Ramesh Gobindram has referred to
earlier judgment in Board of Muslim Wakfs, Rajasthan

                                                         51
v. Radha Kishan and others, (1979) 2 SCC 468. In the
case of Board of Muslim Wakfs this Court had occasion
to   interpret   sub-section   (1)   of   Section  6   with
proviso to sub-section (1) of Wakf Act, 1954. The
questions which fell for consideration in the above
case has been considered in paragraph 22 which is to
following effect:
        “22.    The   questions     that    fall   for
      determination upon the appeal are two:
      first, whether a Commissioner of Wakfs
      appointed under sub-section (1) of Section
      4   of   the   Wakf   Act,    1954,    has   the
      jurisdiction    under   sub-section     (3)   of
      Section 4 to enquire whether a certain
      property is wakf property or not when such
      a dispute is raised by a stranger to the
      wakf and second, if so, whether the failure
      of such a person to institute a suit in a
      civil court of competent jurisdiction for
      decision of such question within a period
      of one year, as provided for under sub-
      section (1) of Section 6, makes the
      inclusion of such property in the list of
      wakfs published by the Board under sub-
      section (2) of Section 5 of the Act final
      and conclusive under sub-section (4) of
      Section 6.”
58. In the above case the respondents were mortgagee
of property which under Section 5 of 1954, Act was
published for inclusion in the list of Wakfs. The
writ    petition    was   filed    by    the   respondents

                                                   52
challenging legality and validity of the proceedings
taken which was allowed by the High Court. The High
Court held that where a person claiming title is a
stranger to the Wakf, the inclusion of such property
in the list of Wakfs by the Board under sub-section
(2) of Section 5 of the Act shall not be final and
conclusive. This Court noticed the contention of the
respondents who contended that they being non-Muslims
they are outside the scope of sub-section (1) of
Section 6 and they have no right to file the suit
contemplated by that sub-section, therefore, the list
of Wakfs published under sub-section (2) of Section 5
cannot be final and conclusive against them under
sub-section (4) of Section 6. The argument raised by
the  respondents  was  accepted  by  this  Court  and
following was laid down in paragraph 33:
       “33. The answer to these questions must
     turn on the true meaning and construction
     of the word “therein” in the expression
     “any person interested therein” appearing
     in sub-section (1) of Section 6. In order
     to understand the meaning of the word
     “therein” in our view, it is necessary to
     refer to the preceding words ‘the Board or
     the mutawalli of the wakf’. The word
     ‘therein’ must necessarily refer to the
     “wakf” which immediately precedes it. It

                                                    53
      cannot refer to the “wakf property”. Sub-
      section (1) of Section 6 enumerates the
      persons who can file suits and also the
      questions in respect of which such suits
      can be filed. In enumerating the persons
      who are empowered to file suits under this
      provision, only the Board, the mutawalli of
      the   wakf,  and   “any   person  interested
      therein”, thereby necessarily meaning any
      person interested in the wakf, are listed.
      It should be borne in mind that the Act
      deals with wakfs, its institutions and its
      properties. It would, therefore, be logical
      and reasonable to infer that its provisions
      empower only those who are interested in
      the wakfs, to institute suits.”
59. This Court after holding that the word ‘therein’
used in sub-section (1) of Section 6 must necessarily
refer   to   the  ‘wakf’.   After  holding  the  above
following was laid down in paragraphs 39 and 42:
      “39. It follows that where a stranger who
      is a non-Muslim and is in possession of a
      certain property his right, title and
      interest therein cannot be put in jeopardy
      merely because the property is included in
      the list. Such a person is not required to
      file a suit for a declaration of his title
      within a period of one year. The special
      rule of limitation laid down in proviso to
      sub-section (1) of Section 6 is not
      applicable to him. In other words, the list
      published by the Board of Wakfs under sub-
      section (2) of Section 5 can be challenged
      by him by filing a suit for declaration of
      title even after the expiry of the period
      of one year, if the necessity of filing
      such suit arises.

                                                     54
       42. We must accordingly hold that the
     Commissioner    of     Wakfs   acted     within
     jurisdiction    in    holding   the    disputed
     property to be wakf property. It must,
     therefore, follow that the Board of Muslim
     Wakfs, Rajasthan was justified in including
     the property in the list of wakfs published
     under sub-section (2) of Section 5 of the
     Act. We must also hold, on a construction
     of sub-section (1) of Section 6 that the
     list of wakfs so published by the Board was
     not final and conclusive under sub-section
     (4) of Section 6 against the Respondents 1
     and 2 due to their failure to bring a suit
     within one year as contemplated by sub-
     section (1) of Section 6.”
60. In the above sub-section (1) of Section 6 of
Act, 1995 an explanation has been added which is to
the following effect:
     “Explanation.- For the purposes of this
     Section and Section 7 the expression “any
     person   interested    therein,”    shall,   in
     relation to any property specified as wakf
     property in the list of wakfs published
     after the commencement of this Act, shall
     include also every person who, though not
     interested   in    the   wakf  concerned,    is
     interested in such property and to whom a
     reasonable opportunity had been afforded to
     represent his case by notice served on him
     in that behalf during the course of the
     relevant inquiry under Section 4.”
    The explanation to sub-section (1) of Section 6
makes it clear that any person interested ‘therein’

                                                     55
who, though not interested in the Wakf concerned, is
interested in such property. The above amendment of
Section 6 sub-section (1) has made the interpretation
of this Court in Board of Muslim Wakfs (supra) of
Section 6 sub-section (1) inapplicable. Thus, the
interpretation that the word ‘therein’ refers to only
Wakf  has  been  consciously  departed   with  and  any
person  interested   therein   is   a  person   who  is
interested in Wakf as well as in Wakf property both.
61. In the above context it is relevant to notice
another judgment of this Court in Punjab Wakf Board
v. Gram Panchayat, (2000) (2) SCC 121, in which case
the explanation which was inserted in Section 6(1) of
the Wakf Act, 1954 by Central Act 69 of 1984 came to
be considered. The explanation which was added in
Section 6(1) by 1984 Amendment has brought almost the
same  statutory  scheme  which   has  been  brought  by
explanation   of  Section  6(1)    of  Act,   1995.  On
explanation inserted by 1984 Amendment, this Court
laid down following:

                                                 56
  “24. Learned counsel for the appellant
also referred to the explanation added
below to sub-section (1) of Section 6 of
the Wakf Act, 1954, by Central Act 69 of
1984. The explanation reads as follows:
    “Explanation.—For    the    purpose    of
  this section and Section 6-A, the
  expression   ‘any   person      interested
  therein’ occurring in sub-section (1)
  of this section and in sub-section (1)
  of Section 6-A, shall, in relation to
  any   property    specified      as    wakf
  property in a list of wakfs published,
  under sub-section (2) of Section 5,
  after the commencement of the Wakf
  (Amendment) Act, 1984, shall include
  also every person who, though not
  interested in the wakf concerned, is
  interested in such property and to
  whom a reasonable opportunity had been
  afforded to represent his case by
  notice served on him in that behalf
  during the course of the relevant
  inquiry under Section 4.”
  25.    Obviously,     the     intention     of
Parliament was to say that if a suit was
not filed within one year, the notification
would   be   binding   not    only    on   those
interested in the trust but even strangers,
claiming   interest   in    the    property   in
question, provided they were given notice
in the inquiry under Section 4 preceding
the notification under Section 5(2).
  26. In this connection, we have to point
out that the Government of India has not
issued any date for commencement of the
explanation in Section 6 of the Wakf Act
quoted above. Even if it is assumed that
the explanation can be invoked, there is no
material before us to show that any notice

                                                     57
      was issued to the Gram Panchayat before the
      issuance of the notification, as required
      by the explanation. If no notice was issued
      as   required  by   the   notification,   the
      notification would not come in the way of a
      civil court to decide the question if
      raised between the Wakf and a third party,
      even if such a suit was filed beyond one
      year from the date of the notification.
      Thus, once the Assistant Collector and the
      Collector had jurisdiction to decide, their
      decision became final and Section 13 of the
      Punjab Act barred the civil suit filed by
      the Wakf Board.”
62. The judgment of this Court in Punjab Wakf Board
v. Gram Panchayat interpreting the explanation, thus,
held that the notification issued under Section 5
would be binding not only on those interested in the
Wakf but even strangers, claiming interest in the
property in question, provided they were given notice
in   the   inquiry  under   Section  4  preceding   the
notification under Section 5(2). The interpretation
put by this Court in      Punjab Wakf Board Vs. Gram
Panchayat to the explanation added by Amendment Act,
1984   can  equally be  applied  to  interpretation  of
explanation to sub-section (1) of Section 6 of Act,
1995. Applying the above ratio to the interpretation

                                                    58
of explanation of Section 6(1) of Act, 1995 following
two conclusions can be drawn:
   (a)   Any person interested in the Wakf property
   which is specified as Wakf property in the list
   of Wakfs published under Section 5 can also raise
   the   dispute  regarding   the  Wakf   property  by
   instituting a suit in a Tribunal. Limitation for
   filing such suit by any person interested in the
   Wakf property is one year as per Section 6(1)
   proviso.
   (b)   The  finality of   the  Wakf  property  being
   included in the list of Wakfs published under
   Section 5(2) shall not be on a person to whom a
   reasonable opportunity had not been afforded to
   represent his case by notice served on him during
   the course of relevant inquiry under Section 4.
63. We may also notice the provision of Section 6 of
sub-section (5) as it existed when suit was filed by
Punjab Wakf Board against Sham Singh Harike. Section
6 sub-section (5) provided as follows:

                                                       59
    “6(5) On and from the commencement of this
    Act in a State, no suit or other legal
    proceeding shall be instituted or commence in
    a Court in that State in relation to any
    question referred to in sub-section (1).
64. As per Section 6 sub-section (1) if any question
arises as to whether a Wakf property in the list of
Wakfs   is  wakf   property    or  not,a   suit  can   be
instituted in a Tribunal for the decision of the
question which decision shall be treated as final.
Limitation for such suit was also provided in proviso
as one year from the date of the publication of the
list of Wakfs. Sub-section (5) of Section 6 contained
the provision barring a suit in any Court after the
commencement of the Act in relation to any question
referred to in sub-section (1). In Suit No.250 dated
10.09.2001 (RBT No.84 dated 09.10.2006, Punjab Wakf
Board vs. Sham Singh) the question has arisen as to
whether suit property is a Wakf property or not. We
have noticed pleadings in written statement filed by
the   defendant   in  the   above  suit   where  it   was
specifically   denied  that   suit  property  is  a  Wakf
property. Thus, within the meaning of sub-section (1)

                                                   60
of Section 6 question that whether a suit property is
a Wakf property or not has arisen. Thus, the suit
wherein the above question has arisen ought to be
considered by the Tribunal and the High Court clearly
erred in allowing the revision filed by the defendant
by its order dated 20.09.2010.
65. Thus, the view of the High Court that right,
title and interest of a non-Muslim to the Wakf in a
property cannot be put in jeopardy is contrary to the
statutory scheme as contained in Section 6 of the
Act, 1995. Thus, the reason of the High Court to
allow the revision petition is wholly unfounded. The
defendant in written statement has pleaded that the
suit property is not Wakf property. When issue in the
suit is as to whether suit property is Wakf property
or  not  it  is  covered  by  specific  provision  of
Sections 6 and 7 of the Wakf Act, 1995, hence, it is
required to be decided by the Tribunal under Section
83 and bar under Section 85 shall come into existence
with regard to jurisdiction of Civil Court. In this
context, in the judgment in Haryana Wakf Board vs.

                                                          61
Mahesh Kumar, (2014) 16 SCC 45, this Court has laid
down   that   the  question   as   to   whether   the   suit
property is a Wakf property is a question which has
to be decided by the Tribunal. In the above case
plaint   was  returned  by   the   Appellate  Court   under
Order   VII   Rule  10   for   presentation    before    the
Tribunal which view was upheld by this Court. In
paragraph 6 of the judgment following was laid down:
        “6....Deciding       the       question      of
      maintainability    and     locus    standi,    in
      respect of which Issues 2 and 4 were
      framed, the first appellate court held that
      since the claim in the suit by the
      petitioner which is a Wakf Board, was on
      the basis that suit property was wakf
      property and since the respondent had
      denied it to be the wakf property, the
      question had arisen as to whether suit
      property is wakf property or not. Such a
      question, in the opinion of the learned
      Additional District Judge, could be decided
      only by the Tribunal constituted under the
      Wakf Act. The appeal court, therefore,
      returned the plaint to the petitioner under
      Order 7 Rule 10 CPC for presentation to the
      court of competent jurisdiction, namely,
      the Tribunal. The result was that the
      decree passed by the trial court was set
      aside and the plaint returned.”
66. Civil    Appeal  No.92   of   2019   is,  thus,   fully
covered by the judgment of this Court in Haryana Wakf

                                                     62
Board vs. Mahesh Kumar. The defendant having pleaded
that  suit  property  is  not  a   Wakf  property,  the
question has to be decided by the Tribunal. Thus, the
High  Court  has  committed   error   in  allowing  the
revision petition. Thus, this appeal deserves to be
allowed.
67. One more question needs to be considered is as
to whether a suit within the meaning of Section 6
sub-section (1) or Section 7(1) is to be filed within
a period of one year of publication of list of Wakfs
under Section 5.
68. The provision contained in proviso to Section
6(1) that no such suit shall be entertained by the
Tribunal after the expiry of one year from the date
of the publication of the list of Wakfs shall be
applicable to every person who though not interested
in the Wakf concerned, is interested in such property
and  to  whom   a  reasonable   opportunity   had  been
afforded to represent his case by notice served on

                                                    63
him in that behalf during the course of the relevant
inquiry under Section 4.
69. When  Section   6  sub-section  (1)   provides for
raising a dispute regarding Wakf property in a period
of one year, it applies to every person who wants to
dispute  the  list  except  those  who  have  been not
served notice under Section 4(1).
70. Now coming to Civil Appeal No.93 of 2019(Punjab
Wakf Board vs. Teja Singh), the suit was filed by
Wakf  Board  for   possession  of  suit  property  and
injunction in the Tribunal. The above suit was fully
covered by the ratio laid down by this Court in
Ramesh Gobindram (supra). The High court relying on
Ramesh Gobindram case has allowed revision petition
filed by the defendant. We do not find any error in
the order of the High Court allowing the revision
petition filed by the defendant directing the plaint
along with documents was returned to be presented
before the appropriate court i.e. Civil Court. We
uphold the above order of the High Court. In the
result, this appeal deserves to be dismissed.

                                                   64
71. In view of the foregoing discussions, we allow
Civil Appeal No.92 of 2019 (Punjab Wakf Board vs.
Sham Singh Harike) and set aside the order of the
High Court dated 20.09.2010. Civil Appeal No.93 of
2019 (Punjab Wakf Board vs. Teja Singh) is dismissed.
Parties shall bear their own costs.
                            ......................J.
                                ( ASHOK BHUSHAN )
                            ......................J.
                                 ( K.M. JOSEPH )
New Delhi,
February 07,2019.


