                                                                            1
                                                                   REPORTABLE
                                                                  Corrected
                                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11259 OF 2016
                           (Arising out of SLP(C)No. 12882 OF 2009)
                    MANBHAR DEVI AGARWAL             .......PETITIONER(S)
                                            VERSUS
                    THE STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS      ......RESPONDENT(S)
                                         J U D G M E N T
                    ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.
                         Leave Granted.
                    2. This appeal has been filed against the judgment of
                    the  High  Court  of  Judicature  for  Rajasthan,  Jaipur
                    Bench, Jaipur dated 17.12.2008 in D.B. Civil Special
                    Appeal No. 231 of 2008 by which judgment, the Civil
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
CHARANJEET KAUR
Date: 2017.07.18
11:40:11 IST
                    Special Appeal filed by the appellant against judgment
Reason:
                    and order of Learned Single Judge dated 20.02.2007 was

                                                              2
dismissed.    Brief   facts   necessary   to   be   noted   for
deciding the appeal are:­
     The   appellant,    a  contractor,   licensed   by   Nagar
Nigam, Jaipur has been carrying out constructions of
buildings, roads, drains, footpaths, etc.. The appellant
for  carrying    out   his  construction   work   uses   Bazri,
stone,   grit,    moram,   etc.  which   is   claimed    to  be
purchased from an open market at Jaipur.
3.   State of Rajasthan has issued various Government
Orders dated 20.02.1994, 08.11.1996 and 20.11.1996 by
which provision of deduction of 2% towards the royalty
of   minerals     from    bills   of   contractors     of   the
construction department was made. The State of Rajasthan
modified the scheme by issuing an order dated 13.11.2000
by which the earlier Government Orders providing for
deductions of 2% as royalty of minerals from the bill
was done away. A new scheme was enforced vide order
dated 13.11.2000. Under the new scheme, the copy of work
order    issued    by   Construction    Department     to   the

                                                               3
contractors containing details of the quantity of the
minerals   used    for   construction   was   required   to   be
produced before the Mining Engineer/ Assistant Mining
Engineer, who before the commencement of the mining work
were required to issue short term permission letter for
use of mineral in the construction.
4.   Another      Government    Order    was    issued    dated
03.10.2001 by which, direction nos. 2 & 4 as contained
in the circular dated 13.11.2000 were modified.
5.   Further, directions were issued on 25.01.2002.            A
letter dated 26.03.2002 was issued by the Government to
the   Chief    Executive    Engineer,  Commissioner,     Jaipur
Municipal    Corporation    referring  to   Government   Orders
dated   03.10.2001     and  13.11.2000   and   requesting    the
Jaipur Municipal Corporation to ensure compliance of the
aforesaid Government Orders. It was further stated that
until the No Dues certificate is issued in favour of the
contractors by the Department of Mining, payment against
final   bill   of   the  contractors  be   not   made  so   that

                                                          4
Department and State may not suffer any kind of revenue
loss. The appellant filed the writ petition being Writ
Petition  No.   3191   of 2002  praying  for  the following
reliefs:­
          “a. By way of writ, order or
          direction the order dated 26.03.2002
          Annexure­5 passed by the respondent
          No. 3 may kindly be quashed and set
          aside.
          b.   by    way   of   writ   order   or
          direction, the respondents may be
          restrained not to collect royalty
          from the petitioners on purchase of
          Bazri, grit, stone, moram etc from
          the open market.
          c.   by    way   of   writ   order   or
          direction, the respondents may be
          restrained to not to levy royalty
          from the running and final bills of
          the   contractors    i.e.   petitioners
          awarded prior to 26.03.2002.
          d.   any    other   appropriate   writ,
          order or direction to which the
          petitioner may be entitled to in the
          circumstances of the case may be
          issued in his favour.
          e.   cost of the writ petition may
          be   awarded     in   favour   of   the
          petitioner.”

                                                           5
6.   The   Writ  Petition   filed   by  the  appellant   was
disposed of by the learned Single Judge on 20.02.2007.
Learned Single Judge disposed of writ petition in terms
of  an   earlier  judgment   in  SBCWP  No.  359   of  1998,
R.S.Shekhawat   & Others   Vs.  State  of U.P.   decided  on
28.02.2001.
7.   The appellant aggrieved by the decision of learned
Single Judge dated 20.02.2007 filed DBCSA No. 231 of
2008.   The   Division  Bench    held  that   there   is  no
illegality in order passed by the learned Single Judge
in R.S.Shekhawat and others case (Supra), hence, the
learned Single Judge disposing of the writ petition of
the appellant did not commit an error. The appeal was
accordingly dismissed. Aggrieved by the decision of the
D.B.  dated   17.12.2008,   the  appellant  has   filed  the
present appeal.
8.   Learned counsel for the appellant in support of the
appeal   contends  that  both   learned  Single   Judge  and
Division Bench of High Court did not decide the issues

                                                              6
raised by the appellant in the writ petition and have
disposed   of   the  writ   petition   in  terms   of   earlier
judgment   of   learned  Single   Judge,   R.S.Shekhawat    and
others  in  which judgment      no issues   were decided.    He
submits that Judgment in R.S.Shekhawat Case indicates
that the Court did not enter into the correctness or
otherwise    of   the   notification    dated   22.09.1994    &
03.07.1994    which   were    under  challenge.     The   Court
noticing the new scheme as issued by Government Order
dated 13.11.2000, noted the request of the appellant
that  matter    may  be  directed   to  be   examined   by  the
Department of Mines on which request the writ petition
was disposed of.
9.   It is submitted that the above judgment did not
decide the issues raised by the appellant which were
required to be considered. It is further submitted that
the payment of royalty is to be made by lessees or
licensees who have been granted right of excavation of
minerals i.e. a holder of mining lease or license. The

                                                             7
appellant who has been purchasing the minerals from the
open  market  cannot   be  saddled    with   the   payment  of
royalty. The appellant is not carrying out any mining
operation so as to be asked to make payment of royalty.
10. Learned   counsel    for   the    State   disputing    the
submissions of counsel for the appellant submits that
the various Government Orders by the State of Rajasthan
have been issued to prevent the illegal mining i.e. use
of the minerals without payment of the royalty.          It is
submitted  that  the   Government    Orders   provide   for  a
mechanism to  check illegal mining and in event minerals
used  are minerals   which are      royalty   paid   minerals,
there is no liability and the      Government only requires
verification of such facts     i.e. whether minerals used
by the contractors are royalty     paid   or   not.     It  is
submitted  that  direction   for  withholding     the  payment
till the verification of above facts are only for the
purpose of ensuring that minerals used are not illegally
mined minerals without payment of royalty. He submit

                                                           8
that no error was committed by learned Single Judge and
the Division Bench in disposing of the writ petition
giving liberty to the writ petitioner to approach the
competent authorities in the mining department to prove
that minerals used by them are all royalty paid.
11. We   have   considered   the   submission   of   learned
counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
12. The   Parliament   has  enacted   Mines   and   Minerals
(Development   and   Regulation)    Act,  1957,    for   the
development and regulation of mines and minerals. The
Union control on regulation of mines and development of
minerals has been declared by virtue of Section 2 of
1957 Act. Section 3(e) defines 'Minor Minerals' which is
to the following effect:­
         “3(e).    'Minor     Minerals'    means
         building stones, gravel, ordinary
         clay, ordinary sand other than sand
         used for prescribed purposes, and
         any other mineral which the Central
         Government may, by notification in
         the Official Gazette, declare to be
         a minor mineral;”

                                                            9
13. By Section 15 of the Act, the State Government has
been empowered to make rules on Minor minerals.
14. Section 9(2) provides for payment of royalty by the
holder of mining lease. Section 9(2) is as follows:­
          “9(2).    The holder of a mining
          lease   granted    on   or   after   the
          commencement of this Act shall pay
          royalty in respect of any (mineral
          removed or consumed by him or by his
          agent, manager, employee, contractor
          or sub­lessee) from the leased area
          at the rate for the time being
          specified in the Second Schedule in
          respect of that mineral.”
15. By   Act  25   of  94,   certain  amendments   have  been
incorporated in 1957 Act. One of the sections inserted
by  Amendment   is   Section   23C.  Section   23C(1)  is  as
follows:­
          “23C. Power of State Government to
          make rules for preventing illegal
          mining, transportation and storage
          of minerals:­
          (1). The State Government may, by
          notification     in     the     Official

                                                           10
         Gazette,    make rules for preventing
         illegal    mining, transportation and
         storage    of minerals and for the
         purposes   connected therewith.
         (2)   ..............................”
16. The State of Rajasthan has framed Rajasthan Mines
and  Minerals   Concession   Rules,  1986,   in exercise   of
power   under    Section    15.   Rule    3(2)(XX)   defines
‘Royalty’ which is to the following effect:­
         “Royalty means the charge payable to
         the Government in respect of the ore
         or mineral excavated, removed or
         utilized from any land as prescribed
         in Schedule­I.”
17. Rule 18 provides for conditions which are to be
included  in   every   mining   lease.   According  to   Rule
18(1)(b), the holder of a mining lease granted on or
after commencement of these rules shall pay royalty in
respect  of   any  mineral   removed   by  him  from   and/or
consumed within the leased area at the time being as
specified in Schedule I in respect of that mineral.

                                                         11
18. Rule 48 contains various provisions with regard to
unauthorized   working.    Various   provisions   regarding
undertaking of mining operation not in accordance with
the mining lease have been contained in Rule 48 which
also includes seizure of illegally mined minerals and
recovery  of  royalty   and  tax   chargeable  as  well  as
compounding charges.
19. Above statutory provisions clearly indicates that
excavation of minor minerals, as per mining lease or
permit is subject to payment of royalty and the rent as
prescribed in the rules. The liability to make payment
of royalty is on the person who excavates the minerals
under the lease or license.
20. The   provisions   also  indicate   that  in  event  of
illegal mining or excavation of minerals without payment
of royalty, the rules empower exercise of various powers
including  seizure   of  minerals,   recovery  of  royalty,
taxes and compounding charges on such minerals.

                                                        12
21. The   first  submission   which  has  been   raised by
learned counsel for appellant is that learned Single
Judge and Division Bench did not consider the issues
raised in the writ petition and disposed of the matter
in terms of earlier judgment of R.S.Shekhawat case in
which  case  no issues   were  decided.  The   judgment of
R.S.Shekhawat is brought on record as Annexure P­2.
22. The above judgment indicates that in writ petition,
notification dated 22.09.1994 and 03.07.1995 by which 2%
deductions were made from running bills submitted by
petitioners to the Public Works Department and other
State Departments towards royalty of minerals was under
challenge. The petitioners of that case were engaged in
business of constructing roads, buildings and were using
different varieties of minerals purchasing it from the
open market. However, when the writ petition came for
hearing, the court noticed the subsequent development by
which the aforesaid two notifications were substituted
by a new scheme dated 13.11.2000.

                                                          13
23. The   petitioner   of   that   case,   in   view  of the
subsequent development did not press for adjudication
regarding    the   notification     dated    22.04.1994  and
03.07.1994  but   prayed  for  the   refund   of the royalty
deducted from their bills. The petitioner suggested that
the matter may be examined by the Department of Mines
itself. It is useful to note following observation in
the judgment:­
          “...as already stated the counsel
          for the petitioner as also other
          counsels appearing in all these writ
          petitions, no longer consider it
          necessary to insist for adjudication
          of the question as to whether the
          two notifications dated 22.09.1994
          and 03.07.1994 are legal or not in
          view of the fact that a new scheme
          on 13th November 2000 referred to
          hereinbefore has been implemented
          but insofar as deductions already
          made by the Public Works Department
          and other Departments on behalf of
          the Mining Department is concerned,
          the same requires adjudication by
          the    Department    of     Mining     to
          ascertain whether the petitioners at
          any point of time prior to 13th
          November 2000 had used minerals in
          their construction operations or not
          which were not royalty paid and for

                                                       14
         this purpose the counsel for the
         petitioners       have       themselves
         suggested    that    the    matter   be
         examined by the Department of Mines
         in   order   to   come    to   a   just
         conclusion    whether    any   wrongful
         deduction had been made in the
         running bills by the Public Works
         Department and other Departments or
         not in regard to the amount of
         royalty for the minerals used...”
24. The aforesaid writ petition was thus disposed of
giving  liberty  to   the   petitioner   to  approach the
Department  of  Mines   with   the  relevant  records for
assessment and explaining the position for whether the
claim for refund or adjustment is sustainable or not.
25. When the writ petition no. 3191 of 2002 filed by
the appellant came for consideration on 20.02.2007, the
learned Single Judge after considering the judgment in
R.S.Shekhawat case, disposed of the writ petition with
following directions:­
         “...Having   perused    the   aforesaid
         judgment and considering the rival
         arguments of the learned counsel for
         the parties, I am not persuaded to

                                                              15
          take any other view of the matter
          than    the    one     taken     by    the
          Co­ordinate Bench in the aforesaid
          judgment.
               The      writ       petition        is
          accordingly disposed of in terms of
          the    aforesaid     directions.       The
          observations    made    and    directions
          given in the aforesaid judgment
          shall also apply to the present
          case.”
26. The   Division   Bench   also    affirmed    the  aforesaid
judgment.
27. From the prayers as made in the writ petition, it
is  clear   that   principle    prayer    made    by  the   writ
petitioners    was   challenge     to    D.O.    letter    dated
26.03.2002   issued  by  the   Office    of   Mining  Engineer,
Mines  and  Geology,   addressed    to  Commissioner,     Jaipur
Municipal Corporation, Jaipur.
28. The writ petition in R.S.Shekhawat case was decided
on 28.02.2001 by which date the letter dated 26.03.2002
was not even in existence. Letter dated 26.03.2002 being
subsequent   in  point   of   time    from   the   judgment   of

                                                              16
R.S.Shekhawat case, it was necessary to look into the
content of the letter and to take decision thereafter.
We thus find substance in the submission for the learned
counsel for the appellant that letter dated 26.03.2002
was also necessary to be looked into before deciding the
writ petition of the appellant and without referring to
the letter dated 26.03.2002, the writ petition of the
appellant ought not to have been disposed of.
29. We thus, in view of the above, proceed to examine
the  contents    of  D.O.    letter    dated   26.03.2002    and
submissions made    by the appellant       in  support   of the
appeal.
30. The   submission    which    has   been   pressed   by   the
counsel of the appellant is that payment of royalty is
contemplated from holder of a mining lease or permit. As
noted above, the statutory scheme clearly indicates that
the  royalty   is  required   to   be   paid  by  mining   lease
holder  or   permit   holder   for    excavation   of  a   minor
mineral and no mineral is to be removed or excavated

                                                              17
without   payment    of  the   royalty.   For   mining  of   all
minerals payment of royalty is necessary.
31. It   is   however   also  relevant   to   note  that   where
mineral is excavated/transported/removed without payment
of royalty, there are specific provisions for seizure of
such minerals, recovery of royalty, tax and compounding
charges.   The   statute   thus   takes  care   of  payment   of
royalty   for    even   those    minerals   which    have   been
illegally   mined    or  excavated.   The   lease   holders   or
permit holders who excavate the minerals under the lease
or license are obliged to make payment of royalty and in
event any such mineral is found to be removed by lessee
or  their   agents   without   payment   of  royalty,   statute
contains ample provisions to ensure recovery of royalty
and fine etc.
32. As noted above, the earlier Government Orders dated
22.09.1994 & 03.07.1995 provided for 2% deductions from
the running bills of the contractors of public works
department    and   other   state   departments    towards   the

                                                      18
royalty of minerals which were used by contractors in
building of roads etc. The Scheme as provided under the
aforesaid Government Orders were subsequently withdrawn
and a new scheme was enforced by Government Order dated
13.11.2000   and    03.10.2001.   By   Government  Order
03.10.2001 modifying earlier direction dated 13.11.2000,
following was directed:­
         “After carrying out amendment in the
         even    numbered     Circular    dated
         13.11.2000 related to guidance to
         recover the royalty against the
         minerals used in various works by
         the Contractors of Government Works
         Department    and   substituting   the
         Paras 2 and 4 of the above Circular,
         following directions are issued:­
         "(2) Before commencement of mining
         work    by     the    Contractor    of
         Construction Department, Short Term
         Permission Letter for mineral used
         in the construction from the Mining
         Department shall be obtained and
         shall have to deposit the fee fixed
         for it and cost of Khanna Book with
         the   Department,    but   amount   of
         royalty payable on the quantity of
         the mineral mentioned in the short
         term License will be deducted from
         the running bills of the contractor
         by    the    concerned    Construction

                                                      19
         Department on the basis of the
         quantity of the mineral used in the
         construction.
         (4)     On      completion      of    the
         construction work, complete details
         of the mineral such as quantity of
         the mineral, source of receiving
         mineral and details of the amount
         deducted from the bill etc. utilized
         by the Contractor duly verified by
         the    Executive     Engineer    of   the
         concerned     Construction     Department
         shall     be    submitted    to    Mining
         Engineer/Assistant Mining Engineer
         within     15   days   and    further   a
         Certificate         of      Construction
         Department will also be produced in
         which quantity of the mineral used
         in    the     construction     has   been
         certified.”
33. A further Government Order was issued on 25.01.2002
which has been brought on record as Annexure P­4 by
which certain other directions were issued for ensuring
that the payment of royalty regarding all minerals used
is made and the mining engineer was required to keep all
details and the contractors were also to obtain short
term permission for use of the minerals as per work
order.

                                                               20
34. A letter dated 26.03.2002 was issued by the Mining
Engineer   to   the   Commissioner     Municipal    Corporation,
Jaipur, whereunder the attention of Commissioner, Jaipur
Municipal Corporation, Jaipur was drawn towards circular
dated 03.10.2001 of the State Government and circular
dated 13.11.2000, and the commissioner was informed that
although the information of the circular has been sent
earlier to the Jaipur Municipal Corporation, the amount
of  royalty   has   not   been  received.    The   Commissioner,
Jaipur Municipal Corporation was requested to arrange to
send  royalty    on   the   basis   of  the   quantity   of   the
minerals used in the contract of the construction work
given  to   the    contractor    by   subordinate    offices   of
Jaipur Municipal Corporation before end of the financial
year.
35. The    letter      dated    26.03.2002     impressed     upon
Commissioner of Jaipur Municipal Corporation to ensure
compliance   of   Government   Orders    dated   13.11.2000   and
03.10.2001 which has been noted earlier. The appellant

                                                          21
in writ petition has only challenged the letter dated
26.03.2002  but   has  not   challenged    the   Government
Circulars issued earlier which was sought to be complied
by the said letter.
36. Learned  counsel  for  the   State  is   right   in  his
submissions that since appellant did not challenge the
aforesaid two circulars of the State Government where
scheme  for   realization  of    the   royalty    from   the
contractors for use of the minerals was enforced, the
state  had  no  occasion  to   give  all   relevant    facts
pertaining to two earlier circulars by which royalty was
sought to be recovered. In the present writ petition
only prayer is to quash the letter dated 26.03.2002,
which is only a letter to Municipal Commissioner Jaipur
to ensure compliance of Circulars dated 13.11.2000 &
03.01.2001.  There  being  no   challenge   to   Circular's
13.11.2000 & 03.01.2001 in the writ petition and the
State had no opportunity to defend its above policy it
is not appropriate for this Court to embark upon the

                                                            22
adjudication    of  above   Government   Scheme.   The  letter
dated  26.03.2002      being   only   a   letter    to  ensure
compliance of Circulars dated 13.01.2000 & 03.01.2001,
no fault can be found in the said letter.
37. A Counter Affidavit has already been filed by the
Respondent No. 1 & 2, the State of Rajasthan and Mining
Engineer    in   the   present    appeal.    In  the   counter
affidavit, State has come up with the case that the
liabilities to pay royalty rest with contractors/lease
holders to whom mining lease are bestowed. It is further
pleaded that in case the minerals have been procured
from the legal source on which royalty have been paid,
there    is    no    royalty    payable    subsequently.    In
sub­paragraph IV of the counter affidavit, following was
stated:­
          “IV. That the contents of para IV
          of the questions of law are wrong,
          ill­advised and are hence denied. It
          is submitted that the liability to
          pay     royalty     rests     with    the
          contractors/lease holders to whom
          the mining leases are bestowed but

                                           23
in   order    to    prevent    losses   on
account of rampant illegal mining
and    subsequent      usage    of    such
illegally      mined       minerals     in
construction work, the department of
mines of the State of Rajasthan
issued circulars from time to time
calling     upon     vendors/contractors
registered      with      Public     Works
Department of the State who carry
out construction works to place
before    it    the    records    of   the
minerals     having     been     purchased
legitimately and that such minerals
have not been procured from illegal
mining      to     determine       whether
royalties on such minerals have been
paid. In case, the minerals have
been procured by vendors/contractor
from illegal mining, the royalties
due to the State can be recovered.
The   said    circulars     categorically
state that, in case minerals have
been procured from legal sources on
which royalties have been paid,
there    is    no    royalties     payable
subsequently. However, in case such
minerals are procured from illegal
mining, then the royalties that have
been         usurped         by        the
vendors/contractors must be paid to
the State. There is no infirmity or
illegality in such a circular which
is intended to legitimately collect
the royalties due to the State and
which have not been paid.”

                                                            24
38. It is further stated in the counter affidavit that
in event appellant has procured the minerals from open
market,   the    appellant    should   have   presented    the
documents    to   prove   that    such   minerals    used   in
construction work were purchased legitimately and then
no royalty shall be paid to the State by the appellant
on such mineral in such a case.
39. It   is    submitted   that   in   spite   of   department
communication 18.02.2008 and 16.02.2009 calling upon the
appellant   to   produce  the   records   of  purchasing   the
minerals from open market, the appellant has failed to
produce any such record of such purchase. In paragraph
VIII, following has been stated:­
          “VIII.     That    the    contents     of
          corresponding para no. VIII are
          wrong and denied. It is submitted
          that as per the circular issued by
          the department under Rule 63 of
          Rajasthan Minor Minerals Concession
          Rules, 1986, it is mandatory for all
          contractors     enlisted     /registered
          with the Public Works Department
          cited above to obtain 'Short Terms
          Permit' for the minerals to be used

                                                              25
          in construction works. In case the
          petitioner purchased the minerals
          from the open market, then the
          petitioner should have produced the
          relevant documents to prove that
          such minerals used in construction
          works was purchased legitimately.
          However,      in      spite      of     the
          communications from the department
          dated 18.02.2008 and 16.02.2009 in
          this regard, the petitioner has
          failed to produce any documents that
          proves that the minerals have been
          purchased legitimately from the open
          market.    It    is    clear    that    the
          petitioner does not possess any
          documents    that     prove    that    such
          minerals have been procured through
          legitimate means and hence it is
          clear   form    the    conduct     of   the
          petitioner that such minerals are
          procured illegally and are illegally
          mined.”
40. The    circulars    issued    by   the    State   Government
including   the  circular     dated   13.11.2000    as  well  as
circular dated 03.10.2001 has to be interpreted to mean
that circular requires payment of royalty with regard to
only  those   minerals     which   have    been   used   by  the
contractor for which no royalty was paid. The circular
cannot be interpreted to mean as requiring payment of

                                                             26
royalty for minerals used for which once royalty has
already been paid. The state has come up with the above
mentioned Government Order only with object to ensure
that  contractors    do   not  use   minerals  which   are  not
royalty paid.
41. Rajasthan High Court in R. S. Shekhawat’s case as
noted above has permitted the contractor to approach the
mining department for refund of the amount which was
deducted from the bill in event they successfully prove
that  minerals   used    by  them   were  minerals  for   which
royalty   was   already    paid.   The   aforesaid  directions
clearly protected the interest of the contractors and we
are of the view that the appellant's interests are amply
protected   with   the    aforesaid    directions   issued   by
Rajasthan High Court.
42. We, however, deem it appropriate to give liberty to
the   appellant    to     approach    the   mining    engineer,
Respondent   No.  2   by   a  written   representation   giving
details of    amount   deducted   from its bills     or  amount

                                                                                27
withheld  along   with the details of             minerals used                by
contractors  with   details   of  proof        to     establish            that
minerals used were minerals for which royalty was paid
as per 1986 rules.    The Mining Engineer/Assistant Mining
Engineer,   the   Respondent    No.      2     may       consider            the
representation   and   take  an   appropriate             and      reasoned
decision expeditiously preferably within three months of
submission of the representation and, in event it is
found  that   appellant   is  entitled         to     refund          of     any
amount, appropriate consequential action may be taken.
43. The   Civil  Appeal   is  disposed        of     with       the      above
directions.
                                   .............................................J.
                                     (PINAKI CHANDRA GHOSE)
                                      ..........................................J.
                                           (ASHOK BHUSHAN)
NEW DELHI;
NOVEMBER 25, 2016.

ITEM NO.1 B                COURT NO.10                SECTION XV
(For Judgment)
               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F I N D I A
                          RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 11259 OF 2016 @
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No.    12882/2009
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated
17/12/2008 in DBCSA No. 231/2008 in SBCWP No. 3191/2002 passed
by the High Court Of Rajasthan At Jaipur)
MANBHAR DEVI AGARWAL                                 APPELLANT(s)
                                 VERSUS
STATE OF RAJASTHAN & ORS.                            Respondent(s)
Date : 25/11/2016    This appeal was called on for
                   pronouncement of judgment today.
For Appellant(s)     Mr. Venkateswara Rao Anumolu,Adv.
For Respondent(s)    Mr. Milind Kumar,Adv.
                               –------
          Hon'ble Mr. Justice Ashok Bhushan pronounced
     the judgment of the Bench comprising Hon'ble Mr.
     Justice Pinaki Chandra Ghose and His Lordship.
          Leave granted.
          The civil appeal is disposed of with the
     directions mentioned in the signed reportable
     judgment.
     [ Charanjeet Kaur ]                 [ Indu Pokhriyal ]
        A.R.-cum-P.S.                       Court Master
        [ Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file ]


