                                                                     REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO(S)._2336 OF 2019
                                (ARISING FROM SLP(C) NOS.10103 OF 2016)
      VAISHNORANI MAHILA BACHAT GAT                                  ..APPELLANT(S)
                                                   VERSUS
      STATE OF MAHARASHTRA & ORS.                                    ..RESPONDENT(S)
                                                    WITH
                                C.A. NO. 2337/2019 SLP(C) No. 2415/2017
                               C.A. NO. 2348/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 2187/2017
                               C.A. NO. 2346/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 2184/2017
                         C.A. NOS. 2340-2341/2019 @ SLP(C) Nos. 2191-2192/2017
                               C.A. NO. 2344/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 2178/2017
                               C.A. NO. 2349/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 2177/2017
                              C.A. NO. 2338/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 29178/2016
                              C.A. NO. 2347/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 30156/2016
                              C.A. NO. 2342/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 29955/2016
                              C.A. NO. 2339/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 29603/2016
                              C.A. NO. 2345/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 30088/2016
                             C.A. NO. 2343/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 30079/2016
                              C.A. NO. 2350/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 8244/2018
                              C.A. NO. 2351/2019 @ SLP(C) No. 16947/2018
                                           W.P.(C) No. 910/2017
                                                 J U D G M E N T
      1.               Leave granted.
Signature Not Verified
      2.
Digitally signed by
                       The appellants/petitioner(s) have questioned the judgment
NARENDRA PRASAD
Date: 2019.03.08
17:33:58 IST
      and order dated 11.7.2016 passed by the High Court of Bombay,
Reason:
                                                      1

Bench at Aurangabad and order dated 15.03.2016 of the High Court
of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at Nagpur.            The petitioners in
the   writ  petition   filed    before    the   High   Court  i.e.   W.P.
No.3359/2016   questioned    the   tender     notice   dated   08.03.2016
issued   by   the   State   of   Maharashtra      inviting   tender   for
multilevel contract and for supply of ready to cook food to
Anganwadi    Centres   as    supplementary      nutritional    food   for
children,   pregnant   women   and    lactating    mothers,  adolescents
girls under Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDS Scheme).
The conditions were questioned by the appellants/petitioner(s)
being arbitrary, unreasonable against the spirit of the decision
of this Court in W.P.(C) No.196/2001.
3.  The question as stated in the appeal is that the local self-
help groups are sought to be ousted by the money power of large
corporate houses with the help of the State ,the decision by
this Court in PUCL v. Union of India (W.P.(C) No.196/2001) is
being   violated   and  that   of  Shagun     Mahila   Udyogik   Sahakari
Sanstha Maryadit v. State of Maharashtra and Others, passed in
Civil   Appeal   No.7104/2011.       It    is   urged   that  the   local
organization of women (Mahila Mandals) and self-help groups are
best suited to give local food and other necessary efforts to
provide supplementary nutritional food for children.              The so-
called Mahila Mandals who have applied under the tender that has
                                    2

been floated is, in fact, large industrial units and nothing to
do with the Mahila Mandals and self-help groups.      They are close
to certain political personalities in the State of Maharashtra.
Industrialists are not supplying good food as compared to these
Mahila Mandals in different parts of the country, as accepted by
the  Union   of  India  in  its  Report.    The  imposition   of  the
unrealistic conditions made it impossible for the Mahila Mandals
to compete.    Thus, the State is entertaining fake business units
and is acting contrary to the various decisions of this Court
and the spirit of the Scheme.
4.  The  principal   issue  raised   is whether  contracts  for   the
supply of such food for Anganwadis should be given to local
Mahila  Mandals   run  along  democratic   lines  with  local   women
participating or whether such contracts ought to be given by the
State to large corporates/contractors under the guise of the
conditions of the tender.       In PUCL v. Union of India & Ors.
(W.P. (C) No.196 of 2001), this Court has passed the order, on
07.10.2004, inter alia to the following effect:-
           "The contractors shall not be used for the
           supply of nutrition in Anganwadis and preferably
           ICDS funds shall be spent by making use of
           village communities, self-help groups and Mahila
           Mandals for buying of grains and preparation of
           meals."
                                   3

5.   On 13.12.2006, in PUCL (supra), the Court inter alia passed
the following order:-
                    “...Chief Secretaries of all State
          Governments/UTs     are     directed     to   submit
          affidavits giving details of the steps that have
          been taken with regard to the order of this
          Court of October 7th, 2004 directing that
          "contractors shall not be used for supply of
          nutrition in Anganwadis and preferably ICDS
          funds shall be spent by making use of village
          communities, self-help groups and Mahila Mandals
          for buying of grains and preparation of meals".
          Chief Secretaries of all State Governments/UTs.
          must indicate a time-frame within which the
          decentralization of the supply of SNP through
          local community shall be made.”
6.   Thereafter, Food Safety Ordinance, 2013 was promulgated on
5.7.2013 in which provision has been made for the benefit of
children  in  the  age  group   of  6   months  to   14 years.     The
Ordinance which has taken the shape of the Act i.e. National
Food Security Act, 2013 (for short ‘the Act of 2013’), aims at
to  reform   the  public  distribution     system   and  bringing   in
transparency and accountability apart from creating obligation
of the Central Government and the State Governments in respect
of all issues relating to food security.
7.   A report was submitted to this Court by the Commissioner
appointed  in  PUCL  [W.P.(C)   No.196/2001]    regarding  Take   Home
Ration (for short ‘THR’) in Maharashtra, relevant portion is
extracted hereunder:-
                                  4

      "In the attached report claims large-scale
irregularities in the supply of supplementary
nutrition in violation of the orders of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court. The report claims though
it is not specifically proven that there is a
nexus    between   politicians,    bureaucrats   and
private contractors in the provisioning of SNP
to the ICDS leading to large-scale corruption
and leakages.
      The contracts to supply THR in Maharashtra
have been given to three Mahila Mandals, namely,
Venkateshwara Mahila Audhyogic Utpadan Sahakari
Sanstha Ltd, Mahalaxmi Mahila Grahaudhyog &
Balvikas Buddheshiya Audhyogic Sahakari Sanstha
and    Maharashtra   Mahila   Sahakari    Grahudhyog
Sanstha Ltd. These Mahila Mandals, in turn, have
leased in the facilities for production of THR
from    private    agro-companies.       My   report
establishes the de-facto and de-jure ownership
of the Mahila Mandals and the private agro-
companies are by the same family. In each case,
the Mahila Mandal has formed a sub-committee
which has been given also operational control
over production and finances in relation to a
unit which is owned by family members of the
members of the said sub-committee.
      In some States like Uttar Pradesh, the
supplementary nutrition has been contracted out
to private companies like Great Value Foods,
promoted by Gurdeep Singh (Ponty) Chadha in
complete violation of the Supreme Court orders.
This continues despite an adverse report on the
issue (in Gorakhpur) by the National Human
Rights Commission. Similarly, a contractor based
out of Noida, Continental Milkose (India) Ltd.
provides the supplementary nutrition for the
ICDS    in   Meghalaya.   The  contract    continues
despite adverse CAG reports on the provision of
SNP in Meghalaya. This state of affairs prevails
across many States/UTs.
        According to the National Family Health
Survey 3, every day close to 5,000 children dies
in India due to preventable causes including
malnutrition. The ICDS is the only institutional
mechanism of the Government to deal with issues
of children under the age of six. The government
of India/States and UTs spend close to 8,000
crores     every   year   on   the    provision   of
                        5

          Supplementary Nutrition. It is unconscionable
          that a country with one of the highest rates of
          child malnutrition, globally, allows rampant
          corruption to undermine the ICDS and thereby the
          future of its children.”
8. The second report was submitted by the Commissioner appointed
in PUCL (W.P.© No.196/2001) to this Court, the relevant portion
is extracted hereunder:
                    “Part A of the existing report further
          probes   the    subject   of    the   large-scale
          irregularities in the supply of Supplementary
          Nutrition Provisioning (SNP) in violation of the
          orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court by the
          engagement of contractors in ICDS in four states
          namely, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh,
          and Gujarat.
              Part B of the report documents the best
          practice study from two states viz, Odisha and
          Kerala on the effective involvement of the local
          women's' groups in the form of the decentralized
          model of nutrition provisioning under ICDS, which
          is in consonance with 2004 and 2006 Hon’ble
          Supreme Court order.
            Part C of the report is the nutrient analysis
          of the samples Take Home Rations collected from
          four states (Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat,
          Meghalaya), carried out by National Institute of
          Nutrition (NIN) Hyderabad. NIN data shows a
          significant gap between state specifications and
          the results of the lab test.
              We reiterate our concern for the health,
          nutrition, and life of millions of children in
          India, in the larger public interest and in order
          to be able to indisputably establish the facts of
          this case, we would again request the Hon'ble
          Supreme Court to set up an independent Special
          Investigation Team (SIT) to enquire into the
          matter."
9.   Further directions were issued by this Court in PUCL (W.P.©
No.196/2001) on 10.7.2013:
                                6

               “Mr. Colin Gonsalves, learned senior counsel
          appearing for the writ petitioner, on the other
          hand argued that although the Government of
          Gujarat had made a statement before the High
          Court on 14 March, 2011 that they will completely
          switch-over to the system of providing rations
          through Mahila Mandals and Self-Help Groups
          within a period of one year, the Government had
          not been diligent in doing the needful with the
          result that the switch-over was achieved only to
          the extent of 16 percent. He submitted that the
          Government had in derogation of the orders of
          this Court dated 7.10.2004, 13.12.2006 and
          22.04.2009 engaged a contractor for the supply of
          nutritional food to the children falling in the
          age group of six months to three years and that
          the present application was only an attempt to
          perpetuate that violation. He submitted that
          according to his instructions each Anganwadi was
          equipped with pucca/kaccha kitchen for many many
          years and that there was indeed no difficulty in
          supplying to the targeted age group of children
          cooked nutritional food in terms of the scheme as
          directed by this Court.
               In the circumstances, therefore, and keeping
          in view the submissions made at the Bar we direct
          the State Government of Gujarat to file an
          additional affidavit on the lines indicated
          above, indicating the time-frame within which it
          will switch-over to the system of supply of food
          to the targeted population of children and others
          entitled to the same in the State of Gujarat
          under the Ordinance and also indicating the time-
          frame within which every school and Anganwadi may
          be equipped with facilities for cooking meals
          within the meaning of Section 5 (2) of the
          Ordinance.”
10.  On  6.8.13,  this  Court  passed  an order  in  PUCL  (W.P.©
No.196/2001) with respect to Gujarat:-
               “In the meantime, we permit the Government
          of Gujarat to continue the system under which it
          has been procuring for distribution take-home
          ration as EFBF from the original manufacturers by
          inviting competitive bids for a period of one
                                 7

          more year.
               The State would, therefore, would do well to
          diligently identify not only reliable self-help
          groups who can be entrusted with the process of
          setting up of the plants but also providing all
          such assistance as may be required for the plants
          to become functional as early as possible.
               We make it clear that in case its found that
          the State Government have not taken appropriate
          steps in terms of what we have said above, we may
          be forced to recall this order and issue
          appropriate direction in the matter."
11.  This Court again in PUCL (W.P.© No.196/2001) directed State
of  Gujarat  and  Rajasthan,   on   01.09.2014, to the  following
effect:-
          “Rajasthan: The directions of this Court have
          over the past 10 years resulted in a switchover
          of decentralization of the feeding process to
          Self-Help Groups and Women Co-operatives only in
          107 such projects as against 304 projects spread
          over in the entire State. The pace of switchover
          is very slow and needs to be increased by the
          authorities concerned."
          Gujarat: "There is no manner of doubt that the
          State has undertaken steps in setting up of pilot
          projects four of which projects have already been
          commissioned, no matter the capacity of the
          project is limited. There is also no manner of
          doubt that the thirteen additional sanctioned
          projects will not be sufficient to cater to the
          States of its requirement of 12,000 metric
          tonnes. In that view, therefore, we are inclined
          to extend the time fixed for completing the
          switchover but impress upon the State to expedite
          the process of switchover for otherwise it can go
          on indefinitely for decades."
12.  The  tender   notice  has   been   issued  by Government  of
                                  8

Maharashtra dated 08.03.2016, the tender conditions that came to
be questioned were contained in Clauses VII (h), (j) and (l) and
Clause X (e) and (g), which are extracted hereunder:-
          "VII... (h)    Machinery Performance Certificate:
          Proposer must furnish a list of machineries
          installed   in   his   premises     and   a   latest
          certificate from a Chartered Engineer registered
          with the Institution of Engineers (India),
          stating that the machinery is sufficient to meet
          the production requirement of various Ready to
          Cook Food Mixes as per product specification
          given under this proposal and also stating that
          the machinery can effectively perform for a
          further period of 5 years. The certificate shall
          also clearly indicate the installed capacity of
          such machinery.
          (j) The Proposer should have In house Quality
          Control facilities, and any quality control
          laboratory equipped with appropriate laboratory
          equipment for testing the parameters prescribed
          in the Food Safety and Standard Act (Prevention
          of Food Adulteration Act) and as per the
          specifications given in the proposal regarding
          the   Nutrient    contents,     Moisture    content,
          Microbiological    and    Chemical    contamination,
          Physical   conditions    e.g.   dryness,   softness,
          consistency, Micronutrient contents. The proposer
          must submit a list of equipment list of
          technically   qualified     personnel   engaged   in
          quality control etc.
          (l) The latest consent letter received from the
          micronutrient manufacturer/importers, for the
          supply of micronutrient, minimum for the contract
          period to the proposer, should be submitted
          before the work order gets awarded.
          X.   Blueprint/drawing of the plant approved by
          the Food and Drug Authority from where the
          product as specified in this proposal will be
          produced and supplied by the proposer. The
          design/detail should cover location and capacity
          (in MT) of silos, covered storage areas with
          capacity in MT, open storage areas with capacity
          in   MT,   process   divisions     like   extrusion,
          cleaning, grinding etc. Proposers shall also
                                 9

          submit     Notarized    copies     of   the     following
          registration/licenses       for    producing     Extruded
          Fortified Blended Food as specified in this
          proposal.
          (e) A valid license under FSSA, 2006.
          (g)    ISO    22000:2005,     ISO    14001:2004      OHSAS
          18001:2007 Good Manufacturing Practice."
13.  The Nagpur Bench has dismissed W.P. No.1807/2016 that has
been  questioned   in   the  special    leave   petitions     i.e.  SLP(C)
Nos.10103/16, 8551/16 and 2415/2017.
14.  Whereas Aurangabad Bench has set aside the tender notice to
the extent of reducing the products to 70.            All the terms and
conditions of the tender have been held valid.              The direction
was  issued  to   the  respondent    to   conduct   the   survey   of  the
eligible   units   with    respect    to    extrusion    technology    and
satisfying all other conditions and shall thereafter proceed to
form projects and issue tender notice accordingly.
15.  It was pointed out that while rendering the decision in
Shagun (supra) on 19.8.2011 this Court was shown a letter dated
28.7.2009 which was issued by the Deputy Technical Advisor, Food
and  Nutrition   Board   (Western   Region),    Ministry   of   Women  and
Child   Development,     sent    recipes     to    the    Government    of
Maharashtra.   The   recipes   inter    alia   provided    for   mandatory
micronutrient   fortification     and    mandatory   use    of   extrusion
technology in preparation of meals, thus requiring factory-based
                                   10

production which is difficult at the level of Anganwadi Centres,
Relevant portion of the recipes, which was relied on in the case
of Shagun (supra), is extracted hereunder:
               “Protein   content  in   the  food   can  be
          increased by confined sources and among the
          available sources Soybean is the best sources for
          who are vegetarian, now the question arises that
          milk can also be considered as one of the sources
          but protein content of milk are not as much as
          that of soybean. Again we can say that legumes
          can also be considered as one of the sources
          available for protein but when compared to
          soybean the protein contents of legumes is very
          less and the problem faced with legumes is very
          expensive.
               Hence the only sources left to attain the
          required protein content are SOYABEAN which fits
          into the budgetary and nutrition norms Problem
          encountered with soybean is that presence of
          Tropism inhibitor and complex starch structure in
          Soybean makes protein unavailable the solution to
          this was the use of apt processing technology.
               The technology that we came across after
          studying the various factors was "EXTRUSION
          TECHNOLOGY”.
          EXTRUSION TECHNOLOGY
               Is a multivariable unit operation i.e.
          mixing shearing, cooking, puffing and drying in
          one energy efficient rapid continuous process?
          This process of High-Temperature Short Time
          (HTST) combined with high-pressure cooking in
          presence of moisture.
               Try spin Inhibitor: They interface with the
          proper digestion of the protein kakde at all
          (1973) estimated that nearly 40% of the reduction
          in growth performance of any mammal fed raw
          soybean is due to the trips in inhibitor.
               The anituntironal factors can be deactivated
          through proper heat processing such as across in
          extrusion.
               Once the product is being extruded and is in
          granule or powder form the fortification of the
          micronutrients will be easy which leads to a
                                11

          homogeneous mix of required nutrition in correct
          proportion.
               Micronutrient Fortification: The revised
          guidelines lays major streets on micronutrient
          fortification of the THR to be provided to the
          beneficiary     this      step    of      micronutrient
          fortification       requires     expert        technical
          supervision and can be achieved in precise
          perfection by using accurate machines with
          precision    in     measuring    the     quantity     in
          milligrams.    The    fortification    of     the   said
          receipts at AWC will be quite difficult."
16.  The Government   of  Maharashtra    passed    a  Resolution   dated
24.08.2009 on the basis of the advice dated 28.7.2009, which
required a highly mechanized and automated process of extrusion
and micronutrient fortification.       The State Government further
issued a tender notification based on these requirement laying
onerous   conditions   on    Mahila    Mandals    to    have   automated
production units, turnover of Rs.1 Crore or more etc.          Following
is the Resolution of the Government of Maharashtra:
               "There being need of change in the diet
          system to bring about multifariousness in the
          diet and to effect micronutrient certification by
          chemical process, individual cleanliness from the
          public health point of view, or cleanliness of
          the   premises,     vaccination,     creating     public
          awareness are the points which require to be
          given preference. It is not possible to remove
          the deficiency in the diet of children and
          mothers by the diet being provided under the
          Integrated Child Development Service Scheme.
          However,   the     instructions    of     the    Central
          Government are that 50% need of the micronutrient
          requirement may be made good by fortification
          process."
                                   12

17.  The  Government  of  Maharashtra  sought   clarification from
Government of India regarding extrusion process, factory-based
production etc., as required in the recipe dated 28.07.2009.     A
letter was written on 29.1.2010.    Relevant extract of a letter
dated 29.01.2010 is extracted hereunder:-
          “Meanwhile, we have received a report from
          Mr.Balbeer Singh, Dy. Director (Technical), Food
          and Nutrition Board, Western Region, a copy of
          which is enclosed herewith.
          From this report, it is seen that the Food and
          Nutrition Board has recommended factory-based
          production    with   extrusion    technology    and
          specific recipes which use this technology for
          production of THR.
          In this regard, we would be grateful, if you
          would kindly clarify the following points so
          that   the   further   tender   process    can   be
          finalised.
          1. Does GOI prescribe or recommend factory-based
          production, or any specific technology, for
          production of THR? Has it prescribed any
          specific recipes or products?
          2.   Does it recommend ‘Extrusion Technology for
          THR production’?
          3.   Does it recommend any minimum shelf life
          for THR? Is there any prescribed water content?
          4.   Can the state go in for gur-groundnut
          chikki or similar products as THR, as long as it
          satisfied the prescribed criteria for calories
          and proteins etc.?
          5. Has it authorized Food and Nutrition Board,
          Western    Region,    to    prescribe     Extrusion
          technology for THR?"
18.  On 26.2.2010, Government of India sent its clarification to
the Government of Maharashtra regarding the use of extrusion
technology and as to mandatory specifications laid down in the
                                13

recipe dated 28.7.2009.       Following is the reply sent by the
Government of India:-
                 “Please    refer     to    your    DO    letter
           No.ICDS/2008/CR-59     (Part-II)/2005    dated    29th
           January 2010 raising queries regarding factory-
           based production or specific technology for
           production of THR.
                 The provision of SNP, whether in the form of
           morning snack, hot cooked meal or THR has been
           left with the State. So far, there are no
           specific recommendations for the use of extrusion
           technology or any other technology for THR. The
           suggestions given by Regional DTA (Western
           Region) are only suggestive in nature and not a
           recommendation by GOI."
                                           (emphasis supplied)
19. It was clarified by the Government of India that there is no
specific recommendation for the use of extrusion technology or
any  other   technology  for  THR.     The  suggestion  given   by the
Regional DTA, (Western Region) is only suggestive in nature and
not a recommendation made by the Government of India.        In Shagun
(supra) this Court on 19.08.2011 observed thus:-
            "The Central Government, through the Ministry
           of Women and Child Development and Food and
           Nutrition Board office vide its letter dated 28th
           July 2009, circulated the Recipe to the State
           Government (respondent No.1) as per new norms of
           ICDS for preparation of the food.            It was
           provided that the feeding norms ought to have
           two components in it, to be provided as
           supplementary nutrition to the beneficiaries at
           Anganwadis namely:- Hot Cooked Meal (HCM) and
           Take Home Ration (THR).
                Directions were issued that HCM and THR
           should be given in the form of "energy-dense
           food/micronutrient fortified food" and should
           conform to the standards laid by the Prevention
           of Food Adulteration Act, Integrated Food Law,
                                   14

          Infant,     and   Young    Child    Practices.   The
          micronutrient fortified food was defined to be
          the food in which essential mineral and vitamins
          are added separately to ensure that minimum
          dietary requirements are met. It was emphasised
          that to attain the required protein content in
          the food proposed to be supplied, the only
          source was Soybean. The food was to be processed
          by using Extrusion Technology to draw maximum
          results by use of Soyabean. The guidelines in
          the aforesaid letter further emphasised that
          since the revised guidelines laid major stress
          on micronutrient fortification of the THR, it
          required "expert technical supervision" and that
          it can be achieved by using accurate machines
          with precision in measuring the quantity in
          milligrams.
                The Government of India communicated the
          judgment in the Shagun Mahila Mandal case to all
          States/UTs. The judgment nowhere mentioned that
          private     manufacturers    or    contractors   are
          allowed, and the judgment was only limited to
          the tender conditions applicable to eligible
          Mahila mandals. However, the Central Government
          communication allowed the states to supply even
          from manufacturers:"
20. It is thus clear that observations made by this Court in
Shagun  (supra)   was  based  upon   not  upon  Government of  India
recommendations but in the letter of Deputy Technical Director,
Western Region, which was wrongly represented to this Court as
recommendations of the Government of India.          In view of the
clarification made by the Government of India, the observations
made by this Court as to extrusion technology stand diluted,
based on misrepresentation.
21. By introducing the extrusion Technology it was pointed out
                                  15

that in 2010 three Mahila Mandals, which were chosen, were found
to be fake and were only acting as fronts for existing companies
and industrialists.   Following facts have been mentioned in the
reply filed by the State of Maharashtra :
          "The following women institutions are selected
          for the supply of THR to the beneficiaries of the
          Gramin/Aadivashi and Urban Project and the
          following product unit is allotted district wise.
          1. Mahalaxmi Mahila Gruhuddyog and Bal Vikas Bahu
          Uddyeshiya Aoudyo. Co.-Operative Society, Nanded
          Unit   1.   Mahalaxmi   M.G.B.V.B.A.  Cooperative
          Society, Nanded Districts- Nanded, Parbhani,
          Hingoli
          Unit 2. Indo Alied Protein Food Districts-Thane
          Pune, Ahmednagar
          Unit 3. Kota Rajasthan Districts Mumbai, Raigad,
          Ratnagiri, Sindhudurg, Sangali, Satara, Kolhapur,
          Solapur, Usmanabad, Akola, Gondiya.
          2. Maharashtra Women Cooperative Home Industry
          Societies, Dhule, Districts – Dhule, Nandurbar,
          Nashik, Jalgaon, Aurangabad.
          3. Vyankateshwar Women Cooperative Home Industry
          Societies, Udgir.
          Unit -1 Kapshikhurd Nagpur Districts- Bhandara,
          Gadchiroli, Nagpur, Yavatmal, Jalna, Buldhana,
          Washim.
          Unit 2- Dongargaon, Nagpur Districts Chandrapur,
          Amravati, Beed, Latur, Vardha”
22.  Following averments have also been made in reply filed by
the State of Maharashtra with respect to Venkateshwara Mahila
Ayodhogic Sanstha:-
          “It is necessary here to clarify that applicant
          Venkateshwara Mahila Ayodhogik Sanstha is in fact
          contractor: which is being well practically
          operated by male members, merely by showing
          female relatives or, documents for projection.
          11. I further submit that detailed enquiry
          regarding Venkateshwara Mahila Ayodhogik Utpadak
                                16

          Sahakari Sanstha will clearly reveal that the
          ladies are being projected merely on record and
          said Sanstha is actually managed by all male
          members. It is not out of place to point out that
          the said Sanstha being Utpadak Sahakari Sanstha
          registered     under    Maharashtra      Co-operative
          Societies   Act    only    for    the    purpose   of
          production/manufacturing has no right to claim
          any relief for supply of food grains as prayed in
          the present application as the said Society is
          not   registered   as    trading/consumer    society.
          Hereto annexed and marked as ANNEXURE R-6 is a
          copy   of    the   registration     certificate    of
          Venkateshwara Mahila Ayodhogik Utpadak Sahakari
          Sanstha issued by Deputy Registrar, Co-operative
          Societies, Udgir.
               I Further submit that on 12.7.1999 the said
          Venkateshwara Mahila Ayodhogik Utpadak Sahakari
          Sanstha authorized Deepak Dinkarrao Lakhangonkar
          to carry all the activities on their behalf that
          makes   it    very   clear    that    actually   male
          counterparts are administering affairs of so-
          called Mahila Society."
23. Thus, it was urged that the field has been left open to the
industrialists in the conditions of the tender under the guise
of Mahila Mandal's fake persons are obtaining contracts.
24.  In the judgment rendered by the Aurangabad Bench, it has
been noted that three big contractors were selected who were not
really Mahila Mandals or Mahila self-help groups:-
          (i)   Maharashtra    Mahila    Sahakari    Grahudhyog
          Sanstha Ltd., Dhule.
          (ii)   Venkateshwara    Mahila   Audhyogic    Utpadan
          Sahakari Sanstha Ltd., Latur.
          (iii) Mahalaxmi Mahila Garhudyog and Balvikas
          Buddeshiya Audhyogic Sahakari Sanstha.
                                 17

25. As in PUCL (supra) and Shagun (supra), divergent orders were
passed.    Circular dated 26.09.2014 was issued.         The order in
PUCL  (supra)    was  received   by  the   government   of   India  on
15.10.2014.     On  17.11.2014  departmental   note  was   circulated.
Secretary   made   a   recommendation   to   review   circular   dated
26.09.2014 in the light of PUCL order dated 1.9.2014.        Director,
ICDS   also   prepared   a   similar  note    dated   17.12.2014.   On
22.12.2014 it was observed that requirement of certification as
per circular dated 26.09.2014 be kept on hold till April 2015.
It was again introduced on 23.06.2015.        Then again Maharashtra
Government Principal Secretary sought guidance from J.S. (ICDS)
regarding mandatory use of extrusion technology.       On 03.09.2015,
it  was  written   back  that  decision   of  Supreme   Court  may  be
followed.
26.  The appellants/petitioners have relied on the report as to
corruption and poor quality of meals supplied by contractors as
positive instances of decentralized production model by SHGs.
The Commissioner appointed in PUCL (W.P.© No.196/2001) observed
in a letter:-
          “We also welcome the enhanced calorie and
          protein supplementation norms proposed by the
          Ministry of Women and Child Development for the
          Supplementary Nutrition Programme as mentioned
          in the draft.
                However, we are in strong disagreement with
          the manner in which the Ministry of Women and
          Child Development is seeking to allow a backdoor
                                  18

          entry of contractors and middlemen back into the
          Supplementary Nutrition Programme by suggesting
          the introduction of micro-nutrient fortified
          food obviously through contractors, although
          this is not specifically stated in the letter
          dated 24/02/2009.
               Such an attempt to introduce contractors by
          the back door in the guise of supplying micro-
          nutrient fortified food was repeatedly rejected
          by this Honorable Court when several State
          Governments filed affidavits seeking to promote
          the contractor lobby for the provisioning of
          fortified foods, snack and other ready to eat
          food in ICDS.
               This contractor lobby seeks to capture what
          it perceives to be potential Central Government
          annual   budget    of   Rs.5000   crore    in    the
          Supplementary Nutrition Programme."
27. The petitioners have also relied on the NHRC in a report on
the  functioning  of  ICDS  in  Gorakhpur  (U.P.)  as   to  the poor
quality of THR recommended thus:-
          “...a rapacious private sector is riding on
          the back of the ICDS to a captive rural market
          with the help of government machinery in a
          naked display of crony capitalism.
               By procuring food from a contractor the
          State Government is probably violating the
          orders of the Supreme Court dated 7.10.2004
          and 13.12.2006 in WP (C) No. 196 of 2001,
          though the contractor hides behind the fig
          leaf of being a manufacturer. Less than two
          years back, the contractor set up a processing
          plant in Bahraich district for the sole
          business of supplying ready-to-eat food (RTE)
          to AWCs in Gorakhpur and 11 other districts of
          eastern Uttar Pradesh. This shows that the
          State   Government    far   from   phasing     out
          contractors is encouraging expansion of their
          business in ICDS. The RTE does not seem to
          contain   the   ingredients   claimed   and    the
          weaning food may not be suitable for babies.
                                 19

The ready to eat food is produced in poor
hygienic conditions. Some of the ingredients
shown on the bags containing the finished
product were not found in stock at the time of
the visit and the stock of maize was only
enough to meet 25% of the daily requirement.
     ICDS in Uttar Pradesh is a highly
centralised programme. Virtually everything is
procured by the Directorate in Lucknow. There
is nothing purchased at the district level.
The only exception is the small amount
allotted to each AWC to purchase food items,
which accounts for 14% of the total purchase
of foodstuff.
     All   communication    is    top-down.   The
programme suffers because of the lack of free
flow of information. There is no scope for
local initiative. The authorities rely too
much on paperwork, which seems to have become
an end in itself.
     The complete decentralization of the
feeding   programme    through    local   women's
groups, contemplated by the Supreme Court's
orders referred to above, is still a far cry
in Uttar Pradesh.
Weak Links
     Centralization of powers at Lucknow has
made the field level functionaries powerless,
apathetic   and   devoid   of   initiative.   The
biggest danger of centralization lies in the
area of purchases. It makes small sums spent
per AWC attractive to rapacious private sector
players and their corrupt collaborators by
pooling the resources meant for 166073 AWCs
spread   across   the   State.   I   would   call
centralized purchase the weakest link.
     Manufactured    ready   to   eat   food   is
difficult and unsafe to store, indifferent in
taste and nutritive value lacks variety and is
easy to divert in bulk. It is supplied at the
same rate as prescribed per beneficiary by the
government. If we take away a modest value
addition of 15% in the procession plants, the
                       20

         real value of supplies to the beneficiary will
         be reduced by the same percentage. So I will
         call RTE the second weakest link.
               Dependence on official machinery, with
         only token beneficiary participation, is the
         third weak link.
               Ultimately, the mothers in a village can
         be said to be the beneficiaries of the
         programme.     Until   the   management   of   the
         programme at AWC level is delegates to
         mothers' groups, diversion of resources and
         corruption cannot be rooted out. Suggestions
         for improvement.
               Before    taking   any  other   steps,   the
         government has to demonstrate its intentions
         by doing away with private contracts for food
         supply altogether. This will send a message to
         the field functionaries who seem to be
         confused about the real intentions of their
         superiors at Lucknow.
            Simultaneously, the entire feeding programme
         has to be decentralised to the village-level
         women's' groups. The existing Matri Samitis,
         self-help groups of women or mothers' groups
         formed by the community can be adopted as the
         vehicle of decentralization. There should be
         no prescription about cooked food and ‘take-
         home' food. There is no need to assume that
         women and babies at the weaning stage cannot
         be fed cooked meals at the Anganwadi. Every
         community should be allowed to decide what
         suits it best.       Advice and guidance may be
         provided    to    help  the   community   make   a
         decision. The assistance of CFTRI may be
         sought to generate alternatives from which the
         community can choose. For the decentralised
         system to succeed, it is imperative that funds
         for every month are placed at the disposal of
         the women's' group in the last week of the
         previous month."
28. The National Rural Livelihood Mission, Government of India,
on 21.01.2013, gave guidelines for involvement of SHGs in the
                                 21

supply of THR under ICDS.    The extract of a letter of Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Rural Development are as under:-
               “A Women's’ Self Help Group (SHG) (of 10-
          20 women in general, 5-20 women in difficult
          areas) is the primary building block of NRLM's
          institutional design.          The S.H.G. is an
          informal    and    unregistered        group.     Under
          N.R.L.M., one member from each identified
          rural poor household, preferably a woman, is
          to be organized into a Self Help Group (SHGs).
          These groups are formed on the basis of
          affinity and common bonding among members.
          They are not arbitrarily put together, and
          more important this task is not to be
          performed   mechanically.       It    requires     very
          sensitive    facilitation,       initially     by    an
          external social mobilizing agency, N.G.O or
          Govt.   Missions    and    later     on    their    own
          federation emerges as a sensitive support
          agency and takes over most of the functions
          being   performed    by    the    initial     external
          support organizations. Now SHGs are formed out
          of the existing BPL list. We are attempting to
          switch over to a participatory identification
          methodology which will ensure much better
          inclusion of the deserving poor.
               The time required capacitating groups to
          undertake a micro-enterprise model related to
          Skills and Placement. Currently, only two
          State Missions under NRLM have experience in
          undertaking micro-enterprise models for ICDS -
          Kerala, and Odisha. Based on the models
          developed    by   Kerala     and     Odisha,      where
          Community Based Organisations (CBOs) including
          SHGs/federations are trained to develop a
          micro-enterprise related to SNP using local
          ingredients, it could take between 4-8 weeks
          to train and capacitate a CBO depending on
          their potential and skills. There are also
          models promoted by reputed N.G.Os in many
          states in cooperation with the Dept, of Women
          and Child Welfare.
               How can your department/N.R.L.M. support
          WCD in involving S.H.Gs/M.Ms./local women
          groups in supplying Supplementary Nutrition
          esp?   Take   Home   Rations      for    ICDS    as   a
                                  22

          livelihood activity viable enterprise?
               Essentially, the tasks suggested should
          have to be accepted by the State Rural
          Livelihood Missions and implemented initially
          on a pilot mode. The total acceptance by the
          State WCD is a pre-condition for this. Already
          Kerala and Orissa have experience in supplying
          Take Home Ration under ICDS. These States can
          be declared as the Resource States, the
          experience of which can be formally shared
          with other willing States from which joint
          teams of the State Livelihood Mission and
          State WCD can learn and prepare an action plan
          as appropriate to the State."
29.  On 24.12.2013, Government of India has issued Operational
Guidelines for Food Safety and Hygiene in ICDS with respect to
SHGs and local groups as under:-
               “Take Home Ration (THR) is dry packed
          food produced locally by SHG's, local groups
          and federations. The production should meet
          the standards and specifications for food
          safety and handling.
               The establishment in which food is being
          handled; processed, stored, distributed by the
          SHG/ producer is a holder of the registration
          certificate or a license as per the norms laid
          down   by  the    Food    Standards    and   Safety
          Authority    Act,    2006,     Regulations    2011.
          Sanitary and hygienic requirement, food safety
          measures,   and    other    standards   should   be
          confirmed and it will be the responsibility of
          the producer to ensure adherence to necessary
          requirements.
               Processing of Food (Take Home Rations):
          Processing involves activities like sieving,
          washing, drying, roasting, mixing, grinding
          etc., which requires handling of food.”
30.  The  Government   of   India    in  its  'Social   Service
                                  23

Delivery: Good Practices Resource Book 2015 applauded the
Odisha model in the following terms:
          "Decentralisation     of      ICDS     Supplementary
          Nutrition Programme: Ensuring timely and quality
          nutrition to all beneficiaries in Odisha.
               The   Department    of    Women   and   Child
          Development (WCD), Government of Odisha, has
          undertaken decentralization of the Integrated
          Child      Development        Services      (ICDS)
          supplementary nutrition programme in the state
          to streamline and strengthen the programme and
          ensure ' universalization with quality' in a
          time-bound manner. The initiative reaches out
          to all beneficiaries with a standard weekly
          menu, meeting the protein and calorie norms
          within the allocated ration cost, removing
          contractors and encouraging women Self Help
          Groups (SHGs) in adherence with the Supreme
          Court directive. Results from a social audit
          indicate that 71% of the respondents felt that
          the menu chart was being followed."
          “Replicability and Sustainability
               Social sustainability of the initiative
          is high, owing to the successful run of the
          community-driven    model      that    has    been
          institutionalized for the SNP. Following the
          success of Jaanch Committees in SNP, the
          system will now also been extended to other
          components of ICDS on a trial basis to induce
          more      community         participation       in
          implementation.
               Long-term   sustainability     requires   the
          state administration to create an enabling
          environment. For the purpose of introducing
          reforms, support for this initiative was
          garnered from the apex to the grassroots level
          and the required trust to be invested in
          grassroots functionaries.
             The replication of this model requires a
          strong administrative thrust in identifying
          the context-relevant loopholes in the system,
          as was done in the case of Odisha. Training
          and capacity building of the community is also
          an essential factor for the smooth deployment
                                 24

          of the model which has demonstrated that
          procuring food materials at ration rates may
          be   difficult   but    is    possible   and   that
          contractors can be removed from the supply
          chain of SNP with beneficial results in terms
          of effective implementation.”
31. In our opinion, it was argued rightly that this Court was
misled while rendering the decision in Shagun (supra) when it
was projected that it was mandatory to follow the recipes dated
28.7.2009 whereas Government of India itself has clarified that
it was only suggestive and was not the decision of Government of
India as pointed out in the letter dated 26.2.2010 extracted
above.
32.  Apart from that after the decision has been rendered by this
Court in Shagun (supra) Act has been enacted and new policy has
been  framed  by  the  Government     of  India  and   thereafter  new
policies have been filed by the Government of India on 6.8.2018,
contained in the affidavit of the Secretary, Ministry of Home
and  Child   Development.      In    the   affidavit   filed   by  UOI
represented  by  the  Ministry    of   Women  and  Child   Development
following has been mentioned with respect to the supplementary
nutrition programme of the Government under the Integrated Child
Development Scheme:-
          “SUPPLEMENTARY NUTRITION PROGRAMME         OF   THE
          GOVERNMENT UNDER THE ICDS SCHEME
                                  25

3.   That    the   Anganwadi    Services   Scheme
(earlier known as Integrated Child Development
Services (hereinafter referred to as “ICDS”)
aims at holistic development of Children (0-6
years)   and   Pregnant   Women   and   Lactating
Mothers. It comprises of integrated services
including        supplementary         nutrition,
immunization,    health    check-ups,    referral
services, pre-school non-formal-education, and
Health & Nutrition Education.
4.   That   ICDS   is   a   Centrally   Sponsored
Scheme, wherein the Central Government in the
Ministry of Women and Child Development is
responsible for programme planning and its
share of operating costs and the State
Governments/UT Administrations are responsible
for     day-to-day     program     implementation
including Supplementary Nutrition Programme
and management thereof.
5. That the Government of India provides its
share of funds for administrative, operative
and implementation costs as per cost sharing
norms. For ICDS (General), the Central share
is 90% for North-Eastern (NE) States and
Himalayan States and 60% for other States and
UTs with the legislature and 100% for UTs
without    the    legislature.    It    is   most
respectfully submitted that for Supplementary
Nutrition, Government of India bears the
expenditure on 50:50 basis for all States and
UTs with the legislature and at 90:10 ratio
for NE and the Himalayan States. For UTs
without a legislature, the entire expenditure
is borne by Central Government.
6. That the Supplementary Nutrition Programme
(SNP) supplied under ICDS Scheme is of two
types for different beneficiaries i.e.:
a. Take Home Ration (THR) for Pregnant Women,
Lactating Mothers, and Children in the age
group of 6 months to 3 years; and
b. Hot Cooked Meal (HCM) for children in the
age group of 3-6 years.”
7. That it is necessary to clarify that
Supplementary Nutrition is not a full meal as
in the case of Mid-Day Meal. SN is the
difference in nutritional value of Recommended
Dietary Allowance and Average Daily Intake to
cover up the deficiency.
                       26

          8. That the HCM is served at the Anganwadi
          Centre (AWC) itself and is mostly prepared at
          the AWCs. Take Home Ration is served to the
          beneficiaries      once/twice     in   a    month    as
          regulated by the concerned State Government/UT
          Administration and is to be prepared as per
          the guidelines, instructions or orders issued
          by the Central Government from time to time
          and the orders or guidelines issued by the
          Supreme Court or High Courts, to conform to
          the quality, hygiene and quantity standards.
          9.   That    the    Central     Government    provides
          parameters of maintaining standard and quality
          of food (which include calorie, protein, food
          safety hygiene, and contamination).
          10. That Food & Nutrition Board functioning
          under    the    Ministry     of   Women    and   Child
          Development carries out periodic checks to
          ensure that prescribed standards are adhered
          to   and    quality     and    nutritive    value    of
          Supplementary Nutrition is maintained. Theré
          is four regional laboratories under FNB for
          carrying out the tests so as to ensure food
          safety supplied by the State Governments.
          There are 43 field units under FNB spread
          across the country to collect the sample and
          get food tested to ensure food quality.
          11. That the Government of India issued the
          detailed     Operational      Guidelines    for   Food
          Safety and Hygiene in ICDS on 24.12.2013, copy
          whereof is enclosed herewith as Annexure R-1.
          These guidelines provide the broad contours of
          Food Safety measures in ICDS and include
          separate sections on general principles for
          maintenance      of    cleanliness,      hygiene     at
          Anganwadi centers and manufacturing units,
          precautionary measures, handling emergencies
          and cases of chemical poisoning and easy to
          follow simple protocols for food handling at
          different stages."
33. It has also been pointed out in the affidavit on behalf of
the  Government  of   India    dated   06.08.2018   that   the  guideline
prescribes the following measures for maintaining hygiene and
                                    27

sanitation at the Anganwadi centers and ensuring food safety:-
          a) Food Handling and Safety Measures for Hot
          Cooked meal and Morning Snack which includes
          transportation,    procurement,    storage,   food
          safety, safety while cooking and serving,
          disposal    of    leftover,     monitoring,    and
          supervision, quality assurance, etc.
          b) Guidelines for Food Safety and Hygiene in
          Take Home Ration which includes location,
          surrounding and building, drainage and waste
          disposal, washing facilities, storage, etc.
          c) Food Handling and Safety Measures for THR
          which    includes     procurement,     processing,
          packaging, quality assurance.
          d) To prevent contamination of Supplementary
          Nutrition, all equipment and utensils must be
          cleaned and disinfected.
          e) Adequate precautions must be taken to
          prevent the food item from being contaminated
          during cleaning or disinfecting of rooms,
          equipment or utensil, by use of water,
          detergents or disinfectants.
          f) Floors and drains must not be cleaned
          whilst the food is being prepared.
          g)   Detergents   and    disinfectants   must   be
          suitable for the purpose and any residues of
          these agents on a surface which may come in
          contact with food item must be removed by
          thorough rinsing with potable water before the
          area or equipment is used again.
          h) Immediately at the end of the day's work,
          floors (including drains), structures and
          walls   of   food    handling    areas   must   be
          thoroughly cleaned.
          i) Toilets must be kept clean and tidy at all
          times.
          j) Provision of safe disposal of stool and
          wastes must be made.
          k) Nearby outside area/surroundings must also
          be kept clean and tidy.
          l) Regular pest control measures should be
          adopted at the Anganwadi centers. However,
          before pesticides are applied, care must be
          taken to protect people, food, equipment and
          utensils from contamination.
          m) Substances which could contaminate food
                                  28

          must not be used or stored in food handling
          areas
          n) The personal hygiene standard of food
          handlers at kitchen, AWW/AWH includes a high
          standard of personal cleanliness, freedom from
          infectious diseases and a sufficient standard
          of hygiene.
          o) The state may ensure that AWWs/AWHs are in
          good health and all staff enrolled for the
          supply of food items must be adequately
          trained in good hygiene practices. p) Hands
          must always be washed before entering the
          foods handling area immediately after using
          the     toilet,    after     handling    contaminated
          material and whenever necessary.
34.  It  has  also    been  pointed    out   by  the  Secretary   in  the
affidavit   dated     06.08.2018    that    Supplementary    Nutritional
Programme   (for    short    ‘SNP')    is   implemented,    managed   and
controlled   by    the   respective    States/UTs,    it  is   at   their
discretion to decide items of food to be supplied under the
supplementary    nutrition    as  the   local   food   habits,   regional
preferences and availability of food in the local area vary from
place to place.     However, this is to be done by keeping in view
the  overall    guidelines,    nutritional     norms  and   food   safety
standards, a copy of some of the suggestive recipes prepared by
the National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, has been placed
on record as Annexure R-2.
35. The various recipes which have been prescribed were Cereal-
Pulse Mix, Regina, Rice Flakes-Groundnut Barfi, Wheat-Groundnut
Barfi, Bajra and Pulse/Legume Mix, Sweet Ready Mix, Paushtik
                                    29

panjeeri,   Besan-Suji   Ladus,  Paushtik  Barfi,  Paushtik    mathri,
Amylase Rice Energy Food, Wheat Soya Laddu, Nutro Soya Corn
Chikkis, as specified in Annexure R2.
36.  However, it would be for the concerned State or the Union
Territory to take an action on the recipes they want as per
local requirement, the aforesaid recipe is only suggestive, as
specified   in   the  affidavit  of   06.08.2018  of  the   Secretary
Government of India of the concerned department itself.
37. It has also been pointed out that under THR normally dry
mixtures are supplied such as Daliya, Khichdi etc.           However,
some other States are giving in some other forms.        Most of the
items do not require a sophisticated technique of manufacturing
process   and  the   self-help   groups/Mahila   Mandals   are   fully
equipped and competent to supply the said food.        The concerned
Authorities of the State Government are expected to undertake
all  such   steps   which  becomes   necessary  that  the   self-help
groups/Mahila Mandals and such other similar organizations are
allowed to meaningfully participate in providing HCM and THR,
all over the country and terms and conditions of the tenders
etc.,  should   not  be  framed  in  such  a  manner  that  they   get
excluded from participating itself in such tenders.      It has also
been pointed out that with respect to management, preparation,
supply, monitoring and service of the supplementary nutrition
                                  30

under the Integrated Child Development, Scheme the policy of the
Central Government is guided by the provisions contained in the
Office Memorandum dated 24.02.2009 of the Ministry concerned and
the decision of this Court in PUCL v. Union of India dated
22.04.2009 in W.P.(C) No.196/2001 to follow and implement the
guidelines.
38.  Sections  4,  5 and  6  of  the Act  of  2013 are extracted
hereunder:-
          “4. Nutritional support to pregnant women and
          lactating mothers.- Subject to such schemes as
          may be framed by the Central Government, every
          pregnant woman and lactating mother shall be
          entitled to—
             (a) meal, free of charge, during pregnancy
          and six months after the childbirth, through
          the local Anganwadi, so as to meet the
          nutritional standards specified in Schedule
          II; and
              (b) maternity benefit of not less than
          rupees six thousand, in such installments as
          may be prescribed by the Central Government:
               Provided that all pregnant women and
          lactating mothers in regular employment with
          the Central Government or State Governments or
          Public Sector Undertakings or those who are in
          receipt of similar benefits under any law for
          the time being in force shall not be entitled
          to benefits specified in clause (b).
          5. Nutritional support to children.- (1)
          Subject to the provisions contained in clause
          (b), every child up to the age of fourteen
          years shall have the following entitlements
          for his nutritional needs, namely:—
            (a) in the case of children in the age group
          of six months to six years, age appropriate
          meal, free of charge, through the local
                                31

          Anganwadi so as to meet the nutritional
          standards specified in Schedule II:
             Provided that for children below the age of
          six months, exclusive breastfeeding shall be
          promoted;
                (b) in the case of children, up to class
          VIII or within the age group of six to
          fourteen years, whichever is applicable, one
          mid-day meal, free of charge, everyday, except
          on school holidays, in all schools run by
          local bodies, Government and Government aided
          schools, so as to meet the nutritional
          standards specified in Schedule II.
          (2) Every school, referred to in clause (b) of
          sub-section (1), and Anganwadi shall have
          facilities for cooking meals, drinking water
          and sanitation:
                Provided that in urban areas facilities
          of centralised kitchens for cooking meals may
          be used, wherever required, as per the
          guidelines issued by the Central Government.
          6.    Prevention   and    management    of   child
          malnutrition.- The State Government shall,
          through the local Anganwadi, identify and
          provide meals, free of charge, to children who
          suffer from malnutrition, so as to meet the
          nutritional standards; specified in Schedule
          II."
39.  Calorie   requirement  has  also   been   pointed  out   in  the
affidavit dated 06.08.2018 in the tabular form:
S. No.  Category         Type of meal      Calories       Protein
                                           (Kcal)         (g)
1.      Children         Take Home Ration 500             12-15
        (6 months to 3
        years)
2.      Children         Morning Snacks    500            12-15
        (3 to 6 years) and Hot Cooked
                         Meal
3.      Children         Take Home Ration 800             20-25
        (6 months to 6
        years) who are
                                 32

         malnourished
4.       Pregnant women Take Home Ration 600              18-20
         and Lactating
         Mothers
40. It has also been pointed out that before enactment of the
Act of 2013, the National Food Security Ordinance was issued on
5.7.2013.    Note 1 below Schedule II of the said Ordinance states
"Energy   Dense   Food  fortified  with  micronutrients   as  per  50
percent    of   Recommended   Dietary   Allowance".    However,   the
Parliament while discussing and passing the Act of 2013 deleted
the above provision thereby making the preparation of THR in the
simplest way.
41.  In exercise of powers, under Section 39 of the Act of 2013,
the Central Government has framed the Rules after consultation
with the State Government and Union Territories, experts and the
civil society notified the Rules relating to Sections 4, 5 & 6
of the Act of 2013 called as Supplementary Nutritional (under
ICDS) Rules, 2015 on 08.06.2015, which have been amended on
20.02.2017.
42.  Rule   7  of  the  modified  Rules is  relevant,   the  same  is
extracted hereunder:-
           “7. Preparation of meal and maintenance of its
           standard and quality.-
           (1)    The  procurement   of   food   items   and
           preparation of meals by the State Governments
           and the Union Territory Administrations shall
                                  33

be   in   accordance     with    the   guidelines,
instructions or orders issued by the Central
Government from time to time in conformity
with various directions issued by Supreme
Court of India, the provisions of Schedule II
to the Act and any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) The State Governments and the Union
territory Administrations, with the support of
Food and Nutrition Board (hereinafter referred
to as the Board), shall ensure the quality of
supplementary nutrition with reference to the
norms of food safety, as well as food
composition.
(3) The Supplementary Nutrition shall conform
to   the   standards     laid   down   under   the
provisions of the Food Safety and Standards
Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) to ensure consistent
quality    and     nutritive     value   of    the
intervention per serving and it shall also be
ensured that the meal is prepared in the
kitchen having adequate sanitation and safe
drinking    water      to     maintain    hygienic
conditions.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the
concerned District Programme Officer and the
Child Development Project Officer under the
Anganwadi      Services      (Integrated     Child
Development Services) to ensure the quality of
supplementary nutrition with reference to the
norms of food safety, as well as food
composition.
(5) The Board, in collaboration with the State
Governments     and     the     Union    territory
Administrations, shall carry out periodic
checks and test the meal or get it tested
through    the     Government     Food    Research
Laboratories accredited or recognized by any
law for the time being in force, so as to
ensure   that    the    meal    meets   with   the
nutritional standards and quality specified in
Schedule II of the Act.
(6) Similarly, the officers, as authorized by
the State Governments or the Union territory
Administrations, shall also conduct surprise
checks and draw samples and get them tested
through the above laboratories to ensure
quality and nutrient value of the meal.
                        34

          (7) The food should be tasted by the Anganwadi
          worker or helper before it is served to the
          beneficiaries at Anganwadi center."
43.  Rule 9 of the modified Rules is also relevant, the same is
also extracted hereunder:-
          9.   Responsibility    to   monitor    and   review
          arrangement for supplementary nutrition.- The
          respective    State     Governments    and    Union
          Territory Administrations, and the Monitoring
          and Review Committees at the National, State,
          District,    Block     and    Anganwadi    levels,
          constituted by the Central Government in the
          Ministry of Women and Child Development from
          time to time, shall be responsible to monitor
          and review the status of arrangement for
          Supplementary Nutrition, convergence with the
          line    departments    to    ensure    water    and
          sanitation      facilities,     ensure     regular
          functioning    of   Anganwadi    centres,    ensure
          regular supply of Supplementary Nutrition at
          Anganwadi centres without disruptions and use
          of iodised or iron-fortified iodised salts,
          ensure monitoring and supervision visits by
          officials at different levels as per norms,
          method of delivery of supplementary food at
          Anganwadi centres, engagement of Self Help
          Groups,    ensure    supply    and    quality    of
          Supplementary Nutrition through them and all
          other issues relating to the above, as per
          their roles defined in the guidelines issued
          by the Central Government in the Ministry of
          Women and Child Development from time to time:
             Provided that till the engagement of Self
          Help Groups, the supply of Supplementary
          Nutrition shall be ensured from such other
          sources or approved agencies in terms of the
          existing rules and regulations notified by the
          Central Government and the State Governments
          or Union Territory Administrations.
44. It has been also pointed out in the affidavit filed by the
                                  35

Union of India that the Government of India has launched the
POSHAN    Abhiyaan   on    08.03.2018    with     the    objective    to
comprehensively    address   the    problem    of    stunting,    under-
nutrition, low birth weight, and anemia in a time-bound manner
children and Pregnant & Lactating Mother as per the following
targets:-
    S.     Objective                                  Target
    No.
    1      Prevent and reduce Stunting in             By 2% p.a.
           children (0-6 years)
    2      Prevent and reduce under-nutrition         By 2% p.a.
           (underweight prevalence) in children
           (0-6 years)
    3      Reduce the prevalence of anemia among By 3% p.a.
           young Children (6-59 months), Women
           and Adolescent Girls in the age group
           of 15-49 years
    4      Reduce Low Birth Weight (LBW)              By 2% p.a.
45.  Further   instructions  have   been  issued    vide  letter   dated
10.07.2017 with respect to meet the requirement of fortification
of food with micro-nutrient, the Union of India has mandated the
use of double fortified salt (Iodine & Iron) and fortified oil
(Vitamin A & D) and fortified Wheat flour (Iron, Folic Acid and
Vitamin B-12) for preparation of SNP under the ICDS. In POSHAN
Abhiyaan,   a National  Council   on   India’s   Nutrition    Challenges
which  is  an  apex  body  to  give   policy  direction,     review  and
effective coordination and convergence between Ministries having
                                  36

a sectoral responsibility was constituted on 03.01.2018 with the
following Chairperson/Members:-
a. Vice Chairman, NITI Aayog                          …
Chairperson
b. Minister, Women & Child Development                … Member
c. Minister, Health & Family Welfare                  … Member
d. Minister, Drinking Water & Sanitation              … Member
e. Minister, Rural Development                        … Member
f. Minister, Tribal Affairs                           … Member
g. Minister, Panchayati Raj                           … Member
h. Minister, Consumer Affair & Food                   … Member
i. Minister of State of, Finance                      … Member
j. Minister of State of, Human Resource Development   … Member
k. Minister of State Urban Development                … Member
l. Minister of State Information & Broadcasting       … Member
m. Minister of State Environment, Forest & Climate Change  …
Member
n. State Chief Ministers of 5 States                       …
Member
(Bihar, UP, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu &
Chhattisgarh on rotation for 2 years)
o. Member, Health & Nutrition, NITI Aayog                  …
Member
p. Secretary, Health Research & DG, ICMR                   …
Member
q. Secretary, MWCD                               … Member-
Secretary
                                37

Secretaries of the line Ministries as Special Invitees. DCs/DMs
from 10 districts with the highest prevalence of child stunting
(to be co-opted)
46.  The terms of reference of the above Council are as follows:-
          “a. Provide policy directions to             address
          India’s      nutritional      challenges     through
          coordinated inter-sectoral action.
          b.    Review programmes      for   nutrition   on  a
          quarterly basis.”
47.  The National Council of India, pursuant to the meeting held
on  18.04.2018   discussed   the   issue   of  Hot  Cooked   meals for
children in the age group of 3 years to 6 years and Take Home
Ration (THR) for the children in the age group of 6 months to 3
years and Pregnant Women and Lactating Mother as decided by the
State Government in conformity with the the Act of 2013 and the
Supplementary Nutrition (Under the Integrated Child Development
Services Scheme) Rules, 2015, which have been amended in 2017.
Minutes  have  been   placed  on   record   as  Annexure  R-10  to the
affidavit.
48.  The   issues   discussed    and   the   directions   thereon  are
contained in paragraph 28 of the Minutes of Meeting, which are
extracted hereunder:-
          “28. The Issue of Hot Cooked meals and THR at
          Aanganwadi was discussed and deliberated upon.
          Secretary, MWCD brought out that help of SHGs
          and mothers (whose children were in the
                                   38

          Aanganwadi) was being sought in preparing the
          meals. 17 States were following this approach
          and the menu had been fixed based on the
          demographic     profile     as    well    as    the
          availability of local resources. The point was
          also stressed upon by Hon'ble Minister of
          CAF&PD. It was agreed that the mothers should
          be involved for the preparation of the meals
          to    ensure    quality     and    encourage    Jan
          bhagidari."
49. Ultimately, it has been pointed out in the affidavit on
behalf of the Government of India, Ministry of Women and Child
Welfare that the policy of the Government of India vis-a-vis the
Supplementary   Nutrition   under  the   ICDS  Scheme  based  on  the
Nutritional Norms on 24.02.09 read with the Act of 2013 and
Supplementary Nutrition (Under the Integrated Child Development
Services Scheme) Rules, 2015, which have been amended in 2017
and the guidelines issued by the Union of India.        The following
points broadly emerge:-
          “a. Preparation of Hot Cooked Meal at the AWC
          itself where there should be the provision of
          the kitchen, water, and sanitation as per the
          provisions of Section 5(1) of the NFSA;
          b.   Supply of Take Home Ration meant for
          children 6 months - 3 years age and P&LM from
          the Self Help Groups as per Schedule-II of
          NFSA, 2013 and Rule-9 of the SNP Rules, 2017;
          C.   Maintenance of quality, cleanliness, and
          hygiene as per the provisions of Section-7 of
          SNP Rules, 2017 and the Government of India
          guidelines issued in July 2013;
          d.   Protein and the calorific requirement to
          be met as per the provisions of Schedule-II of
          NFSA, 2013;
          e.   Fortification of food ingredients of SNP
          under    ICDS   as   per   MWCD's    letter  dated
                                  39

          10.07.2017;
          f.    States/UTs to decide recipes keeping in
          view the nutritional requirement prescribed
          food habits and availability of local food.”
50.  When   we   consider  the  NIT  in   question   issued  by   the
Government of Maharashtra we are of the considered opinion that
it was not in the spirit of the orders passed by this Court as
the imposition of the condition of 25% of turnover during any
one of the last three financial years in the various districts
by insisting for the performance for supplying at least annual
average  value   equal  to  25% of  required   turnover  of  applied
sectors. As to the formation of     applied sectors it is apparent
from the tender notice that each of the districts has been taken
as a unit and yearly expenditure, for example, Ahmednagar is
Rs.31,78,87,200/- yearly, 25% would come to Rs.7,94,71,800/- and
so on district-wise which ranges from Rs. 1 Crore to more than
Rs.10 Crores in various districts.      Thus, we find force in the
submission that by virtue of the imposition of the aforesaid
condition only big players have been left in the field and that
is not in tune with the spirit of the Act and the orders passed
by this Court as well as the policy framed by the Government of
India,   as    projected   in   the   aforesaid    affidavit    dated
06.08.2018.    Thus, the tender conditions cannot be held to be
valid as they were arbitrarily fixed and it was fairly conceded
by Mr. Nadkarni, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing
                                 40

for the State of Maharashtra as well as by Mr. Vijay Thora,
learned senior counsel, appearing for the State of Maharashtra
that they have to abide by the conditions as imposed by the
Union of India and the policy framed by the Union of India as
projected in the affidavit dated 06.08.2018.
51. Tender notice which has been issued also falls down, we
direct the tenders to be invited afresh, within four weeks,
strictly  as   per   the   policy  and   observations  made  in   this
judgment.
52.  It  has  also   been   found  that   fixing  of unit  area  as  a
district several players have been effectively ousted from the
field, it would be appropriate to form groups of the smaller
area such as at panchayat or group of panchayats etc., within
the District so that the real intention behind the policy is
fulfilled in its real sense and supply should be decentralized
as   much    as    possible     as    it   is    not  for   the    big
players/industrialists in the field to cater to the needs of the
Scheme as they have usurped in past.         It is open to the State
Government   to   make    alternative    arrangement  and   they   are
restrained from continuing the existing system of supply in the
interregnum period.    This decision as to alternative arrangement
should be taken within ten days.
                                   41

53.  The appeals and writ petition are, accordingly, disposed of.
54.  The applications for impleadment/intervention are allowed to
the extent of intervention and were heard and disposed of.
55.  Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
                                      .....................J.
                                                [ARUN MISHRA]
                                      .....................J.
                                               [DEEPAK GUPTA]
NEW DELHI;
FEBRUARY 26, 2019.
                                42


