                                                                                REPORTABLE
                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.       5302 OF 2019
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 23592 OF 2014)
                       THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                   …..       APPELLANT(S)
                       AND OTHERS
                                               VERSUS
                       LAFARGE DEALERS ASSOCIATION
                       AND OTHERS                                    …..     RESPONDENT(S)
                                                         WITH
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 460 OF 2005
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 461 OF 2005
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7073 OF 2005
                                           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2343 OF 2007
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.        5303       OF 2019
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO.10520 OF 2013)
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.        5304       OF 2019
                           (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1334 OF 2014)
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.        5305       OF 2019
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 10165 OF 2014)
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.        5306       OF 2019
                          (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 23297 OF 2014)
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by R
NATARAJAN
                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.        5308       OF 2019
Date: 2019.07.09
17:33:44 IST
Reason:
                           (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 6729 OF 2016)
                                                         AND
                       Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 1 of 38

                CIVIL APPEAL NO.         5307         OF 2019
   (ARISING OUT OF SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 16550 OF 2016)
                           JUDGMENT
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
              Leave granted in all the special leave petitions.
2.     This judgment would dispose of the afore-captioned appeals
       which relate to the legal effect of bifurcation of the State of
       Madhya Pradesh into the successor State of Madhya Pradesh and
       the State of Chhattisgarh by the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation
       Act, 2000 (“Reorganisation Act”, for short) on exemption or benefit
       of deferment of sales tax granted under the Madhya Pradesh
       Commercial Tax Act, 1994 read with the applicable rules. The
       question to be answered is whether the industrial unit in the
       reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh and under the new State of
       Chhattisgarh would continue to avail the benefit of such exemption
       or deferment even after the bifurcation in both the states,
       irrespective of the location of the industrial unit which would be in
       one of the two states.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 2 of 38

3.     Civil Appeal Nos. 460, 461, 7073 of 2005 and 2343 of 2007 arise
       from the judgments of the Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh
       High Court, Jabalpur Bench, upholding judgment of the learned
       Single     Judge    dismissing     the     Writ   Petition    by    the
       manufacturer/dealer of cement inter-alia recording that on
       enforcement of the Reorganisation Act, two separate states viz.,
       the State of Madhya Pradesh and the State of Chhattisgarh had
       come into existence as postulated by the Constitution of India and
       hence, benefit of the exemption or deferment of sales tax would
       be restricted and confined to the boundaries/limits of the state in
       which the unit was located and would not operate beyond the
       limits of the state boundary. It was observed that any trade and
       movement of goods between the two states henceforth would be
       inter-state trade and not intra-state trade and the provisions of the
       Reorganisation Act had not removed and eclipsed this legal
       position but had a limited effect to treat the laws in operation in the
       State of Madhya Pradesh as equally applicable to the State of
       Chhattisgarh.
4.     The other set of appeals arising from Special Leave Petition (Civil)
       Nos. 10520 of 2013, 1334, 10165, 23297 of 2014, 6729 and
       16550 of 2016 have been preferred by the State of Madhya
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 3 of 38

        Pradesh and the State of Chhattisgarh impugning decisions of the
        High Court of Madhya Pradesh, which have in view of the
        pronouncement of this Court in Commissioner of Commercial
        Taxes, Ranchi and Another v. Swarn Rekha Cokes and Coals
        Pvt. Ltd. and Others1 taken a contrary view and held that
        notwithstanding the creation of the two states, exemption or
        deferment of tax notifications issued before the bifurcation would
        continue to apply in the new state and that for the purpose of
        sales tax, the two states were deemed to be one because of the
        legal fiction envisaged vide Sections 78 and 79 of the
        Reorganisation Act.
5.      At this stage, it would be appropriate to mention that a Division
        Bench of this Court (Ashok Bhan and V.S. Sirpurkar, JJ.) vide
        order dated 12th September, 2007 had observed that certain facts
        and provisions of law which were not taken note of in Swarn
        Rekha’s case (supra), had come to light and therefore they had
        thought it appropriate to refer the appeals to a larger Bench for
        consideration.
6.      Before we deal with the rival contentions, it would be appropriate
        to notice and take on record the undisputed position. State of
1
  (2004) 6 SCC 689
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 4 of 38

       Madhya Pradesh in exercise of powers conferred under Section
       12 of the Madhya Pradesh General Sales Tax Act, 1958 and
       Section 8(5) of the Central Sales Tax Act, 1956 (for convenience
       we would refer to the two enactments as the “Sales Tax Act” for
       short), with a view to attract investors and increase industrial
       output in the State, had vide notification dated 19 th February, 1991
       formulated a policy for grant of sales tax exemption to industrial
       units having fixed assets above Rs. 100 crores. Quantum of
       exemption from tax was to be equal to the capital investment in
       the fixed assets and the duration or period was 11 years from the
       date of commencement of commercial production or the date on
       which quantum of exempted tax reached the limit equivalent to the
       value of capital investment in the fixed assets. It is an undisputed
       position that private parties/assessee to the present appeals being
       entitled to the benefit/exemption were issued a certificate of
       eligibility for exemption from tax by the Directorate of Industries in
       the unified State of Madhya Pradesh.
7.     The industrial units belonging to the private parties/assessee
       situated in the unified State of Madhya Pradesh after the
       bifurcation in terms of the Reorganisation Act would necessarily
       fall in the area/boundary forming a part either of the reorganised
       State of Madhya Pradesh or the new State of Chhattisgarh. As
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 5 of 38

       noticed above, the precise issue before us is whether these
       industrial units, which were granted exemption and were after the
       bifurcation located in the reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh or
       the new State of Chhattisgarh, would continue to enjoy the benefit
       of exemption/deferment of tax in the other state while conducting
       inter-state transaction(s) from the state they are located to the
       new State of Chhattisgarh or the reorganised State of Madhya
       Pradesh, as the case may be.
8.     Before we dwell into the respective contentions and elaborate our
       reasons, it would be appropriate to reproduce relevant provisions
       of the Reorganisation Act, viz. Sections 2(e), (f), (j) and (k),
       Sections 3, 4 and 5 and Sections 78, 79, 80, 85 and 86(1) which
       are as under:
                “Section 2 (e), (f), (j) and (k) of the Reorganisation
                Act
                                           Part I
                                     PRELIMINARY
                2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context
                otherwise requires, —
                                 xx        xx          xx
                (e) “existing State of Madhya Pradesh” means the
                State of Madhya Pradesh as existing immediately
                before the appointed day;
                (f) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation,
                order, bye-law, rule, scheme, notification or other
                instrument having, immediately before the appointed
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 6 of 38

              day, the force of law in the whole or in any part of the
              existing State of Madhya Pradesh;
                               xx         xx           xx
              (j) “successor State”, in relation to the existing State of
              Madhya Pradesh, means the State of Madhya Pradesh
              or Chhattisgarh;
              (k) “transferred territory” means the territory which on
              the appointed day is transferred from the existing State
              of Madhya Pradesh to the State of Chhattisgarh;
              Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Reorganisation Act
                                         Part II
                  REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF MADHYA
                                      PRADESH
              3. Formation of Chhattisgarh State.— On and from
              the appointed day, there shall be formed a new State to
              be known as the State of Chhattisgarh comprising the
              following territories of the existing State of Madhya
              Pradesh, namely:—
              Bastar, Bilaspur, Dantewada, Dhamtari, Durg, Janjgir-
              Champa, Jashpur, Kanker, Kawardha, Korba, Koriya,
              Mahasamund, Raigarh, Raipur, Rajnandgaon and
              Surguja districts,
              and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form
              part of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh.
              4. State of Madhya Pradesh and territorial divisions
              thereof.— On and from the appointed day, the State of
              Madhya Pradesh shall comprise the territories of the
              existing State of Madhya Pradesh other than those
              specified in section 3.
              5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the
              Constitution.— On and from the appointed day, in the
              First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “I.
              THE STATES”, —
              (a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the
              State of Madhya Pradesh, after the words, brackets
              and figures, “the Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 7 of 38

              (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959 (47 of 1959)”, the
              following shall be added, namely: —
              “but excluding the territories specified in section 3 of
              the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.”;
              (b) after entry 25, the following entry shall be inserted,
              namely: —
              “26. Chhattisgarh: The territories specified in section 3
              of the Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.”
              Sections 78, 79, 80, 85 & 86 of the Reorganisation
              Act
                                         PART X
                    LEGAL AND MISCALLANEOUS PROVISIONS
              78. Territorial extent of laws.— The provisions of Part
              II of this Act shall not be deemed to have effected any
              change in the territories to which any law in force
              immediately before the appointed day extends or
              applies, and territorial references in any such law to the
              State of Madhya Pradesh shall, until otherwise
              provided by a competent Legislature or other
              competent authority be construed as meaning the
              territories within the existing State of Madhya Pradesh
              before the appointed day.
              79. Power to adapt laws.— For the purpose of
              facilitating the application in relation to the State of
              Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh of any law made
              before the appointed day, the appropriate Government
              may, before the expiration of two years from that day,
              by order, make such adaptations and modifications of
              the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as
              may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every
              such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations
              and modifications so made until altered, repealed or
              amended by a competent legislature or other
              competent authority.
              Explanation. — In this Section, the expression
              “appropriate Government” means as respects any law
              relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the
              Central Government, and as respects any other law in
              its application to a State, the State Government.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 8 of 38

                80. Power to construe laws.— Notwithstanding that
                no provision or insufficient provision has been made
                under section 79 for the adaptation of a law made
                before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or
                authority, required or empowered to enforce such law
                may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in
                relation to the State of Madhya Pradesh or
                Chhattisgarh, construe the law in such manner, without
                affecting the substance, as may be necessary or
                proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal
                or authority.
                85. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with
                other laws.— The provision of this Act shall have
                effect notwithstanding anything in consistent therewith
                contained in any other law.
                86. Power to remove difficulties.— (1) If any difficulty
                arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
                President may, by order, do anything not in consistent
                with such provisions which appears to him to be
                necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the
                difficulty:
                Provided that no such order shall be made after the
                expiry of a period of three years from the appointed
                day.”
   9. The Reorganisation Act, which was to commence from the
       appointed day, was notified by the Central Government vide
       Notification No. S.O. 827(E), dated 14 th September, 2000
       published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part II sec.3(ii)
       with 1st November, 2000 as the appointed date. Accordingly, on 1 st
       November, 2000 the erstwhile State of Madhya Pradesh was
       bifurcated and divided into the reorganised State of Madhya
       Pradesh and the new State of Chhattisgarh. The political map of
       the country underwent a change. The reorganised State of
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors. Page 9 of 38

       Madhya Pradesh and the new State of Chhattisgarh were
       described as “successor State” vide clause (j) to Section 2 of the
       Reorganisation Act. The transferred territories, which were to form
       part of the State of Chhattisgarh, were demarcated and specified
       in Section 3 of the Reorganisation Act. As per Section 4, the
       reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh was to comprise of the
       existing territories other than those specified in Section 3 i.e., the
       territories which shall now form part of the State of Chhattisgarh.
       The expression “law” as defined in clause (f) to Section 2 of the
       Reorganisation Act included any enactment, ordinance, regulation,
       order, notification, etc., in force immediately before the appointed
       day in the whole or any part of the erstwhile or unified State of
       Madhya Pradesh. The law by definition would include delegated
       legislation and also the exemption notification issued under the
       Sales Tax Act, and the certificate of eligibility for exemption from
       tax issued under the Sales Tax Act.
10.    Section 5 of the Reorganisation Act states that on and from the
       appointed day, in the First Schedule to the Constitution under the
       heading “THE STATES” after entry 25, entry 26 shall be inserted
       by mentioning the State of Chhattisgarh which shall comprise of
       the territories specified in Section 3 of the Reorganisation Act.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 10 of
38

       Similarly, in relation to and in the case of Madhya Pradesh,
       necessary changes will be made in the territories forming part of
       the State by excluding the territories specified in Section 3 of the
       Reorganisation Act.
11.    Before interpreting Sections 78 and 79 of the Reorganisation Act
       which are in pari materia to Sections 84 and 85 of the Bihar
       Reorganisation Act, 2000, we would like to reproduce paragraphs
       26, 27, 28, 29 and 30 of Swarn Rekha (supra), which read as
       under:
                “26. The question then arises, as to what is the true
                meaning and import of Sections 84 and 85 of the Act?
                27. We have earlier reproduced Sections 84 and 85 of
                the Act. As earlier noticed, Sections 3 to 6 which form
                part of Part II of the Act provide for the formation of
                new States to be known as the State of Jharkhand and
                the State of Bihar. The territories specified in Section 3
                constitute the new State of Jharkhand and the
                remaining territories fall within the territory of the State
                of Bihar. However, Section 84 in express terms,
                provides that the provisions of Part II shall not be
                deemed to have effected any change in the territories
                to which any law in force immediately before the
                appointed day extended or applied and the territorial
                references in any such law to the State of Bihar shall,
                until otherwise provided by a competent legislature or
                other competent authority, be construed as meaning
                the territories within the existing State of Bihar before
                the appointed day. Section 85 provides that for the
                purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the
                State of Bihar or Jharkhand of any law made before the
                appointed day, the appropriate Government may,
                before the expiration of two years from that day, by
                order, make such adaptations and modifications of the
                law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 11 of
38

              be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such
              law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and
              modifications so made until altered, repealed or
              amended by a competent legislature or other
              competent authority. The language in these sections is
              clear and unambiguous. These sections provide that
              the laws which were applicable to the undivided State
              of Bihar would continue to apply to the new States
              created by the Act. The laws that operated continue to
              operate notwithstanding the bifurcation of the erstwhile
              State of Bihar and creation of the new State of
              Jharkhand. They continue in force until and unless
              altered, repealed or amended. It is not disputed before
              us and indeed it cannot be disputed in view of the wide
              definition given to “law” in Section 2(f) of the Act that
              the notification issued under Section 7(3)(b) of the
              Bihar Finance Act, 1981 is law within the meaning of
              Sections 84 and 85 of the Act. Thus, the notification
              published in the Bihar Gazette on 22-12-1995 bearing
              SO No. 478 continues to operate in the State of
              Jharkhand till such time as it is altered, repealed or
              amended. By virtue of Section 84, the territorial
              references in any such law (which includes the
              notification in question), to the State of Bihar shall be
              construed as meaning the territories within the existing
              State of Bihar before the appointed day, until otherwise
              provided by a competent legislature or other competent
              authority. A conjoint reading of both these provisions
              makes it abundantly clear that the territorial references
              in any law in force immediately before the appointed
              day must be construed as meaning the territories within
              the existing State of Bihar before the appointed day. To
              facilitate their application in respect of the State of
              Bihar or Jharkhand, the appropriate Government may,
              before the expiration of two years from that day, by
              order, make such adaptations and modifications of the
              law as it may consider necessary or expedient by way
              of repeal or amendment. Till such law is so repealed or
              amended in accordance with law, it shall have effect.
              After their amendment or alteration, they shall have
              effect subject to the adaptations and modifications
              made. We, therefore, find no difficulty in holding that
              the notification of the Government of Bihar issued
              under Section 7(3)(b) of the Bihar Finance Act, 1981
              and published in the gazette on 22-12-1995 being SO
              No. 478 is law as defined by Section 2(f) of the Act.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 12 of
38

              The said notification holds the field and applies to all
              the territories which comprised the undivided State of
              Bihar. The States of Bihar and Jharkhand have been
              vested with power to make such adaptations and
              modifications of the law as they may consider
              necessary or expedient. This they can do by issuance
              of order before the expiration of two years from the
              appointed day. After the adaptations and modifications
              of the law, the law shall have effect as so modified or
              adapted till such time as a competent legislature or
              other competent authority further alters, repeals or
              amends such law.
              28. This is not the first time that a provision such as
              Section 84 of the Act has come up for interpretation by
              this Court. Section 88 of the Punjab Reorganisation
              Act, 1966 is also identically worded as Section 84 of
              the Act. That provision came up for consideration
              before this Court in at least three decisions which have
              been brought to our notice, namely, State of Punjab v.
              Balbir Singh, Sher Singh v. Financial Commr. of
              Planning and Dhayanand v. Union of India. In the first
              of these cases i.e. in State of Punjab v. Balbir Singh
              this Court was concerned with an administrative order
              and not a law with which we are concerned in the
              instant case. Section 88 of the Punjab Reorganisation
              Act was noticed as also the definition of law under
              Section 2(g) of that Act. Section 2(g) of that Act did not
              define law as widely as it has been defined under
              Section 2(f) of the Act. This Court agreed with the High
              Court that the impugned administrative orders in
              question were not law within the meaning of Section
              2(g) of that Act and hence, were not saved by Section
              88. However, this Court held that when there is no
              change of sovereignty and it is merely an adjustment of
              territories by reorganisation of a particular State, the
              administrative orders made by the Government of the
              erstwhile State continue to be in force and effective
              and binding on the successor States until and unless
              they are modified, changed or repudiated by the
              Governments of the successor States. This Court
              observed that no other view is possible to be taken as
              that will merely bring about chaos in the administration
              of the new States. Their Lordships found no principle in
              support of the stand that administrative orders made by
              the Government of the erstwhile State automatically
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 13 of
38

              lapsed and were rendered ineffective on the coming
              into existence of the new successor States. Their
              Lordships further distinguished a case where there was
              no change of sovereignty and there was merely an
              adjustment of territories by the reorganisation of a
              particular State, from a case of absorption of one State
              in another by accession, conquest, merger or
              integration. The same view was taken by this Court in
              the other two judgments referred to earlier. We are of
              the view that the principles laid down in Balbir Singh
              case fully apply to the facts of this case having regard
              to the identical legislative provision and, particularly so
              when the notification in question is by definition law
              and not a mere administrative order.
              29. The next question which arises is whether the
              aforesaid notification has been altered or modified by
              the State of Jharkhand. It was sought to be argued
              before us that the State of Jharkhand has announced
              its own industrial policy on 25-8-2001 and, therefore,
              the industrial policy of 1995 and the notification bearing
              SO No. 478 dated 22-12-1995 issued under Section
              7(3)(b) of the Act will have no legal force in the State of
              Jharkhand. The High Court in Swarn Rekha case has
              considered this aspect of the matter and we find
              ourselves in complete agreement with the view taken
              by the High Court. There is nothing in the industrial
              policy of 2001 which alters, amends or repudiates the
              notification dated 22-12-1995. It deals with new
              industrial units set up after 15-11-2000 and, therefore,
              whatever benefits or incentives are provided for in the
              said policy are applicable to new industrial units set up
              after 15-11-2000. In the instant case, we are
              concerned with industrial units set up before 15-11-
              2000 and which were found eligible for grant of
              exemption certificate under the industrial policy of the
              State of Bihar of the year 1995. Moreover, the industrial
              policy of the State of Jharkhand will not apply to the
              units already existing before that date. In these
              circumstances in the absence of anything in the
              Industrial Policy, 2001 of the Government of Jharkhand
              or in the notification or order issued by the Government
              of Jharkhand, Notification No. SO No. 478 dated 22-
              12-1995 must continue to operate in the State of
              Jharkhand and the appellants or respondents
              concerned, as the case may be, must be held entitled
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 14 of
38

              to the benefits and incentives envisaged by the said
              notification.
                   The submission which found favour with the High
              Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in Civil Appeal No. 3765
              of 2003 is that the statutory notification issued by the
              erstwhile State of Bihar envisaged only intra-State sale
              transactions and not inter-State sale transactions. With
              the coming into existence of two States, incentive by
              way of exemption from payment of sales tax cannot be
              claimed in respect of transactions which can now be
              categorised as inter-State sale transactions. The
              submission overlooks the provisions of Sections 84
              and 85 of the Act, which create a legal fiction. It is well
              settled that in interpreting a provision creating a legal
              fiction, the court must ascertain the purpose for which
              the fiction is created and having done so, to assume all
              those facts and consequences which are incidental or
              inevitable corollaries to the giving effect to the fiction.
              When the law requires that an imaginary state of affairs
              should be treated as real, then unless prohibited from
              doing so, one must also imagine as real the
              consequences and incidents which, if the putative state
              of affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have
              flowed from or accompanied it. As Lord Asquith in East
              End Dwellings Co. Ltd. v. Finsbury Borough Council,
              All ER at p. 589 observed that having done so, you
              must not cause or permit your imagination to boggle
              when it comes to the inevitable corollaries of that state
              of affairs. Section 84 bids us to imagine that despite
              the division of the erstwhile State of Bihar into two
              States, any law in force immediately before the
              appointed day, notwithstanding territorial references in
              them, shall, until otherwise provided by the competent
              legislature or other competent authority, be construed
              as meaning the territories within the existing State of
              Bihar before the appointed day. In simple words,
              though the law may refer to the State of Bihar, and
              though the State of Bihar has been bifurcated into two
              by creating the State of Jharkhand, the laws in force
              before the appointed day must continue to operate in
              the territories which formed the erstwhile State of Bihar.
              This, of course, is subject to amendment, alteration or
              repudiation by a legislature or other competent
              authority. The statutory notification relied upon,
              therefore, continues to operate throughout the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 15 of
38

              territories which earlier constituted the State of Bihar.
              Under Section 85, they shall continue to operate until
              repealed or amended in the manner provided. As a
              natural consequence, the entrepreneurs are entitled to
              the benefits and incentives provided in the said
              notification. Having regard to the overriding provisions
              of this Act, as envisaged under Section 91, the
              statutory notifications must prevail and the benefits
              flowing therefrom must accrue to the beneficiaries. We
              must not permit our mind to boggle by imagining that
              what was one State earlier has now become two and
              consequently what were intra-State sale transactions
              earlier are now inter-State sale transactions. If any law
              in force before the appointed day must have effect in
              the absence of its modification or repeal, the benefit
              under that law must flow notwithstanding the fact that
              in reality intra-State sale transactions may have
              become inter-State sale transactions. Law gives
              authority to the State concerned to bring about a
              change in the state of affairs, if it so considers
              necessary or expedient by modifying or amending the
              law or by altering, repealing or amending it by
              legislation. We have, therefore, no doubt that the High
              Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi was wrong in dismissing
              the writ petition on the ground that the notification of
              22-12-1995 could not apply to inter-State sale
              transactions.
              30. We have carefully considered the decisions relied
              upon by Shri Rakesh Dwivedi in Rattan Lal & Co. v.
              Assessing Authority, State of Mysore v. P.B. Hussain
              Kunhi & Co. and CST v. Minerva Minerals and we find
              that none of those decisions in any manner advances
              the case of the State. The decisions in those cases
              depended on the interpretation of the provisions of the
              Acts concerned which were not at all similar to the
              provisions with which we are concerned in the instant
              appeals. In Civil Appeal No. 2450 of 2003, the High
              Court of Patna on a similar ground has rejected the
              claim of the appellants. It noticed the earlier decision of
              the High Court, but distinguished the same on the
              ground that in the case in hand, the industrial unit was
              situated in the State of Jharkhand while the benefit was
              being claimed in the State of Bihar. In view of our
              earlier findings, this would not be a relevant
              consideration for rejecting the writ petition. Moreover, if
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 16 of
38

               this principle were to be upheld, it would result in
               arbitrary results inasmuch as the entrepreneurs whose
               industrial units operate in the State of Bihar will get the
               benefit of exemption from payment of sales tax on
               purchase of raw materials in the State of Jharkhand,
               but their counterparts in the State of Jharkhand would
               not be entitled to such benefit. We must not lose sight
               of the fact that an unforeseen event may give rise to
               unusual situations. Faced with such situations, the
               legislature has to find appropriate methods and
               solutions to deal with them. When the State of Bihar
               announced its industrial policy in the year 1995, it could
               not foresee that the State will be divided five years
               later. But when the division of the State became a
               reality, Parliament had to make appropriate provisions
               to carry on the administration in the two States. If the
               laws in force were to lapse on the day the division was
               effected, a chaotic situation would have emerged
               inasmuch as the newly created State would be
               rendered a State without laws. It is, therefore, that
               provisions like Sections 84 and 85 of the Act are
               enacted to maintain continuity, and at the same time
               authorise the States to make such modifications and
               adaptations as are considered necessary by mere
               issuance of orders within two years, and thereafter by
               legislation or exercise of power by the competent
               authority. Such provisions have necessarily to be
               incorporated in legislations relating to reorganisation of
               States. It is, therefore, appropriate that such
               legislations must be construed in the light of the
               unusual situation created by the creation of a new
               State and the object sought to be achieved.”
12.    Relying upon the aforesaid ratio and interpretation of Sections 78
       to 80, 85 and 86 of the Reorganisation Act, learned counsel for the
       private parties/assessee have submitted that the Reorganisation
       Act did not withdraw and negate the benefit of exemption which
       was already granted in respect of the entire area forming part of
       unified State of Madhya Pradesh. Provisions of the Reorganisation
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 17 of
38

       Act protect and enforce the “law” which included the exemption
       notification in force in the unified State of Madhya Pradesh on the
       appointed day. Reliance was placed on the Adaptation of Laws
       Order, 2000 Notification No. F1/17/-2000/C.Tax/V dated 30 th
       November, 2002 with effect from 1 st November, 2000, the relevant
       portion of which reads as under:
                “2. The laws, as amended from time to time, specified
                in the Schedule to this order, which are in force in the
                State of Madhya Pradesh immediately before the
                formation of the State of Chhattisgarh, are hereby
                extended to and shall be in force in the State of
                Chhattisgarh until repealed or amended. Subject to the
                modifications that in all the laws for the words “Madhya
                Pradesh” wherever they occur the word “Chhattisgarh”
                shall be substituted.
                3. Anything done or any action taken (including any
                appointment, notification, notice, order, rule, form,
                regulation, certificate or licence) in exercise of the
                powers conferred by order under the laws specified in
                the Schedule shall continue to be in force in the State
                of Chhattisgarh.”
              The Schedule to the said Notification, it was highlighted,
       included the Sales Tax Act and the rules framed thereunder.
       Accordingly, the Adaptation of Laws Order states that subject to
       the modification in the form of substitution of the word “Madhya
       Pradesh” with the word “Chhattisgarh”, “the law” would continue to
       apply and had remained in force and would be effective for the
       balance period of 11 years or till the quantum of exemption was
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 18 of
38

       reached. Further, Section 80 of the Reorganisation Act empowers
       the court, tribunal or authority to enforce “the law” for the purpose
       of facilitating its application to the reorganised State of Madhya
       Pradesh and the new State of Chhattisgarh in a manner, without
       affecting its substance, as would be necessary or proper in regard
       to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority. This prime
       objective must keep in mind by the Court while interpreting the
       provisions. Section 85 in the nature of a non-obstante or
       overriding clause mandates that the provisions of the Act would
       have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent contained in any
       other law. Therefore, the exemption notification must be
       interpreted as in force in both the States i.e. the reorganised State
       of Madhya Pradesh and the new State of Chhattisgarh as if the
       unified State of Madhya Pradesh had not been bifurcated. This
       would be the only way to reconcile Part X of the Reorganisation
       Act and give effect to the legal fiction created by Sections 78 and
       79 of the Reorganisation Act. Section 78 by incorporating a
       deeming fiction enures to the benefit given to the private
       parties/assessee was not denied and fully given effect to.
13.    The two States, on the other hand, submit that with effect from the
       appointed day the new State of Chhattisgarh had come into
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 19 of
38

       existence and hence the trade inter-se or between the territories
       now forming part of the State of Chhattisgarh and the reorganised
       State of Madhya Pradesh would be in the nature of inter-state
       sales and not intra-state sales. The Sales Tax Act as earlier
       applicable to the unified State of Madhya Pradesh would be
       applicable in the reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh and the
       new State of Chhattisgarh but within the territorial confines and
       limits of the two States. Therefore, the units situated within the
       territorial limits/boundaries of the reorganised State of Madhya
       Pradesh and the new State of Chhattisgarh would continue to
       enjoy benefit of exemption in respect of intra-state trade within the
       particular state and not in respect of inter-state trade between the
       two states. This is the exact purport and meaning behind Section
       78 and 79 of the Reorganisation Act. Reliance was placed on the
       judgment of the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court
       in Sri Peera Mohammad Mahamood Saheb v. The State of
       Andhra Pradesh2, which we would advert to at the appropriate
       stage.
14.     Having considered the contention of the parties and in the context
       of Sections 78, 79, 80, 85 and 86 of the Reorganisation Act, we
       feel that the stand taken by the State of Madhya Pradesh and the
2
  1960 (11) STC 456
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 20 of
38

       State of Chhattisgarh is correct and merits acceptance. We have
       already reproduced the aforesaid provisions and partly interpreted
       them in paragraphs 9 and 10 and would now proceed to interpret
       Sections 78 and 79 of the Reorganisation Act. Section 78 of the
       Reorganisation Act consist of two parts. The first part states that
       the provisions of the Reorganisation Act shall not be deemed to
       have affected any change in the territories to which any law in
       force immediately before the appointed date extends or applies. In
       other words, the law in force before the appointed date, which in
       the present case is 1st November, 2000, would continue to apply to
       the successor or reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh as it
       existed before bifurcation. This is natural and normal as the laws
       enacted by the legislature and the executive of the State of
       Madhya Pradesh would obviously apply to the territories forming
       part of it after its reorganisation/division. As a result of bifurcation
       some areas that were earlier part of the State of Madhya Pradesh
       would now form part of the new State of Chhattisgarh, albeit this
       would not matter and affect application of the laws as they applied
       prior to the appointed date to the territories that required a part of
       the reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh. Section 78, no doubt
       uses the word ‘deemed’ but in fact, the first part does not
       incorporate/create any deeming fiction and rather postulates and
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 21 of
38

       states the obvious. However, the second part of Section 78
       incorporates a deeming fiction when it states that territorial
       references to such law in the State of Madhya Pradesh, i.e. the
       laws enacted by the legislature and executive of the State of
       Madhya Pradesh before bifurcation, shall until otherwise provided
       by the competent legislature or other competent authority be
       construed as meaning the territories within the existing state of
       Madhya Pradesh before the appointed day. The effect, thereof, is
       that the laws enacted by the State of Madhya Pradesh before the
       reorganisation would continue to apply to the areas forming part of
       the new State of Chhattisgarh and also the reorganised State of
       Madhya Pradesh, but within their territorial confines. The
       enactments or the laws in force in the unified State of Madhya
       Pradesh would continue to apply to the two states, not as one or
       the same enactment or law, but as two separate enactments or
       laws as applicable to two different states.
15.           The deeming fiction incorporated for the purpose of second
       part of Section 78 does not postulate and state that the territories
       which were earlier part of the State of Madhya Pradesh but now
       form part of the State of Chhattisgarh would continue to remain
       part of the reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh or should be
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 22 of
38

        treated as part and parcel of the other state. This is not what is
        postulated in Section 78. Deeming fiction in terms of Section 78
        does not extend and include any such stipulation, either expressly
        or by necessary implication. Indeed, this is not even remotely
        visualised. This Court in B. S. Goraya vs. U.T. of Chandigarh 3, in
        paragraphs 6 to 8 had observed that a deeming provision is
        operative for the purposes for which it is created and the Court
        should be careful not to extend this fiction beyond the legitimate
        field and the purposes for which the legislature had adopted the
        fiction. The purpose and objective for creating fiction must be kept
        in mind. In the present enactment, the object and purpose of the
        deeming provision envisaged in Section 78 of the Reorganisation
        Act is limited and restricted to the enforcement of enactment/laws
        as they existed in the unified State of Madhya Pradesh to the new
        State of Chhattisgarh, and nothing more and beyond.
16.     Section 79 of the Reorganisation Act states that the appropriate
        Government of the reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh and the
        new State of Chhattisgarh may, before the expiration of two years
        from the appointed date, by an order, as may be necessary or
        expedient, make such adaptations or modifications in the earlier
        laws enacted in the unified State of Madhya Pradesh by way of
3
  (2007) 6 SCC 397
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 23 of
38

       repeal or amendment. Thereupon, every law shall have effect
       subject to the adaptations or modifications made, until further
       repealed, modified or amended by the competent legislature or
       other competent authority. Explanation to the said section states
       that ‘appropriate Government’ in respect of any law means the
       Central Government in respect of matters enumerated in the
       Union List and in respect of any law in its application to a state,
       the State Government.
17.    Section 80 relates to the construction or interpretation of the laws
       made by the State of Madhya Pradesh before the appointed date.
       It states that notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient
       provision has been made in terms of Section 79, the court, tribunal
       or authority interpreting such laws made by the unified State of
       Madhya Pradesh would construe the law in such a manner as to
       facilitate its application to the successor States of Madhya
       Pradesh and Chhattisgarh without effecting the substance. In
       other words, the court, tribunal or authority while interpreting the
       laws would go by the substance and with the objective and
       purpose of facilitating the application of laws in relation to the
       successor     States   of  Madhya    Pradesh    and    Chhattisgarh,
       notwithstanding the fact that the legislature or the competent
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 24 of
38

       authority in relation to the laws applicable to the States of Madhya
       Pradesh and Chhattisgarh have not passed any law before or
       within the expiration period of two years from the appointed date.
18.    Section 85 of the Reorganisation Act states that the provisions of
       the said enactment shall have effect notwithstanding anything
       inconsistent contained in any other law. Therefore, the provisions
       of the Reorganisation Act have been given primacy over any other
       law. However, this primacy is not meant to denude and over-ride
       the legal effect envisaged by the Constitution consequent to the
       creation of the successor State of Madhya Pradesh and the State
       of   Chhattisgarh     which    would    henceforth   have    separate
       government(s) comprising of different legislature and executive.
       On and from the appointed date of 1 st November,2000 any trade
       between the State of Chhattisgarh and the State of Madhya
       Pradesh and vice-versa would be inter-state trade and not intra-
       state trade. The deeming fiction and the provisions of the
       Reorganisation Act nowhere postulate that the trade would
       continue to remain intra-state trade and not inter-state trade
       between the two States. In fact, any deeming fiction to the said
       effect would have fallen afoul and would be contrary to Article 286,
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 25 of
38

       as it stood before amendment on 16 th September, 2016 and reads
       as under:
                “286. Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the
                sale or purchase of goods: -
                No law of a State shall impose, or authorise the
                imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods
                where such sale or purchase takes place
                (a) outside the State; or
                (b) in the course of the import of the goods into, or
                export of the goods out of, the territory of India.
                (2) Parliament may by law formulate principles for
                determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes
                place in any of the ways mentioned in clause (1).
                (3) Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes, or
                authorises the imposition of,
                (a) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods declared by
                Parliament by law to be of special importance in inter-
                State trade or commerce; or
                (b) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods, being a tax
                of the nature referred to in sub-clause (b), sub-clause
                (c) or sub-clause (d) of clause (29-A) of Article 366,
                be subject to such restrictions and conditions in regard
                to the system of levy, rates and other incidents of the
                tax as Parliament may by law specify.”
              As per the said Article, states are not competent to enact
       any legislation relating to the taxation of ‘inter-state sales’, an
       expression which, in the context of the Constitution, has been
       subject matter of several decisions explaining the difference
       between ‘intra-state’ and ‘inter-state’ sales. The expression ‘inter-
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 26 of
38

       state’ trade has specific legal connotation and meaning. It refers to
       transfer or movement of goods from one state to another. Such
       transactions, notwithstanding that the situs of sale would
       necessarily be at a fixed location, are inter-state sale or trade and
       not intra-state sale or trade. Thus, when there is a movement of
       goods between the two states without there being a transfer of title
       to the consignor or consignee, compliance would have to be made
       with the relevant laws applicable to such inter-state transactions.
       This position will hold good and equally apply in respect of the
       inter-state sales between the new State of Chhattisgarh and the
       reorganised State of Madhya Pradesh and vice-versa. The
       movement of goods from one state to another is in the nature of
       inter-state sales. The fact that two separate states are formed
       after the bifurcation, which were once a single entity for the
       purpose of levying sales tax, would be of no consequence so as to
       disturb the legal and constitutional impact by which two separate
       States were created and the legal effect of Article 286 as regards
       the inter-state character of inter-state transactions.
19.    Section 86 of the Reorganisation Act states that in case any
       difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the said Act, the
       President may, by an order, do anything as may be necessary and
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 27 of
38

        expedient for removing the difficulties. However, such order
        cannot be inconsistent with the provisions of the Reorganisation
        Act. Proviso states that no order shall be made after the expiry of
        three years from the appointed date.
20.     In Ranjan Sinha and Another v. Ajay Kumar Vishwakarma and
        Others4, three Judges’ Bench of this Court have elucidated that
        the Parliament, under Article 3 of the Constitution, is empowered
        to form a new State by separation of territory from any State or by
        uniting two or more States. Article 4 of the Constitution states that
        the law made by the Parliament with reference to Article 3 may
        contain supplemental, consequential and incidental provisions.
        When the territory of the existing State is reorganised by the
        Parliament under Article 3, there is no change of sovereignty and it
        is only a case of adjustment of territories as some portion of the
        territories forming part of the existing state would now form part of
        the newly formed state or get merged in a new state. In the latter
        case, the laws which were applicable to the territories of the
        reorganised state would continue to apply to the territories of the
        new state until the newly created state adapts or subject to its
4
  (2017) 14 SCC 774
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 28 of
38

       competency amends or repeals the existing and applicable laws.
       It was held:
                “36. At the cost of repetition, we may mention that
                under Article 3 of the Constitution, Parliament can alter,
                amend, amalgamate, form new States, diminish or
                increase area of a State. The principle of “clean slate”
                as applicable in international law is not applicable when
                reorganisation takes place under Article 3 of the
                Constitution. The reorganised States do not usually
                start as tabula rasa, rather they are successors of a
                pre-existing erstwhile States. Under BROA, Jharkhand
                was carved out of Bihar and the other separate States
                came into existence on 15-11-2000. If the laws in force
                were to lapse on the date the division was effected, a
                chaotic situation would have emerged inasmuch as the
                newly created State would be rendered a State without
                laws. To avoid such situation, provisions like Sections
                84 and 85 of BROA have been enacted to maintain
                continuity, and at the same time authorising the States
                to make such modifications and adaptations as are
                considered necessary by mere issuance of orders
                within two years, and thereafter by legislation.”
              This decision had referred to several earlier enactments by
       the Parliament under Article 3 beginning with the States
       Reorganisation Act, 1956 till the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000
       which had similar provisions under the heading ‘Territorial extent
       of laws’ and ‘Power to adapt laws’ as in the present case.
       Referring to Section 84 of the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000,
       which is identically worded as Section 78 of the Reorganisation
       Act, this Court in Ranjan Sinha (supra) held as under:
                “29. Section 84 contains two legal fictions, first is that
                the reorganisation of Bihar would not affect the
                applicability of laws made by the State of Bihar to all
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 29 of
38

                 territories included in it before reorganisation and after
                 the reorganisation. In other words, a law made by
                 Bihar shall be applicable to all the territories of the
                 erstwhile State of Bihar including the territories of the
                 State of Jharkhand even after reorganisation. The
                 second fiction is that until Jharkhand provides for it by
                 way of amendment or otherwise, territorial reference in
                 any law to the State of Bihar shall mean all the
                 territories in Bihar before reorganisation. For instance,
                 if Bihar had made a law as applicable to entire Bihar, it
                 shall apply to Bihar and Jharkhand until it is amended
                 by the new State. The territories to which the said Act
                 is made applicable would also include the territories
                 which were included in Jharkhand. Section 85 is an
                 enabling provision which empowers both the States to
                 make adaptations and modification of the law by way of
                 amendment to the law as applicable to the newly
                 formed State.”
              While interpreting Section 84 and 85 of the Bihar
       Reorganisation Act, 2000 analogous to Section 78 and 79 of the
       Reorganisation Act, this Court in Ranjan Sinha (supra) had dealt
       with and affirmed the underlined theory of continuity of laws in the
       new state after or post the reorganisation observing that the
       principle of “clean state”, as it exists in the international law in
       relation to the state succession, which means that the successor
       state generally does not inherit the prior treaty obligations or rights
       of a predecessor state, is different from the adjustment of
       territories which the Parliament undertakes and enforces under
       Article 3. The reorganised states do not usually start as tabula
       rasa, rather they are successors of the pre-existing erstwhile
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 30 of
38

        States. Disorderly and chaotic situation would erupt if the new
        state was to be created without any laws as on the date of its
        creation. To overcome this interregnum and vacuum, the
        Reorganisation Act(s) uniformly contain provisions which create a
        legal fiction to the extent that the reorganisation of the State would
        not affect the applicability of laws to all the territories included
        within it before and even after the reorganisation. However, this is
        subject to another dictum/rule that the existing laws as earlier
        applicable to the territories would be applicable to the new state
        until the new state provides for adaptation or modification of the
        law by way of repeal or amendment. The time period provided for
        such adaptations and modifications is generally two years from the
        appointed day, i.e. the day by which the Central Government in
        the Official Gazette provides for the creation of the two states by
        transfer of territories from one state to another.
21.     The Constitutional Bench judgment in M.P.V. Sundararamier &
        Co. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Another 5, had examined
        and rejected several contentions of the dealers carrying on
        business in the city of Madras for restraining the State of Andhra
        from imposing sales tax on sales effected in favour of merchants
        carrying on business in the State of Andhra.              One of the
5
  AIR 1958 SC 468
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 31 of
38

       contentions raised related to the true interpretation of Section 53
       of the Andhra State Act, 1953, the argument being that though for
       political purposes the State of Andhra was a separate State, but
       for enforcement of laws as they stood on the date of
       division/bifurcation, the State of Andhra was deemed to be a part
       of the State of Madras. This contention was rejected holding that
       the States of Andhra and Madras were two separate States and
       were governed by two separate though identical Acts. Accordingly,
       when the sales tax enactment as applicable had provided for
       single levy on successive sales of yarn, it would have application
       to sales in the State of Madras or Andhra, as the case may be,
       and not in the other State or inter-state sales. Section 53 had
       provided that the laws in existence in the territories which were
       constituted and had become part of the State of Andhra would
       continue to be governed by the laws which were enacted by the
       State of Madras. In terms of Section 53, the laws enacted by the
       State of Madras would continue to operate as before. It had not
       stipulated that the States would continue to be one. For clarity and
       convenience, we would reproduce paragraph 60 of the said
       judgment, which reads as under:
                 “60. (VI) Another contention urged by the petitioners is
                 that the levy of tax proposed to be made by the Andhra
                 State on the sale of yarn by them to dealers in the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 32 of
38

                State of Andhra is illegal because under the Madras
                Act and the Rules made thereunder, where there are
                successive sales of yarn the tax can be imposed at
                only one point, and as the Government of Madras had
                already imposed a tax on the sale within that State, a
                second levy on the selfsame goods by the State of
                Andhra is unauthorised and that therefore the
                threatened     proceedings     for   assessment       are
                incompetent. This contention is clearly untenable.
                When the Madras Act provides for a single levy on
                successive sales of yarn, it can have only application to
                sales in the State of Madras, as it would be
                incompetent to the Legislature of Madras to enact a
                law to operate in another State. But it is argued that
                S.53 of the Andhra State Act, 1953 on its true
                interpretation enacts that though for political purposes
                Andhra is to be regarded as a separate State, for the
                enforcement of laws as they stood on that date it
                should be deemed to be a part of the State of Madras.
                We do not agree with this interpretation. In our opinion,
                S. 53 merely provides that the laws in existence in the
                territories which were constituted into the State of
                Andhra should continue to operate as before. In fact,
                by an Adaptation Order issued on November 12, 1953,
                even the name of Andhra was substituted for Madras in
                the Madras General Sales Tax Act. There is no
                substance in this contention.”
22.    In the context of the above provisions of the Reorganisation Act,
       we would now reproduce relevant portion of the judgment of the
       Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Sri Peera
       Mohammad Mahamood Saheb v. The State of Andhra
       Pradesh (supra), which had also dealt with the situation pursuant
       to bifurcation of the State of Madras into the reorganised State of
       Madras and the new State of Andhra. Referring to identical
       provisions, it was held that Section 3 of the Andhra State Act,
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 33 of
38

       1953 states that the territories enumerated would, from the
       appointed date i.e. 1st October, 1953, cease to be the territories of
       the State of Madras and would be the territories of the new State
       of Andhra. Further, the laws in force in the territories in the State of
       Andhra prior to its constitution shall continue to remain in force
       even after its creation. Accordingly, one of the Acts namely the
       Madras General Sales Tax Act, 1939, would continue to apply to
       the new State of Andhra and the word ‘Madras’ used in said Act
       would be replaced/substituted by the word ‘Andhra’. To this extent,
       Section 53 of the Andhra State Act which is pari materia to Section
       78 of the Reorganisation Act, 2000, declares that notwithstanding
       the emergence of the State of Andhra, there shall be no change in
       the laws in force. This provision was made for avoiding any hiatus
       and the same set of laws, therefore, would continue to be
       operative in the States of Madras and Andhra.
23.    We have quoted the relevant portions of the judgment in the case
       of Swarn Rekha Cokes and Coals Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and have no
       difficulty in agreeing to the dictum as enunciated in paragraphs 26,
       27 and 28, but find it difficult to agree with the ratio recorded in
       paragraph 29. The effect of Sections 84 and 85 of the Bihar
       Reorganisation Act, 2000 was to ensure continuity of laws enacted
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 34 of
38

       by the unified State of Bihar in the new State of Jharkhand which
       had been created by transfer of territories which earlier formed
       part of the State of Bihar. These sections incorporating a deeming
       fiction were to ensure that the new State of Jharkhand would
       continue to be governed by the pre-existing laws as, otherwise,
       there would be a disorderly and chaotic situation where the new
       State would not be governed by any law. This is the true effect of
       the legal fiction created by Section 84 of the Bihar Reorganisation
       Act, 2000, i.e., the reorganisation of the state would not affect the
       applicability of the existing laws in the state to all territories
       included within it before and even after the reorganisation. The
       said fiction does not postulate and cannot be extended to imagine
       that for the purpose of sale transactions or even for other
       purposes, the new state did not have any political and
       constitutional existence as a separate state and that till a new law
       was enacted, the two States were to be treated as one political
       State as it was before the reorganisation. The sale transactions
       which were hitherto intra-state sales being within the unified State
       of Bihar, would become inter-state transactions once the two new
       States had come into existence. Provisions do not stipulate that
       such transactions would continue to be treated as intra-state
       transactions notwithstanding creation of the new State.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 35 of
38

24.    With respect to reasoning given in paragraph 30 in Swarn Rekha
       Cokes and Coals Pvt. Ltd. (supra), we would acknowledge that
       creation of a new State was an unforeseen event and could give
       rise to unusual situations, but this cannot be a ground and reason
       to treat inter-state sales between the two successor states as
       intra-state sales. This would be contrary to the Constitution and
       even the Statute i.e. the Reorganisation Act. Whenever a new
       State is created, there would be difficulties and, issues would arise
       but these have to be dealt within the parameters of the
       constitutional provisions and the law and not by negating the
       mandate of the Parliament which has created the new state in
       terms of Article 3 of the Constitution. Creation of the new political
       State must be given full legal effect. We would, therefore,
       respectfully overrule the contrary observations and ratio recorded
       in paragraphs 29 and 30 in Swarn Rekha Cokes and Coals Pvt.
       Ltd. (supra) in light of the legal position elucidated and explained
       above.
25.    In the end, we must take note of one of the submissions made by
       the private parties/assessee that under the exemption clauses
       even the inter-state transactions were entitled to some benefits.
       This contention was not raised in the writ petition or even in the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 36 of
38

       pleadings before us and has been urged and argued for the first
       time. We would not like to comment and decide this contention in
       vacuum and leave it open to the private parties/assessee to raise
       this plea before the authorities in appropriate proceedings under
       the statute. In other words, the authorities would examine whether
       the inter-state transactions were entitled to any benefit and if so,
       whether the private parties/assessee herein fulfil and meet the
       requirements to claim such benefit. We have not expressed any
       opinion either way on this contention. It was pointed out that in
       several cases adjudication orders may have been passed and the
       private parties/assessee may not have preferred appeals in view
       of the writ petitions filed by them and the present proceedings. As
       recorded above, some of the private parties/assessee had
       succeeded before the High Court. We would observe that it will be
       open to the private parties/assessee to challenge the adjudication
       orders in accordance with law and if required, by filing application
       under Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963, or other applicable
       provisions of the state enactments for exclusion of time during
       which the proceedings have remained pending before the High
       Court and this Court. In such cases, it would be appropriate for the
       authorities to exclude such time period as we are overruling the
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 37 of
38

       ratio laid down in paragraphs 29 and 30 in Swarn Rekha Cokes
       and Coals Pvt. Ltd. (supra).
26.    Accordingly, the appeals arising from Special Leave Petition (Civil)
       Nos. 10520 of 2013, 1334, 10165, 23297 of 2014, 6729 and
       16550 of 2016 preferred by the State of Madhya Pradesh and the
       State of Chhattisgarh are allowed and the Civil Appeal Nos. 460,
       461, 7073 of 2005 and 2343 of 2007 preferred by the private
       parties/assessee are dismissed in terms of the aforesaid
       observations, findings and directions.
                                              ......................................CJI
                                                           (RANJAN GOGOI)
                                                 ......................................J.
                                                       (S. ABDUL NAZEER)
                                                 ......................................J.
                                                          (SANJIV KHANNA)
NEW DELHI;
JULY 09, 2019.
Civil Appeal arising out of SLP (C) No. 23592 of 2014 & Ors.Page 38 of
38


