*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                             Judgment reserved on: January 04, 2011
                             Judgment delivered on: January 14, 2011
+       CRIMINAL APPEAL No.700/2008
        DAYA SHANKAR                                ....APPELLANT
               Through:  Mr. S.D. Singh, Advocate with Mr. Rahul Kumar
                         Singh, Advocate & Ms. Bharti D. Tyagi,
                         Advocate
                         Versus
        STATE OF DELHI                              .....RESPONDENT
                    Through:   Mr. R.N. Vats, APP
         CORAM:
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AJIT BHARIHOKE
1.      Whether Reporters of local papers
        may be allowed to see the judgment?
2.      To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3.      Whether the judgment should be
        reported in Digest ?
AJIT BHARIHOKE, J.
1.      This appeal is directed against the impugned judgment dated
01.08.2008 and consequent order on sentence dated 02.08.2008 in
Sessions Case No.31/06 FIR no.903/05 under Section 376(2)(f) IPC P.S.
Nand Nagri whereby the appellant has been convicted by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge for the offence of rape of minor child under
Section 376(2)(f) of IPC and sentenced to undergo RI for the period of
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                            Page 1 of 14

12 years and also to pay a fine of `10,000/-, in default to undergo SI for
a further period of five months.
2.      Briefly stated, allegations against the appellant are that on
04.12.2005 at around 6:30 pm in the park, Kachchi Pur, Nand Nagri,
Delhi, he committed rape of the prosecutrix “P” (name withheld) aged
three years. On 04.12.2005 at about 7:45 pm, an information about
apprehending of a thief at B-2/239, Nand Nagri, Delhi was received at
P.S. Nand Nagri which was recorded as DD No.25A in the daily diary
maintained at the Police Station and copy of DD report was entrusted
to ASI Rakesh Kumar Tyagi, who immediately left for the spot along
with Constable Naim Chand. There, he found that the prosecutrix “P”,
daughter of the complainant Manbhavti had been raped by a
neighbour, namely, the appellant Daya Shankar and he had already
been taken to GTB Hospital. Since it was a case of rape, information
was conveyed to the Police Station and the SHO directed SI Banita
Tyagi to investigate the matter.
3.      SI Banita Tyagi thus reached GTB Hospital. She obtained the MLC
of the prosecutrix, who was unable to speak clearly.        Mother of the
prosecutrix Smt. Manbhavti was also present in the Hospital, so SI
Banita Tyagi recorded her statement.
4.      Smt. Manbhavti, in her statement to the Investigating Officer,
inter alia, stated that in the evening of 04.12.2005, prosecutrix was
playing outside the house and at around 6:00 pm, she noticed that the
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                              Page 2 of 14

prosecutrix was missing.       So, she and her family members started
searching for the prosecutrix.        At about 7:00 pm, appellant Daya
Shankar came with the prosecutrix in his lap. Prosecutrix was bleeding
from her private parts and there were blood-stains on the pant and
clothes of Daya Shankar. When she enquired from the appellant as to
what had happened, he did not reply and tried to go away. Then, she
enquired from the prosecutrix, who told that the appellant Daya
Shankar, whom the prosecutrix used to address as “bhaiya”, had laid
her on the ground and indulged in wrong act with her after gagging her
mouth. In the meanwhile, several public persons had collected at the
spot and they gave beating to the appellant. SI Banita Tyagi obtained
signatures of the complainant Manbhavti on the said statement
Ex.PW4/A and sent it to the Police Station through Constable Naim
Chand along with her endorsement Ex.PW11/A for the registration of
formal FIR.        After the registration of the case, investigation was
entrusted to SI Banita Tyagi.
5.      On 05.12.2005, Investigating Officer SI Banita Tyagi was handed
over one sealed bottle purportedly containing the blood of the
appellant and a sealed parcel purportedly containing underwear of the
appellant which he was wearing at the time of his medical examination,
which were taken into possession by the Investigating Officer vide
memo Ex.PW6/A. The Investigating Officer also seized a sealed packet
purportedly containing the clothes which prosecutrix was wearing at
the time of incident, a sealed parcel containing anal swab, a sealed
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                              Page 3 of 14

parcel containing vaginal swab and one sample seal vide memo
Ex.PW10/A, which were handed over to her by Dr. Rajni. She visited
the spot of occurrence and prepared rough site plan Ex.PW11/B. The
exhibits seized at the Hospital were sent to CFSL for examination and
the result was collected. Statements of witnesses were recorded and
on conclusion of formalities of investigation, the appellant Daya
Shankar was charge sheeted and sent for trial.
6.      The appellant was charged by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge for the offence punishable under Section 376 IPC.          Appellant
pleaded not guilty to the charge and claimed to be tried.
7.      In order to bring home the guilt of the appellant, prosecution has
examined 11 witnesses in all. Prosecutrix “P” was not examined as a
witness, though she was produced in the court for that purpose on
hearings dated 02.05.2006 and 23.08.2006.          The learned Additional
Sessions Judge on preliminary examination of the prosecutrix came to
the conclusion that she was not mature enough to testify in the court,
as such she was not examined. Thus, the case of the prosecution rests
mainly on the medical evidence as well as the statements of the
parents of the prosecutrix, namely, PW3 Sheshmani, PW4 Manbhavti
and PW7 Hari Lal, who claims to be the neighbour of the complainant.
8.      PW4 Manbhavti has stated that on 04.12.2005 at around 6:00
pm, she noticed that her daughter “P” who was playing outside the
house was missing.         She informed her husband and they started
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                               Page 4 of 14

searching for her. While they were searching for the prosecutrix, at
about 7:00 pm, she noticed the appellant Daya Shankar coming along
with the prosecutrix from the park. Daya Shankar left the prosecutrix
and tried to escape from there. When she picked up her daughter, she
noticed blood oozing from her vagina. Her husband caught hold of the
appellant.      When she enquired about the cause of injury from the
prosecutrix, she told that “Papa of Ravi had taken her in the park
where he did a wrong act with her”. She further claimed that when she
asked the appellant as to what had happened, the appellant confessed
by saying that “Galti Ho Gai Hai, Ab Nahi Hogi”. Besides those words,
no further explanation was given by the appellant. She also stated that
PCR was informed and pursuant to the information, a PCR van came
and took her, her husband and the prosecutrix to the Hospital.
9.      PW3 Sheshmani is the father of the prosecutrix and he also
deposed to the similar effect. He, however, has not stated anything
about the extra judicial confession made by the appellant.
10.      PW7 Hari Lal claimed that he reached at the spot on hearing
noise from the side of the house of the complainant. There, he noticed
that the prosecutrix was in the lap of her mother and she was bleeding.
He took the prosecutrix from her mother and thereafter a PCR van
came and he along with the prosecutrix and the parents of the
prosecutrix went to GTB Hospital in the PCR van. He also stated that
when he enquired from the appellant Daya Shankar as to what had
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                             Page 5 of 14

happened, the appellant stated that “Mujhse Galti Ho Gai, Aainda Nahi
Karuga”.
11.     PW2 Dr. Rajni medically examined the prosecutrix at GTB
Hospital and prepared her MLC Ex.PW2/A. She stated that on medical
examination of the prosecutrix, she found: “Hymen torn – cervix intact
and normal. Vaginal tear extending from posterior vaginal formix upto
the forehette through which rectal mucosa was bulging.        PR exam –
Anal sphincter torn. Rectal mucosa was intact. Vaginal tear and anal
sphincter stichea in vayes complete hemostasis achieved”.
12.     PW1 Dr. Banarasi proved the MLC of the appellant Daya Shankar
prepared by Dr. Jitendra Pratap Singh by way of secondary evidence as
Ex.PW1/A.
13.     Statement of the appellant under Section 313 Cr.P.C. was
recorded. In the said statement, he denied the prosecution evidence.
He denied having made extra judicial confession by saying that “Galti
Ho Gai, Aab Nahi Karuga”. No witness in defence has been examined.
14.     In the instant case, prosecutrix “P” could not be examined as a
witness due to her tender age, as in the opinion of the trial Judge, she
was not capable of understanding the nature of the questions and
giving clear and coherent answers.       The learned trial Judge, relying
upon the testimony of PW3 Sheshmani and PW4 Manbhavti, parents of
the victim (prosecutrix) as also the testimony of PW7 Hari Lal and the
medical evidence found the appellant guilty of rape of the prosecutrix
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                              Page 6 of 14

and convicted and sentenced him for the offence under Section
376(2)(f) IPC.
15.     Learned Shri S.D. Singh, advocate appearing for the appellant
submitted that the appellant is innocent and he has been implicated
merely on suspicion. Learned counsel contended that the impugned
judgment of conviction is the result of wrong appreciation of the facts
and the judgment suffers from several infirmities.
16.     Expanding on the argument, learned counsel for the appellant
firstly contended that the learned trial judge has fallen in error in
relying upon the testimony of PW3 Sheshmani, PW4 Manbhavti and
PW7 Hari Lal, ignoring the fact that they are not the eye witnesses to
the occurrence and their version is based upon the so-called
information given by the prosecutrix, who when produced in the court
as a witness, was not found capable of understanding the nature of
questions and giving coherent answers by the trial Judge.
17.     Learned APP has refuted the argument by contending that in a
case of child rape, when the child is incapable of giving coherent
answers as a witness in the court, non-examination of the prosecutrix
cannot be a ground for acquittal and in such cases, the court has
ample power to revert to circumstantial evidence in order to find out
whether or not the accused on trial is guilty.       In support of this
contention, learned APP has referred to the judgment in the matter of
State of Karnataka Vs. Mahabaleshwar Gourya Naik, 1992 Supp.
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                            Page 7 of 14

(3) SCC 179, relied upon by the learned trial Judge. In the aforesaid
case, the prosecution could not produce the prosecutrix as she had
unfortunately died before she could be examined and considering that
fact, the Supreme Court held that non-examination of the prosecutrix
due to her non-availability cannot be a ground for acquittal of the
accused and the court can record a conviction for an offence made out
from the available evidence.
18.     There can be no dispute with the aforesaid proposition of law.
The question, however, is if there is sufficient evidence available to
prove the guilt of the appellant beyond doubt?        PW4 Manbhavti,
mother of the prosecutrix has testified that the appellant brought the
prosecutrix to their house in his lap and the prosecutrix was bleeding
from her vagina and when she asked the appellant as to what had
happened, the appellant did not respond and tried to go away.
Thereafter, on her asking, prosecutrix told her that the appellant had
laid her on the ground in the park, gagged her mouth with his palm and
indulged in wrong act (rape) with her. PW3 Sheshmani and PW7 Hari
Lal have also testified to a similar effect.  The question is whether
aforesaid evidence is worthy of credence? In this regard, it is pertinent
to note that the prosecution did produce the prosecutrix for recording
of her statement during trial on hearings dated 02.05.2006 and
23.08.2007. On both the occasions, the trial court, on examination of
the prosecutrix came to the conclusion that the prosecutrix was not
intelligent enough to give coherent answers regarding the occurrence
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                              Page 8 of 14

and on both the occasions, due to the inability of the prosecutrix to
testify, she was sent back unexamined, as is apparent from the record
of the proceedings of the trial dated 02.05.2006 and 23.08.2007. From
the aforesaid circumstances, it is evident that the prosecutrix, even till
23.08.2007 was too young to depose properly in the court. That being
the case, can it be safely inferred that the prosecutrix was capable of
telling PW4 Manbhavti as to what had happened on the date of
occurrence?        In my considered view, it is not safe to draw said
inference, though there is a possibility that the prosecutrix might have
told PW3, PW4 and PW7 that she was raped by the appellant. Since
above noted evidence leaves scope for doubt, medical/forensic
evidence assumes importance.
19.     It is the case of the prosecution that the appellant was
apprehended and taken to the Hospital for medical examination on the
same day. MLC of the appellant prepared at GTB Hospital, Shahdara is
Ex.PW1/A. As per this MLC, the appellant was medically examined on
the date of occurrence i.e. 04.12.2005 at 8:30 pm. It is recorded on
the MLC that no injury was seen on the genitals of the appellant and
also that blood sample and the underwear of the appellant which he
was wearing at the time of medical examination were handed over to
duty Constable Jai Karan. Admittedly, the underwear of the appellant
was sent to CFSL for forensic examination and as per the result of the
examination, the underwear tested negative for the presence of blood
or semen.       This circumstance negates the theory of the rape having
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                              Page 9 of 14

been committed by the appellant and casts doubt on the correctness of
the prosecution story.        Further, as per the testimony of PW3
Sheshmani, PW4 Manbhavti and PW7 Hari Lal, when the appellant
brought the prosecutrix to her house, she was bleeding from her
vagina. If this version is to be believed, then it is obvious that because
of penetration of the penis in vagina, the prosecutrix sustained injury
and started bleeding. In that eventuality, under the natural course of
circumstances, there ought to have been some traces of blood on the
penis of the appellant and the aforesaid blood ought to have stained
the underwear of the appellant.       However, on perusal of the CFSL
report, it is seen that no traces of blood or semen were found on the
underwear of the appellant. Even the MLC of the appellant Ex.PW1/A
does not mention about the presence of blood on the male organ of the
appellant nor are there any witnesses to this effect.    Thus, the forensic
evidence also points towards the innocence of the appellant.
20.     Learned Additional Sessions Judge declined to attach any
importance to absence of blood or semen on the underwear of the
appellant on the ground that accused, in his statement under Section
313 Cr.P.C. stated that after dropping the prosecutrix, he had gone to
his home and there, he might have changed his underwear. Aforesaid
observation of trial Judge is in the nature of surmises and conjectures.
Otherwise also, as per the testimony of the witnesses, appellant was
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                               Page 10 of 14

apprehended at the spot and none of the witnesses have stated that he
had gone inside his home.        Therefore, the reasoning given by the
learned trial Judge to reject the argument is unacceptable.
21.     Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that even the
medical evidence rules out any possibility of the rape having been
committed by the appellant.         Dilating on the argument, learned
counsel for the appellant referred to the MLC Ex.PW2/A of the
prosecutrix, which records following injuries found on the person of the
prosecutrix:
        “Hymen torn – cervix intact and normal.          Vaginal tear
        extending from posterior vaginal formix upto the forehette
        through which rectal mucosa was bulging. PR exam – Anal
        sphincter torn. Rectal mucosa was intact. Vaginal tear and
        anal sphincter stichea in vayes complete hemostasis
        achieved”.
Learned counsel contended that from the aforesaid injuries, one can
safely infer that it is not a case of marginal penetration but a case of
forced entry of the male organ into the vagina of the prosecutrix.
Learned counsel contended that as per MLC Ex.PW1/A of the appellant,
he was medically examined on the date of occurrence at about 8:30
pm and on examination, no injury on his genitals was found. Learned
counsel argued that if the appellant had actually committed rape on
the prosecutrix resulting in tear of the hymen as well as vaginal tear,
there ought to have been some injury on his male organ. Absence of
such injuries on the penis of the appellant, according to learned
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                              Page 11 of 14

counsel, is also a circumstance pointing towards his innocence.            In
support of this contention, he has referred to the judgment in the
matter of Rahim Beg Vs. State of U.P., AIR 1973 SC 343 wherein the
Supreme Court, in a case of rape of a girl of 10 to 12 years, observed
that absence of injury on the male organ of the accused would point to
their innocence.
22.     Learned APP, on the other hand, referred to the judgment of
Supreme Court in the matter of State of H.P. Vs. Gian Chand, (2001)
6 SCC 71 and submitted that absence of injury marks on the genitals of
the accused cannot be taken as a circumstance of his innocence.
23.     No doubt that absence of the injury on the genitals of an accused
in a rape case by itself cannot always be a reason to presume the
innocence of the accused, provided other reliable evidence leading
towards the guilt of the accused is available.     In the instant case, in
view of the circumstances noted above, the version of the prosecution
witnesses appears to be doubtful. Therefore, the absence of the injury
on the male organ of the appellant is a factor which further compounds
the doubt.
24.     Learned APP took me through the testimony of PW4 Manbhavti,
mother of the prosecutrix and PW7 Hari Lal wherein they have stated
that when they asked the appellant as to what had happened, he
stated “Galti Ho Gai Hai, Ab Nahi Hogi”. Learned APP states that the
aforesaid statement of the appellant amounts to extra judicial
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                              Page 12 of 14

confession of his guilt by the appellant and, therefore, the trial court
was right in convicting the appellant.
25.     I do not find any merit in the submission of learned APP, firstly for
the reason that the so-called extra judicial confession is vague.
Secondly, perusal of the statement of PW4 Manbhavti Ex.PW4/A, which
is the basis of registration of the case reveals that in the aforesaid
statement, Manbhavti did not say anything about the extra judicial
confession made by the appellant and instead she stated that when
she enquired from the appellant as to what had happened, the
appellant tried to go away without giving any answer. From this, it is
evident that that the story of extra judicial confession made by the
appellant in presence of PW4 Manbhavti and PW7 Hari Lal is an
improvement over the earlier version, as such it is not reliable.        The
aforesaid version is also not reliable for the reason that admittedly,
father of the prosecutrix Sheshmani (PW3) was also present all through
and he, in his testimony, is silent about the confession made by the
appellant. Thus, no significance can be attached to the evidence of the
prosecution regarding the extra judicial confession purportedly made
by the appellant, being unreliable.
26.     In view of the circumstances discussed above, I do not find it safe
to rely upon the testimony of PW3 Sheshmani, PW4 Manbhavti and
PW7 Hari Lal, who are related to each other.           Otherwise also, the
prosecution story is unnatural. If the appellant had actually raped the
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                               Page 13 of 14

prosecutrix, under the natural course of circumstances, he was
expected to leave the child in the park instead of bringing the injured
child to her residence.         Conduct of the appellant in bringing the
prosecutrix to her house also points towards the innocence of the
appellant and a possibility cannot be ruled out that he has been falsely
implicated on the basis of suspicion.
27.     In view of the discussion above, case of prosecution appears to
be doubtful.       Thus, I find it difficult to sustain the conviction of the
appellant on the charge under Section 376(2)(f) IPC.          The impugned
judgment and consequent order on sentence are, therefore, set aside
and the appellant is acquitted of the charge, giving him benefit of
doubt.
28.     Appellant is in jail. He be released forthwith, if not required in
any other case.
29.     Appeal is disposed of accordingly.
                                                    (AJIT BHARIHOKE)
                                                          JUDGE
JANUARY 14, 2011
pst
Crl.A. No.700/2008                                                  Page 14 of 14


