         *       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                               Judgment reserved on: December 04, 2009
                               Judgment delivered on: December 22, 2009
+        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.29/1995
         SMT. RAJWANT KAUR                               ..... APPELLANT
                                 Through:   Mr. Sanjay Suri, Advocate
                     Versus
         STATE OF DELHI                                  ..... RESPONDENT
                                 Through:   Mr. Sunil Sharma, APP
         CORAM:
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AJIT BHARIHOKE
1.       Whether Reporters of local papers
         may be allowed to see the judgment?             Yes
2.       To be referred to the Reporter or not ?         Yes
3.       Whether the judgment should be
         reported in Digest ?                            Yes
AJIT BHARIHOKE, J.
1.       This appeal is directed against the impugned judgment dated
09.12.94 in Sessions Case No.26/89 arising out of FIR No.420/88 P.S.
Tilak Nagar convicting the appellant for the offence punishable under
Section 302 IPC and Section 201 IPC as also the consequent order on
sentence dated 12.12.1994.
2.       Briefly stated, case of the prosecution is that on 24.09.88 on the
receipt of information about the murder of a child in House No.C-36-B,
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                                 Page 1 of 21

Tilak Vihar, DD No.66B was recorded at the P.S. Tilak Nagar on
24.09.88 at 10:15 pm.             The SHO, on being informed about the
information, directed that a copy of DD report be separately sent to SI
Anil Kumar and he himself proceeded to the spot of occurrence along
with the staff.
3.       The information received vide DD No.66B was also conveyed to
the police post Tilak Vihar, where it was recorded as DD No.26 dated
24.09.88 and copy thereof was forwarded to SI Anil Kumar who also
reached at the spot along with the staff.
4.       SI Anil Kumar met the complainant Jagrup Kaur (PW1) at the spot
of occurrence and recorded her statement Ex.PW1/A, which reads thus:
         “I reside at the above noted address with my husband and other
         family members including Smt. Surinder Kaur, Devrani (Husband’s
         Brother’s wife) whose husband was killed in 1984 riots. My aforesaid
         sister in law ( Devrani) Surinder Kaur has two daughters and one
         son. The name of her son is Sukhdev Singh alias Shunti. My sister
         in law Surinder Kaur is employed with Vijaya Bank, Connaught Place
         New Delhi. Her two daughters and son Sukhdev Singh alias Shunti
         aged 4 years are studying. In her absence, I look after her children.
         Smt. Rajwant Kaur whose husband was also killed in 1984 riots,
         reside with her only daughter aged about 10/11 years in my
         neighbourhood in C-36-B.         Since Rajwant Kaur reside alone
         therefore, my father in law treats her out of sympathy as her
         daughter. As a result whereof, Rajwant Kaur visits our house and
         takes food etc there. Kirpal Kaur, my sister in law ( Nanand i.e.
         husband’s sister aged about 22/23 years has become more intimate
         with Rajwant Kaur, we after seeing a boy for Kirpal Kaur in
         Shahdara, have fixed her marriage in October. Today, I alongwith
         my mother-in-law came back from house of the aforesaid boy at
         about 4.30 p.m. A little later, my Devrani (Husband’s brother wife)
         Smt. Surinder Kaur also reached house after her duty hours and
         enquired about her son Shunti. Whereupon, the family members
         told her that he has gone for tuition. When Shunti did not return
         home upto 5-00 p.m., my sister in law (devrani) sent her elder
         daughter to enquire about Shunti. She on her return, Informed that
         Shunti has not gone for tuition today Shunty goes for his tuition from
         3.00 to 5.00 p.m. On hearing this when I enquired about Shunti in
         the neighbourhood, aforesaid Smt. Rajwant Kaur told that a little
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                                       Page 2 of 21

         earlier she had given him the toffee and he would be playing nearby.
         Where upon my Devrani Surinder Kaur, Nanand Kirpal Kaur, other
         members of the family and myself started searching Shunti in the
         block and park. Smt. Jagrup Kaur also accompanied us but she after
         some time, separated herself, from us. After searching a lot, when
         Shunti could not be traced out, Kirpal Kaur my nanand told that
         Rajwant Kaur was not happy with her (Matrimonial) alliance and she
         wanted to get married with some of her relative. She further told
         that she ( Rajwant Kaur) had also suggested to elope with her and
         when she refused. Rajwant Kaur, had threatened her today itself in
         the morning that she would not allow her marriage to be solemnised
         by way of creating hurdle after getting her some family member
         killed. Whereupon we got suspicion that that Rajwant Kaur might
         have not brought her threat to truth when she separated herself
         from us. Thereafter we returned to our house. At that time my
         father in law Sh. Pritam Singh had also returned from his work.
         When we narrated the entire aforesaid facts to him, he told us that
         in laws of Kirpal Kaur had telephonically informed him in the office to
         the effect that some lady had telephonically asked them not to
         marry with Kirpal Kaur and had also threatened. That fact also sic
         our suspicion and my father in law Sh. Pritam Singh, Nanand Kirpal
         Kaur, Jaspal Singh who resides in house No. C-32-A and had come
         to our house and myself went to the house of Rajwant Kaur. The
         door or her house was bolted from inside. We knocked in order to
         get the same opened. After some time when Rajwant Kaur opened
         the door, she was looking perplexed and her face was sweating. I
         asked Rajwant Kaur that Shunti was with her and she should tell as
         to where he was. Whereupon, Rajwant Kaur disclosed with her
         folded hands that she has committed a mistake as she has killed
         Shunti by way of strangulating him. Thereafter, Rajwant Kaur
         showed us the dead body of Shunti lying behind a wooden plank in
         the left of the kitchen of her house after removing the plank. There
         was a white cloth loose around the neck of Shunti, and a readymade
         under wear gagged in his mouth. Rajwant Kaur, in this manner has
         murdered Sukhdev Singh alias Shunti, the son of Smt. Surinder Kaur,
         my Devrani, by way of strangulating him on account of enmity with
         us.”
5.       SI Anil Kumar, PW28 after endorsing the statement PW1/A sent it
to the police station for the registration of the case and on the basis of
said Rukka, formal FIR under Section 302 IPC was registered against
the appellant.
6.       SI Anil Kumar conducted the inquest proceedings and sent the
dead body for post mortem. Dead body was identified by Jagrup Kaur,
PW1 and grandfather of the deceased Sh. Pritam Singh. Subsequent
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                                       Page 3 of 21

investigation was taken over by the SHO, Shri S.K. Bhatnagar, PW26.
He prepared the rough site plan Ex.PW26/A and got the place of
occurrence photographed from various angles.          On inspection of the
spot, one table Ex.P-2 and one “mooda” Ex.P-3 were found in the
kitchen of the appellant.     Those articles were taken into possession
along with the wooden plank Ex.P-1.              Investigating Officer also
recorded the statements of the witnesses and arrested the appellant
who was produced before him by the witnesses. The scaled site plan
Ex.PW25/A was also got prepared. The exhibits seized from the spot
were sent for CFSL examination and the CFSL report Ex.PW26/C was
obtained.        Post mortem report Ex.PW26/D was also collected.           On
completion of investigation, appellant was challaned and sent for trial.
7.       Appellant was charged for the offences punishable under Section
302 IPC and Section 201 IPC. She pleaded innocence and claimed to
be tried.
8.       In order to bring home the guilt of the appellant, prosecution has
examined 28 witnesses. There is no eye witness to the incident and
the prosecution case is based upon the circumstantial evidence. The
material witnesses examined by the prosecution to prove the motive
on the part of the appellant,        recovery of the dead body of the
deceased from loft of the kitchen of the house of the appellant and the
extra judicial confession made by the appellant are PW1 Jagrup Kaur
(complainant), PW3 Jaspal Singh, PW11 Surender Kaur, mother of the
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                               Page 4 of 21

deceased and PW12 Smt. Kirpal Kaur. The other material witnesses to
prove that the deceased Shunty was last seen at 2:30 pm when the
appellant got him a toffee, are PW5 Prabh Kaur and PW2 Surender
Singh.       The third set of witnesses is PW8 Khehar Singh and PW13
Davinder Singh, who were examined by the prosecution to prove that
the appellant called up Davinder Singh PW13 on the telephone of Kehar
Singh PW8 and tried to dissuade him from marrying PW12 Kirpal Kaur
and even threatened him with dire consequences if the marriage with
Kirpal Kaur was not called off. The other set of important witnesses are
the Investigating Officers, PW26 Inspector S.K. Bhatnagar and PW28 SI
Anil Kumar, besides PW10 Dr. Bharat Singh, who conducted post
mortem examination on the body of the deceased and opined that the
child died due to asphyxia as a result of strangulation.
9.       The appellant in her statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. claimed
to be innocent.       While denying the incriminating evidence produced
against her, she claimed that the dead body of the deceased was
recovered from house No.C-34-B. She also claimed that PW 12 Kirpal
Kaur was the real culprit who had been initially detained by the police
along with one Santokh Singh, but was later released at the instance of
her father Pritam Singh.        The appellant explained that Kirpal Kaur
wanted to marry Santokh Singh.        PW11 Smt. Surender Kaur, however,
was opposed to said marriage as she was also having an affair with
Santokh Singh. Because of that Kirpal Kaur nursed a grudge against
Surender Kaur and because of that, she in order to take revenge, had
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                             Page 5 of 21

killed deceased Shunty, son of Surender Kaur. The appellant further
explained that the police, in league with Pritam Singh, had created
false evidence against her and falsely implicated her in this case.
10.      The Learned Trial Court relying upon the prosecution evidence
concluded that there was sufficient circumstantial evidence on the
record which if taken together formed a chain so complete in itself to
point towards only hypothesis of the guilt of the appellant and
convicted her on both the counts i.e. Section 302 IPC and Section 201
IPC.
11.      Before adverting to rival contentions made on behalf of the
parties, it would be useful to have a look on the law relating to the
circumstantial evidence.                In the matter of Padala Veera Reddy v.
State of A.P.,             1989 Supp (2) SCC 706, it was laid down by the
Supreme Court that when a case rests upon circumstantial evidence,
such evidence must satisfy the following tests:
         “10.    (1)     the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to
                 be drawn, must be cogently and firmly established;
                 (2)     those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly
                 pointing towards guilt of the accused;
                 (3)     the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so
                 complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that within all
                 human probability the crime was committed by the accused and none
                 else; and
                 (4)     the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain conviction must
                 be complete and incapable of explanation of any other hypothesis than
                 that of the guilt of the accused and such evidence should not only be
                 consistent with the guilt of the accused but should be inconsistent with
                 his innocence.”
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                                                    Page 6 of 21

12.      In the matter of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda V. State of
Maharashtra, (1984) 4 SCC 116, the Supreme Court, while dealing
with the nature and character of proof required in a criminal case
which rests on circumstantial evidence alone referred to the judgment
in the matter of Hanumant Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1952
SC 343 and observed thus:
                “153. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following
            conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be said to be fully
            established:
                 (1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn
                      should be fully established.
            It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned
            'must or should' and not 'may be' established. There is not only a grammatical but a
            legal distinction between 'may be proved' and 'must be or should be proved as was
            held by this Court in Shivaji Sahebrao Bobade v. State of Maharashtra,
            1973CriLJ1783 where the following observations were made:
                     Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must be and not merely
                 may be guilty before a Court can convict, and the mental distance between
                 'may be' and 'must be' is long and divides vague conjectures from sure
                 conclusions.
                 (2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of
                      the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on
                      any other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty.
                 (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency.
                 (4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be
                      proved, and
                 (5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any
                      reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the
                      accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have
                      been done by the accused.”
13.      In the light of the above enunciated principles of law, we now
proceed to consider the submissions made by the respective parties.
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                                                    Page 7 of 21

14.      Learned counsel for the appellant has assailed the impugned
judgment on the ground that the prosecution has failed to establish
either the motive on the part of the appellant to kill the deceased or
the recovery of dead body from the kitchen of her house at her
instance or the extra judicial confession purported to have been made
by her. It is also submitted that even the testimony of PW2 Surender
Singh and PW5 Prabh Kaur who were examined to establish that the
deceased was seen alive by them on 24.09.88 at 2/2:30 pm and that
he was also seen going upstairs towards the house of the appellant is
not reliable.    In support of this contention, learned counsel for the
appellant submitted that even the medical evidence does not support
the aforesaid story propagated by the prosecution. It was pointed out
that as per the post mortem report Ex.PW10/A, the deceased died on
22/24 hours before the post mortem was conducted.          The date and
time of conducting of post mortem as per the report is 25.09.88 at 1:00
pm and if the time of death is fixed at 24 hours earlier to the post
mortem, it is somewhere around 1:00 pm on 24.09.88 which belies the
version of PW2 and PW5 that they had seen the deceased Shunty alive
on 24.09.88 at 2:30 pm.     In view of the above, learned counsel for the
appellant has urged us to infer that the circumstantial evidence led by
the prosecution is not sufficient enough to support the hypothesis of
guilt of the appellant.
15.      Learned counsel for the State, on the other hand, argued in
support of the impugned judgment. He submitted that the prosecution
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                            Page 8 of 21

has been successful in proving the motive on the part of the appellant
and that the deceased was last seen at 2:30 pm on 24.09.88, going
towards the house of the appellant besides the recovery of dead body
from the kitchen of the appellant’s house at her instance on 24.09.88
at about 10.00 pm and also the extra judicial confession made by her
in presence of the witnesses i.e. PW1 Jagrup Kaur, PW3 Jaspal Singh
and PW12 Kirpal Kaur.         As regards the medical evidence, learned
counsel for the State submitted that as per PW10 Dr. Bharat Singh, the
time of death was fixed at 22 to 24 hours before the post mortem
examination on 25.09.88 at 1:00 pm and if the time of death is worked
out backwards from the time of commencement of post mortem
examination, it implies that the death occurred between 1:00 pm to
3:00 pm, which evidence is in consonance with the testimony of PW2
Surender Singh and PW5 Prabh Kaur who had stated that the appellant
had thrown at 2:30 pm a fifty paise coin and told PW5 Prabh Kaur to
give toffees for the said amount to the deceased Shunty.
16.      We have considered the rival contentions and perused the
material on record.
17.      So far as the motive is concerned, the case of the prosecution as
set up in the charge sheet is that the appellant was nursing a grudge
against PW12 and her family because they had fixed the marriage of
Kirpal Kaur PW12 with one Davinder Singh PW13 of Shahdara, whereas
the appellant wanted Kirpal Kaur to marry some person known to her
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                              Page 9 of 21

and when she placed that proposal before Kirpal Kaur, she declined to
break off the marriage saying that she would go by the choice of her
parents.       PW12 Kirpal Kaur is the witness examined to prove said
motive. Though Kirpal Kaur in her examination-in-chief had supported
said story, but in her cross-examination, when asked a pointed
question, she deposed that the appellant had not told her the name of
the boy with whom the appellant wanted her to marry and that the
appellant also did not tell her anything about said boy or his family or
his profession or place of residence etc.       This makes her evidence
suspect.         Further, PW12 Kirpal Kaur in her examination-in-chief has
stated that when she declined the proposal of the appellant to elope
and marry the boy of her choice, the appellant had threatened her that
if she failed to elope with her, the appellant would get killed some
member of her family with a view to create obstruction in her marriage.
If that was so, then on coming to know that her nephew Shunty was
missing, PW12 Kirpal Kaur, under the natural course of circumstances,
was expected to tell her family members about the said threat having
been extended by the appellant. This, however, is not the case. As per
the testimony of PW1 Jagrup Kaur, PW11 Surender Kaur and PW12
Kirpal Kaur, the appellant had also joined them in search of Shunty, but
Kirpal Kaur did not say a word about the aforesaid proposal and threat
extended by the appellant till the appellant left the search group after
some time.         This conduct on the part of Kirpal Kaur, being highly
unnatural, makes her testimony regarding motive suspect.
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                             Page 10 of 21

18.      Learned counsel   for  the  State has submitted     that     much
importance cannot be attached to the failure on the part of PW12
Kirpal Kaur to promptly tell about the threat extended by the appellant
in the event of her refusal to elope and marry the boy of the choice of
the appellant because PW8 Kehar Singh and PW13 Davinder Singh
have also supported the theory of the threat extended by the
appellant. In this regard, learned counsel for the State has pointed out
that PW8 Kehar Singh stated in the court that on 24.09.88, a lady
called him on telephone and told him that she was calling from Tilak
Vihar and wanted to speak to Davinder Singh. He told the lady to call
after half an hour and went to call PW13 Davinder Singh. After some
time, aforesaid lady rang up again and he handed over the receiver to
PW13 Davinder Singh. He has stated that PW13 Davinder Singh, after
receiving the call, got nervous and told him that the caller had asked
him not to marry Kirpal Kaur and threatened that in the event of his
failure to do so, he would be responsible for the consequences. PW13
Davinder Singh has also corroborated said version by narrating about
the threat received by him from the lady caller.          The aforesaid
evidence of PW8 and PW13 did not find favour with the learned Trial
Court. Otherwise also, even if for the sake of argument, the aforesaid
evidence is taken to be true, then also it is not of much advantage to
the prosecution because the identity of said lady caller is not
established.     Thus, in our considered view, the prosecution has not
been able to establish the motive for murder beyond reasonable doubt.
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                            Page 11 of 21

19.      We may note that learned counsel for the appellant has
submitted that motive for crime in a case of circumstantial evidence is
a very important piece of evidence and the failure of the prosecution to
establish the motive by itself is sufficient to extend the benefit of doubt
to the appellant. In support of this contention, he has referred to the
judgment         of the Supreme   Court   in   the   matter of   Tanviben
Pankajkumar Divetia Vs. State of Gujarat, AIR 1997 SC 2193. In
our considered view, aforesaid judgment is based upon its own factual
matrix. The ratio of the judgment is that the motive is an important
piece of evidence in a case based upon the circumstantial evidence,
but the judgment does not say that if the prosecution fails to prove the
motive, that by itself can be taken as a ground for rejecting the
otherwise convincing evidence against the accused. Of course, since
the prosecution has not been able to prove motive in this case, a
greater care and caution is required while approaching the evidence
led by the prosecution.
20.      The next circumstance sought to be proved by the prosecution is
the evidence relating to the last seen.            The material witnesses
examined in that regard are PW2 Surender Singh and PW5 Prabh Kaur.
PW5 Prabh Kaur was running a Kiryana shop in her house No.C-36-A.
She has deposed that on 24.09.88 at around 2/2:30 pm, the appellant
threw a fifty paise coin from her first floor house and requested her to
give toffees to the deceased Shunty. Thereafter, the deceased came
to her shop and went upstairs towards the house of the appellant after
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                              Page 12 of 21

taking two toffees. Her aforesaid version finds corroboration from the
testimony of PW2 Surender Singh who was present at the shop of
Prabh Kaur at the relevant time and who has deposed to the same
effect. Both these witnesses were cross-examined at length, but their
testimony could not be shaken. Learned counsel for the appellant has
submitted that if the testimony of above two witnesses is to be
believed, then the deceased was alive till 2:30 pm, which fact is belied
by the post mortem report. Perusal of post mortem report Ex.PW10/A
reveals that it has fixed the time of death of the deceased between 22
to 24 hours prior to the time of commencement of the post mortem.
The post mortem, as per the report, commenced on 25.09.88 at 1:00
pm.      Therefore, if calculated backwards, the time of death is fixed
between 1:00 to 3:00 pm on 24.09.88. Thus, we find no inconsistency
between the oral testimony of PW2 Surender Singh and PW5 Prabh
Kaur vis-à-vis the medical evidence. Learned counsel for the appellant
also submitted that even if the testimony of PW2 Surender Singh and
PW5 Prabh Kaur is taken to be true, then also it only proves that the
appellant got toffees to the deceased on 24.09.88 at around 2:30 pm,
but it does not establish that the deceased, after having taken toffees
had gone to the house of the appellant, particularly when the house of
the grandfather of the deceased was on the same floor of the building.
We find force in this contention of the appellant and are of the view
that as per the testimony of PW2 and PW5, the prosecution has only
been able to establish that the deceased Shunty was seen alive on
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                           Page 13 of 21

24.09.88 at around 2.00 to 2:30 pm and at that time the appellant was
present in her house and she threw an eight anna coin and asked PW5
Prabh Kaur to give toffees to Shunty.
21.      The two most important factors forming basis of the conviction of
the appellant are her extra judicial confession and recovery of dead
body of the deceased from the loft in the kitchen of her house at her
instance. To prove these circumstances, the prosecution has examined
PW1 Jagrup Kaur (complainant), PW3 Jaspal Singh, an independent
witness and PW12 Kirpal Kaur.
22.      PW1 Jagrup Kaur is categoric in her version that on 24.09.88,
somewhere around 4:30 to 5:00 pm they found that the deceased
Shunty was missing. Thereafter, she along with other family members,
including PW12 Kirpal Kaur and PW11 Surender Kaur, the mother of the
deceased, went in search of the deceased. The appellant also joined in
the search for some time and thereafter she left. When Shunty could
not be found, PW12 Kirpal Kaur expressed her suspicion against the
appellant.       Therefore, they went to the house of the appellant and
knocked at her door. The appellant, when she opened the door, was
nervous and on inquiry about the deceased, she confessed that she
had committed a blunder and killed the deceased Shunty by
strangulation. PW1 Jagrup Kaur further deposed that thereafter the
appellant took them to the kitchen of her house and showed them the
dead body of the deceased lying on the “Parchatti” (loft) of the kitchen
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                             Page 14 of 21

by removing a wooden plank.       Aforesaid version of PW1 Jagrup Kaur is
fully corroborated by PW3 Jaspal Singh and PW12 Kirpal Kaur, who
have deposed to the similar effect. All the three witnesses were cross-
examined at length by the learned defence counsel, but their
testimony could not be shaken so far as the above two circumstances
are concerned.
23.      Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that the above
referred testimony of PW1 Jagrup Kaur, PW3 Jaspal Singh and PW12
Kirpal Kaur is not worthy of credence, firstly, because there was no
reason for the aforesaid witnesses and Pritam Singh to suspect the
appellant and go to her house to find out the whereabouts of Shunty.
Secondly, he has contended that PW1 Jagrup Kaur and PW12 Kirpal
Kaur are interested witnesses.      Therefore, also no reliance ought to
have been placed upon their testimony when the appellant had taken a
defence that Shunty (deceased) had been killed by Kirpal Kaur who
initially was the prime suspect along with one Santokh Singh and the
father of Kirpal Kaur in connivance with the police had shifted the
blame on the appellant.
24.      We do not find merit in the above contention. Despite the fact
that the prosecution has not been able to establish motive on the part
of the appellant beyond doubt, we do not find anything unnatural in the
above referred witnesses and Pritam Singh having gone to the house of
the appellant, who was a next door neighbour, to find out about the
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                             Page 15 of 21

deceased Shunty. The real issue is whether or not the appellant made
an extra judicial confession in presence of the above witnesses and
showed them the dead body of the deceased lying in the “Parchatti” of
her kitchen.     In this regard, we find the testimony of the witnesses
consistent, which remained unshaken despite of lengthy cross-
examination.      There is no law that the testimony of an interested
witness, if otherwise reliable, cannot form basis for the conviction of
the accused.        We may point out that PW3 Jaspal Singh is an
independent witness and he is neither related to the complainant party
nor to the appellant.      He has fully corroborated the version of PW1
Jagrup Kaur and PW12 Kirpal Kaur regarding the extra judicial
confession made by the appellant and the recovery of dead body of the
deceased from the “Parchatti” of the kitchen in the house of the
appellant at her instance.     There is nothing on record to suggest that
PW3 Jaspal Singh had any motive or reason to falsely implicate the
appellant in this case.      Thus, we find no reason to disbelieve the
testimony of above three witnesses. Otherwise also, a suggestion was
put to PW12 Kirpal Kaur on behalf of the appellant that it was she who
had concealed the dead body of her nephew Shunty in the house of the
appellant as she was having free access to the house of the accused
and she also had the key to the house of the accused. This suggestion
supports the testimony of PW1 Jagrup Kaur, PW3 Jaspal Singh and
PW12 Kirpal Kaur that the dead body of the deceased was actually
found lying at the “Parchatti” of the kitchen in the house of the
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                             Page 16 of 21

appellant. Thus, we find no reason to disbelieve the evidence of the
above witnesses regarding the extra judicial confession made by the
appellant and the recovery of the dead body.
25.      Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that even if it is
assumed that the dead body of the deceased was recovered from the
loft of the kitchen of the appellant, then also, this by itself is not
sufficient to hold the appellant guilty. In support of this contention, he
has relied upon the judgment in the matter of State of U.P. Vs. Arun
Kumar Gupta, (2003) 2 SCC 202.
26.      We find no substance in the contention. The judgment referred
to by learned counsel for the appellant, in our considered view, is
based upon the peculiar factual matrix of that case and is not
applicable to the facts of this case.        In that case, case of the
prosecution was that the dead body was got recovered by the accused
during investigation and there was no explanation forthcoming on the
record as to why the Investigating Officer did not make any endeavour
to join independent witness from the locality to the recovery. In the
instant case, the facts are totally different.   The dead body was got
recovered at the instance of the appellant from the loft of the kitchen
of her house prior to the investigating agency coming into motion.
Otherwise also, in the instant case there is an independent witness to
support the recovery of dead body at the instance of the appellant.
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                              Page 17 of 21

27.      We may note at this juncture that from the testimony of PW2
Surender Singh and PW5 Prabh Kaur, it stands established that on the
fateful day at around 2:30 pm, the appellant asked PW5 Prabh Kaur to
give toffees worth eight anna to the deceased and thereafter the
deceased went upstairs towards the house of the appellant.                This
implies that the appellant was present in her house at 2:30 pm. There
is nothing on record either in the form of suggestions given to the
witnesses or in the statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. of the
appellant to show that the appellant had left her house during the
period, i.e., from 2:30 pm till the time when the appellant went with the
witnesses in search of the deceased.      PW1 Jagrup Kaur, in response to
a question in her cross-examination, stated that when the appellant
accompanied them in search of the deceased, she had locked her
house. Aforesaid version has not been controverted by the appellant
by giving any suggestion to the contrary.        Thus, it is apparent that
while leaving her house along with the witnesses in search of the
deceased, the appellant had locked the door of her house, which rules
out any possibility of someone else having entered her house and
planted the dead body of the deceased at the loft in the kitchen of the
house of the appellant.
28.      It was contended on behalf of the appellant that PW12 Kirpal Kaur
was very thick with the appellant and she had a free access to her
residence and not only that, she was also having a key to the house,
therefore, a possibility cannot be ruled out that PW12 Kirpal Kaur might
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                              Page 18 of 21

have opened the door of the house of the appellant and planted the
dead body in the loft. From the testimony of PW1 Jagrup Kaur, PW3
Jaspal Singh and PW11 Surender Kaur, it is apparent that Kirpal Kaur
remained there during the search, before the appellant left the search
party.      Therefore, there is no possibility that Kirpal Kaur may have
planted the dead body in the loft in the kitchen of the house of the
appellant.
29.      The defence taken by the appellant in her statement under
Section 313 Cr.P.C. is that PW12 Kirpal Kaur is the real culprit. She
wanted to marry one Santokh Singh, electrician, with whom PW11
Surender Kaur also had an affair. Therefore, she was opposed to the
alliance of PW12 Kirpal Kaur with Santokh Singh.          Because of said
reason, Kirpal Kaur was nursing a grudge against PW11 Surender Kaur
and, therefore, in order to settle score, she killed the deceased Shunty,
son of Surender Kaur. In the cross-examination of PW12 Kirpal Kaur, a
suggestion was given to her that on the relevant night Kirpal Kaur and
Sontokh Singh had been apprehended by the police and were made to
sit the whole night at the police station.         But, later on with the
intervention of her father Pritam Singh, Kirpal Kaur and Santokh Singh
were released by the police and the appellant was falsely implicated in
the case.
30.      The above defence of the appellant is belied by the record of this
case.      From the record, it transpires that the police was intimated
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                              Page 19 of 21

about the murder of the deceased vide DD No.66B at 10:15 pm, on
receipt of which the Investigating Officer, SI Anil Kumar, PW28
immediately proceeded to the spot where he recorded the statement
Ex.PW1/A of Jagrup Kaur PW1 and said statement was despatched to
the police station on the night of 24.09.88 at 11:20 pm vide Rukka Ex.
PW28/A and on the basis of said Rukka, formal FIR Ex.PW22/A was
registered at 11:34 pm on 24.09.88.           Perusal of the complainant
statement Ex.PW1/A and the FIR Ex.PW22/A reveals that by 11:20 pm
in the night, the complaint, categorically implicating the appellant for
murder of the deceased, had been recorded and by 11:34 pm even the
formal FIR detailing those facts was recorded. This circumstance rules
out any possibility of police having detained PW12 Kirpal Kaur and
Santokh Singh at the police station as suspects. Thus, in our view, the
defence set up by the appellant is not plausible.
31.      The result of above discussion is that the prosecution has been
able to firmly establish that the appellant got recovered the dead body
of Shunty from the “Parchatti” of the kitchen in her house and that she
also made an extra judicial confession in the presence of PW1 Jagrup
Kaur, PW3 Jaspal Singh and PW12 Kirpal Kaur confessing that she had
killed the deceased by strangulation.         The aforesaid extra judicial
confession further finds corroboration from the post mortem report
Ex.PW10/A wherein the Doctor concerned had opined that there were
ligature marks around the neck of the deceased and his death was due
to     asphyxia     consequent   upon     strangulation.  The    aforesaid
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                             Page 20 of 21

circumstances, in our considered view, form a complete chain so as to
conclusively point towards the guilt of the appellant and rules out any
possibility of her being innocent. Thus, we do not find any infirmity in
the impugned judgment of conviction and the order on sentence.
32.      The appeal, being devoid of merits, is accordingly dismissed.
33.      The appellant is on bail. Her bail bond and surety bond stand
cancelled. She be taken into custody and sent to Jail to undergo the
remaining sentence.
                                           AJIT BHARIHOKE, J.
DECEMBER 22, 2009                          SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
pst
Crl.A.No.29/1995                                               Page 21 of 21


