*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                          Judgment reserved on: February 17, 2011
                          Judgment delivered on: February 24, 2011
+       CRL.M.C. 3315/2010 & CRL.M.A. NO.16483/2010
        GAURAV KUMAR & ANR.                       ....PETITIONERS
                    Through:    Mr. Vikas Sharma, Advocate
                          Versus
        SURINDER PATWA                            .....RESPONDENT
                    Through: Mr. K.S. Pathania, Advocate
         CORAM:
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AJIT BHARIHOKE
1.      Whether Reporters of local papers
        may be allowed to see the judgment?
2.      To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3.      Whether the judgment should be
        reported in Digest ?
AJIT BHARIHOKE, J.
1.      Gaurav Kumar and Ms. Kiran Vihani, the petitioners herein vide
instant petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. have prayed for the quashing of
complaint case No.131/1/2005 pending in the court of Metropolitan
Magistrate,      New   Delhi   and   consequent     summoning     order    dated
25.07.2005 qua them.
2.      Briefly stated, the facts relevant for the disposal of this petition are
that the respondent Surinder Patwa, Proprietor of M/s. Madan Lal
Crl.M.C.3315/2010                                                    Page 1 of 8

Surender Kumar filed above referred complaint No.131/1/2005 under
Section 138 read with 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act against M/s.
Fisba Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as “Company”) and its
four directors, including the petitioners.
3.      It is alleged in the complaint that the complainant had supplied yarn
products to the accused company against two post dated cheques being
cheque No.217415 dated 03.06.2004 for Rs. 8,55,000/- and cheque
No.217416 dated 04.06.2004 for Rs. 5,35,000/-, each drawn on State
Bank of Patiala, Azadpur Sabzi Mandi, 27 Transport Centre, New Delhi –
33, which were revalidated on 18.03.2005. Shitij Kumar, director of the
company is stated to be the signatory of those cheques. These cheques,
when presented for encashment through the bankers of the complainant,
were returned unpaid with the remarks “Insufficient Funds”.                      The
complainant, therefore, issued a notice of demand under Section 138 N.I.
Act to the company and its directors, including the petitioners, but they
failed to pay the cheque amount within the requisite period despite
service of notice. Consequently, the complainant was constrained to file
the complaint under Section 138 read with 141 N.I. Act against the
company and its directors, including the petitioners.
4.      The allegations to fix the vicarious liability of the petitioners with the
aid of Section 141 N.I. Act are in para 21 of the complaint, which is
reproduced thus:
Crl.M.C.3315/2010                                                      Page 2 of 8

        “21. That the accused No.1 is a company incorporated under the
        Companies Act 1956.       Accused No.1 company has issued the
        abovementioned cheques for the discharge of its liability in part.
        Accused No.2,3,4 & 5 are directors of the accused No.1 company and
        were/are in charge of the affairs of the company and are responsible
        to the company for the conduct of the business of the company. The
        offence has been committed with the consent and connivance of the
        accused No.2,3,4 & 5 as well as accused No.1 are guilty of the offence
        envisaged u/s 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act and are liable to
        be proceeded against and punished accordingly.”
5.      On the basis of the aforesaid allegations in the complaint and the
affidavit evidence of the complainant reiterating the allegations, the
learned Magistrate passed the impugned order of summoning the
petitioners.
6.      The petitioners, feeling aggrieved, have filed present petition
seeking quashing of the summoning order dated 25.07.2005.
7.      Main contention on behalf of the petitioners is that apart from a bald
allegation in the complaint with regard to the petitioners being directors
of the accused company and in-charge of day to day affairs of the
company and being responsible to the company for the conduct of the
business, there is no allegation in the complaint which could, prima facie,
show as to how the petitioners were in charge and responsible for day to
day affairs of the company and what were the acts and functions which
were being discharged by them so as to bring them within the ambit of
law under Section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.                 Learned
Crl.M.C.3315/2010                                                     Page 3 of 8

counsel submitted that in absence of any specific allegations in this
regard, the order of summoning is not sustainable in law.
8.      Learned counsel for the respondent, on the contrary, has submitted
that the complainant has made a specific allegation against the
petitioners that they were directors of the accused company and were in-
charge of day to day affairs and conduct of the business of the company,
which fact is also supported by the affidavit evidence filed by the
respondent in the court. Therefore, the initial onus for making a prima
facie case against the petitioners has been discharged by the respondent.
Learned counsel contended that now the onus is on the petitioners to
adduce the evidence during the course of trial to establish that they were
not in-charge and responsible for the conduct of the business of the
company.
9.      I have considered the rival contentions and gone through the
material on record.
10.     The law relating to vicarious liability of a director under Section 141
of N.I. Act for the offence under Section 138 N.I. Act committed by a
company is well settled. The question came up for consideration before a
three Judge Bench of Supreme Court in SMS Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs.
Neeta Bhalla, (2005) 8 SCC 89 wherein upon consideration of a
number of decisions of the Apex Court, Supreme Court opined thus:
Crl.M.C.3315/2010                                                    Page 4 of 8

               “10. While analysing Section 141 of the Act, it will be seen that
        it operates in cases where an offence under Section 138 is committed
        by a company. The key words which occur in the section are “every
        person”. These are general words and take every person connected
        with a company within their sweep. Therefore, these words have been
        rightly qualified by use of the words:
               “Who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of,
        and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business
        of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
        of the offence, etc.”
               What is required is that the persons who are sought to be made
        criminally liable under Section 141 should be, at the time the offence
        was committed, in charge of and responsible to the company for the
        conduct of the business of the company. Every person connected with
        the company shall not fall within the ambit of the provision. It is only
        those persons who were in charge of and responsible for the conduct
        of business of the company at the time of commission of an offence,
        who will be liable for criminal action. It follows from this that if a
        director of a company who was not in charge of and was not
        responsible for the conduct of the business of the company at the
        relevant time, will not be liable under the provision. The liability
        arises from being in charge of and responsible for the conduct of
        business of the company at the relevant time when the offence was
        committed and not on the basis of merely holding a designation or
        office in a company. Conversely, a person not holding any office or
        designation in a company may be liable if he satisfies the main
        requirement of being in charge of and responsible for the conduct of
        business of a company at the relevant time. Liability depends on the
        role one plays in the affairs of a company and not on designation or
        status. If being a director or manager or secretary was enough to cast
        criminal liability, the section would have said so. Instead of “every
        person” the section would have said “every director, manager or
        secretary in a company is liable”..., etc. The legislature is aware that
        it is a case of criminal liability which means serious consequences so
        far as the person sought to be made liable is concerned. Therefore,
        only persons who can be said to be connected with the commission of
        a crime at the relevant time have been subjected to action.”
Crl.M.C.3315/2010                                                       Page 5 of 8

11.     In the matter of N.K. Wahi Vs. Shekhar Singh, AIR 2007 SC
1454, Hon’ble Supreme Court while dealing with the vicarious liability
under Section 141 N.I. Act observed thus:
               “8. To launch a prosecution, therefore, against the alleged
               Directors there must be a specific allegation in the complaint as
               to the part played by them in the transaction. There should be
               clear and unambiguous allegation as to how the Directors are
               in-charge and responsible for the conduct of the business of the
               company. The description should be clear. It is true that precise
               words from the provisions of the Act need not be reproduced
               and the court can always come to a conclusion in facts of each
               case. But still, in the absence of any averment or specific
               evidence the net result would be that complaint would not be
               entertainable.”
12.     From the above judgments, it is apparent that in order to rope in a
director of a company for the offence under Section 138 N.I. Act with the
aid of Section 141 of N.I. Act, the complainant is not only required to
make a clear allegation that the person concerned was the director of the
company, but he is also required to make specific allegation of the facts
indicating as to how and in what manner the said director was in-charge
and responsible for conduct of the business of the company.
13.     On reading of the complaint filed by the respondent, it would be
seen that admittedly, the petitioners are not the signatories to the
cheques in question. In order to rope in the petitioners to be vicariously
liable for the offence under Section 138 N.I. Act committed by the
company, in the name of allegations, respondent/complainant has simply
Crl.M.C.3315/2010                                                       Page 6 of 8

reproduced the language of Section 141 N.I. Act in the complaint. There
is no allegation in the complaint to show as to how and in what manner
the petitioner directors were in-charge and responsible for the day to day
affairs and business of the company. In absence of specific allegation in
this regard, in my considered view, the requirement of Section 141 N.I.
Act to hold the petitioners vicariously liable for the offence committed by
the company is not fulfilled. Even in the affidavit evidence given by the
respondent before the Magistrate, there is no mention as to how and in
what manner the petitioner directors were in-charge of or were
responsible to the company for its day to day affairs and conduct of
business.      Thus, in my view, the petitioners cannot be held vicariously
liable for the purported offence under Section 138 N.I. Act committed by
the company.
14.     In view of the above, I am of the considered view that the impugned
order of learned Magistrate dated 25.07.2005 summoning the petitioners
for the offence under Section 138 N.I. Act committed by the company with
the aid of Section 141 N.I. Act is not sustainable in law as there is neither
a specific allegation nor prima facie evidence on record to show that the
petitioners were in-charge and responsible for the conduct of the business
and the day to day affairs of M/s Fisba Enterprises Pvt. Ltd.
Crl.M.C.3315/2010                                                 Page 7 of 8

15.     Result of above discussion is that impugned summoning order dated
25.07.2005 qua the petitioners Gaurav Kumar and Ms. Kiran Vihani is
quashed.
16.     Petition as well as the application stand disposed of accordingly.
                                                  (AJIT BHARIHOKE)
                                                       JUDGE
FEBRUARY 24, 2011
pst
Crl.M.C.3315/2010                                                  Page 8 of 8


