*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                Judgment delivered on: January 27, 2011
+       CRL.M.C. NO. 1907/2008
        BSES RAJDHANI POWER LTD.                       ....PETITIONER
                          Through: Mr. Sunil Fernandes, Advocate with
                                       Mr. Deepak Pathak, Advocate.
                          Versus
        SHAMMI KAPOOR AND ORS.                      ....RESPONDENTS
                          Through: None.
         CORAM:
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AJIT BHARIHOKE
1.      Whether Reporters of local papers
        may be allowed to see the judgment?
2.      To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
3.      Whether the judgment should be
        reported in Digest ?
AJIT BHARIHOKE, J.(ORAL)
1.      BSES Rajdhani Power Limited, the petitioner herein vide this
petition has pressed for following prayer:
         “(i) allow the instant petition and quash the last para of
         the order dated 7th May, 2008 in criminal complaint
         Case No. 1054 of 2007 passed by Special Electricity
         Court, Malviya Nagar, New Delhi and;
         (ii) to pass/make any other such other appropriate
         orders/directions as this Hon’ble Court may deem fit
         and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case.
2.      Briefly stated, facts relevant for disposal of this petition are
that the petitioner company is a licensed power supply company.
Crl.M.C.1907/2008                                               Page 1 of 5

On 07th August, 2007, a statutory inspection/raid was conducted by
the officials of BSES at Flat No. 27-D, Pocket C, Siddharth Extension,
Vasant Kunj, New Delhi. The premises were found occupied by the
respondents Shammi Kapoor, Suraj and Daljeet Singh.                    The
inspection team detected theft/unauthorized use of electricity in the
said premises. Accordingly, a supplementary theft bill for ` 66,792/-
was raised. Respondents failed to pay the amount of supplementary
bill. The petitioner company was thus constrained to file complaint
case No. 1054/2007 in the Special Electricity Court, Malviya Nagar
under Section 135 of the Electricity Act.     Learned Trial Judge took
cognizance of the complaint and adopted summary trial procedure.
3.      During the pendency of trial, the respondents approached the
petitioner company for settlement/compromise and the petitioner
company, as an act of good faith, considered the request of the
respondents and after discussion, reduced the theft bill amount and
allowed the respondent to pay that amount in instalments.              The
factum of this proposed settlement was brought to the notice of
learned Trial Judge on the next date of hearing and on the payment
of the last instalment, the petitioner intimated the court that it does
not wish to proceed with the complaint and prayed for dismissal of
the complaint as compromised.
Crl.M.C.1907/2008                                            Page 2 of 5

4.      It appears that learned Trial Judge took offence to the
petitioner settling the matter with the accused during the pendency
of complaint and while directing the respondents/accused to deposit
the settled amount of theft bill so that the case is closed, inter alia,
observed thus:
           “Heard.    In the given facts, the complainant is
           directed not to deal with subject matter of the
           complaint without permission of the court in any
           manner whatsoever as it caused harassment to the so
           called accused and convenience to the complainant in
           term of finance.     Now, it is submitted by the
           complainant that they will take care in such matters
           and would keep in touch with the department
           concerned so that no such inconvenience is caused to
           the accused persons if (sic) such complaint are
           withdrawn at the earliest. With the direction in terms
           of submission made, the file be consigned to record
           room. A copy of this order be sent to the CEO of the
           complainant in confidential copy”.
Petitioner is aggrieved of the aforesaid order of the court in
restraining the petitioner to enter into out of court settlement of
theft bills during the pendency of the complaint and sending of
confidential communication to the CEO of the petitioner company.
5.      Learned counsel for the petitioner company has submitted that
the learned Trial Court has failed to appreciate that the petitioner
company is a private sector organization in the business of supply of
electricity and its prime concern is to generate profits.      The main
concern of the petitioner company in power theft cases is to ensure
Crl.M.C.1907/2008                                             Page 3 of 5

that the revenue in respect of the power theft is recovered as early
as possible, therefore, the petitioner company is well within its rights
to settle the bills raised in respect of power theft even during the
pendency of the complaint under Section 135 of the Electricity Act.
Learned counsel contended that the learned Additional Sessions, if
he was of the view that the offence under Section 135 Electricity Act
was not compoundable, could have rejected the request of the
petitioner company for withdrawal of the complaint but the Trial
Court had no jurisdiction to restrain the petitioner company from
settling the bill amounts after initiating the prosecution of the
accused under Section 135 of the Electricity Act.
6.      I find merit in the above submission of learned counsel for the
petitioner. The object of Section 135 of the Electricity Act is to deter
the theft of electricity but at the same time, one cannot ignore that
the petitioner company, who is in the business of supply of
electricity has a legal right to recover the revenue in respect of the
power theft by raising bill or even by encouraging settlement and
such an act on the part of the petitioner company, by no stretch of
imagination,      can   be   termed    as interference  in  the   judicial
proceedings even if there is a complaint under Section 135 of the
Electricity Act pending.        Thus, in my view, the learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Special Electricity Court had no jurisdiction to send a
communication to the CEO of the petitioner company to refrain from
Crl.M.C.1907/2008                                             Page 4 of 5

settling the matter after filing of the complaint under Section 135 of
the Electricity Act. Learned Additional Sessions Judge also seems to
have lost sight of the fact that he was exercising criminal jurisdiction
under the Code of Criminal Procedure and not a writ jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India where he could issue
such directions or orders.     An Additional Sessions Judge presides
over a particular jurisdiction and he is bound by rules of procedure
and he cannot overstep into the areas which does not concern the
jurisdiction being exercised by him. If, on hearing the parties, the
Judge was of the view that there was no justification in prayer for
withdrawal of the complaint, he could have rejected request of the
petitioner instead of issuing directions to the petitioner through its
CEO.
7.      In view of the aforesaid, I find it difficult to sustain the
impugned order of the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Special
Electricity Court, Malviya Nagar dated 07th May, 2008. The order is
accordingly quashed.
                                              (AJIT BHARIHOKE)
                                                   JUDGE
JANUARY 27, 2011
akb
Crl.M.C.1907/2008                                            Page 5 of 5


