*               IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                         C.W.P No.718/1987
%                    Date of decision: 1.7.2008
       Ram Phal                                  ….… PETITIONER
                          Through: Mr.Anil Mittal, Advocate.
                                  Versus
       Union of India & Ors.                     ........ RESPONDENTS
                          Through: Ms.Saroj Bidawat, Advocate.
CORAM :-
   HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
    1. Whether reporters of Local papers may                  YES
       be allowed to see the judgment?
    2. To be referred to the reporter or not?                 YES
    3. Whether the judgment should be reported                YES
       in the Digest?
ANIL KUMAR, J.
1.     The petitioner, a dismissed conductor of Delhi Transport
Corporation, seeks quashing of his dismissal order contained in
letters dated 20th September, 1985, 20th May, 1986 and 3rd March,
1987 and he seeks a declaration that Regulation 14 of DRTA
(Conditions of Appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952        is ultra
vires, void and violative of Articles 14, 16, 19 and 21 of the
Constitution of India. The petitioner has also claimed that he is
deemed to be in continuous employment and, therefore, he is entitled
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                            Page 1 of 20

for reinstatement with all consequential benefits including back wages
and continuation in service.
2.     The brief facts to comprehend     the controversies are that the
petitioner was appointed as a Conductor with respondent No.2 on 24th
April, 1982 and he was given Badge No.12652.         During his service
with the respondent No.2, petitioner fell sick and he was absent from
19th May, 1985 to 5th June, 1985. He alleged that he had submitted a
leave application to the respondent No.2. The petitioner also
contended that he was diagnosed suffering from Tuberculosis. The
petitioner was undergoing treatment at Dr.Ram Manohar Lohia
Hospital.
3.     A notice dated 26th August,1985 was given to the petitioner on
account of his absence from duties with effect from 19th May, 1985
and because the leave application submitted by him was without any
medical certificate for the period 19th May, 1985 to 5th June, 1985. It
was stated in the notice that he had not been reporting for the duty at
Depot and he had also not submitted any application after 6th June,
1985. The notice also stipulated that on 18th May, 1985 only 14 days
leave was due to him which could only be regularized on submission
of medical certificate. He was also intimated that on his failure to
produce requisite medical certificate, the period of his leave from 19th
May, 1985 could only be regularized as extraordinary leave without
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                             Page 2 of 20

pay. Reliance was placed on Para 14(10) (b) of DRTA (Conditions of
Appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952 and it was contended that
extraordinary leave without pay beyond three months and up to 18
months could be granted, in case of employee suffering from
Pulmonary Tuberculosis or Tuberculosis of any other part of the body.
The notice categorically stipulated that in case petitioner failed to
submit the requisite medical certificate in reply to the notice, the
period of leave/absence beyond three months will not be regularized
and he will be deemed to have resigned from his appointment with
effect from 19th August, 1985 under regulation 14(10) (b) of DRTA
(Conditions of Appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952 without
any further reference and intimation to him.
4.     The case of the petitioner is that he submitted a medical
certificate dated 12th September, 1985 issued by the Medical Officer,
Dr. Ram Manohar Lal Hospital, New Delhi.        The medical certificate
stipulated that period of absence from 19th July, 1985 till 12th
September, 1985 for 56 days was absolutely necessary for restoration
of petitioner‟s health as he was suffering from Tuberculosis. Another
medical certificate of the same date was also issued by Dr.A. Sahay
for the period 20th May, 1985 upto 18th July, 1985 stipulating that the
leave was necessary for restoration of petitioner‟s health from
Tuberculosis. A copy of the letter dated 16th September,1985 has also
been    produced by the petitioner to show that          by  the said
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                           Page 3 of 20

communication which was addressed by the Depot Manager of the
respondent Corporation to the Medical Superintendent, Dr. Ram
Manohar Lohia Hospital, the Depot Manager had sought clarifications
regarding the certificates on the ground that it did not bear any serial
number. Information was also sought from the Hospital, whether the
petitioner was hospitalized for T.B or was under treatment only and
why the petitioner was not referred to T.B. Hospital. This information
was sought by the Depot Manager to regularize the period of absence
of petitioner from duty for the period 19th May, 1985 to 12th
September, 1985.
5.     The copy of the said communication sent by the Depot Manager
to the Medical Superintendent, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, has
also been produced by respondent No.2 as Annexure R1 with the
endorsement dated 19th September, 1985 by the hospital that the
medical certificates produced by the petitioner were issued by Dr.A.
Sahay and his case was not referred to T.B. Hospital as it was not
thought proper to do so.
6.     On 20th September, 1985, however, the dismissal order was
issued against the petitioner without considering the medical
certificate produced by him pursuant to notice dated 26th August,
1985 and the clarification sought by the respondent from the Medical
Superintendent, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital was also not taken
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                            Page 4 of 20

into consideration. The dismissal order only stipulated that the
absence of the petitioner beyond three months cannot be regularized
under clause 14(10) (b) of DRTA (Conditions of Appointment and
Service) Regulation, 1952, and, therefore, the petitioner is deemed to
have resigned his appointment from the respondent No.2 Corporation
with effect from 19th August, 1985 in accordance with the Clause
14(10)    (e)   of  DRTA (Conditions   of Appointment    and   Service)
Regulation, 1952.
7.     The petitioner made representation on 21st September,1985
against the order of his deemed dismissal dated 20th September,
1985. Another representation dated 10th March, 1986 was also sent.
The representations seeking quashing of deemed dismissal order and
seeking reinstatement were rejected by order dated 20th May, 1986.
An appeal dated 3rd July, 1986 was also filed by the petitioner which
was also declined and the order of rejection of appeal was
communicated to the petitioner by communication dated 3rd March,
1987.
8.     The petitioner, therefore, filed the present petition on 12th
March, 1987 seeking the relief of reinstatement and back wages. The
learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on AIR 1966 Supreme
Court 492, Jai Shanker v. State of Rajasthan; D.K. Yadav v. JMA
Industries Limited, (1993) 3 SCR 930 and Syndicate Bank v. General
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                           Page 5 of 20

Secretary, Syndicate Bank Staff Association & Anr., (2000) 5 SCC 65
to contend that even if there is a clause in the Regulation of the
Corporation for deemed resignation, the principle of natural justice
have to be read into it, and an opportunity ought to have been given
to the petitioner, no matter how the regulation had described it.
According to the learned counsel, not giving an opportunity to the
petitioner before his dismissal is contrary to Article 311 of the
Constitution of India. The learned counsel also contended that the
alleged unauthorized absence from duty is also mis-conduct as per
standing order No.4 of the Standing Orders governing the Conduct of
Employees of DTC and as per Regulation 15 of the DRTA Regulations,
1952, a detailed procedure of charge sheet for obtaining reply from
the employees and then holding inquiry has been prescribed before
imposition of any punishment. Consequently, it has been prayed that
the order of dismissal dated 20th September, 1985 and declining the
request of the petitioner dated 20th May, 1986 to reinstate him be set
aside and the order dated 3rd May, 1987 dismissing the appeal of the
petitioner be set aside and the petitioner be reinstated with continuity
of service and full back wages.
9.     Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on a judgment
of a Division Bench of this Court dated 7th May, 2002 in LPA Nos.208,
181, 28-38 of 2002, Delhi Transport Corporation v. Daya Nand &
others upholding the decision of a single Bench holding that the
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                             Page 6 of 20

termination of the services of the employees of DTC without giving an
opportunity of hearing was not valid and sustainable.
10.    The respondent No.2 has contested the petition contending inter
alia that the petitioner was appointed as daily wage conductor with
effect from 25th October, 1978 and was granted monthly rates with
effect from 25th April, 1979 and after his probation period was over,
he was confirmed on the post with effect from 24th April, 1980. It was
asserted that the petitioner was in the habit of taking excessive leave
and he was a habitual absentee. According to the respondent no.2,
the petitioner performed his duties for one day on May 18th, 1985 and
thereafter an undated application was received from him for grant of
leave on the ground of illness. Another application was received on
28th May, 1985 for grant of leave from 19th May, 1985 to 25th May,
1985. It is asserted that two more applications were received from the
petitioner on 31st May, 1985 and 6th June, 1985 for grant of leave on
the same ground but none of the applications were supported by any
medical certificate. The respondent no.2 further contended that letters
dated 24th July, 1985 and 6th August, 1985 were sent to the petitioner
to report to the Medical Officer of the respondent no.2 or to submit
medical certificate in support of his medical sickness. Ultimately a
notice dated 26th August, 1985 was sent and consequent thereto
petitioner sent two medical certificates from the Doctors of Ram
Manohar Lohia Hospital advising him rest for the period 20th May,
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                           Page 7 of 20

1985 to 18th July, 1985 and for the period 19th July, 1985 to 12th
September, 1985. On receiving the medical certificates, a letter was
written by the respondent no.2 to the Medical Superintendent asking
as to why the certificates submitted by the petitioner do not bear any
serial numbers. It was also enquired as to whether the petitioner was
under hospitalization for T.B or under careful treatment and as to
why the petitioner was not referred to the T.B Hospital.
11.    The respondent no.2 admitted that a reply was received from
the Medical Superintendent that medical certificate do not bear any
serial number and that it was not thought proper to refer the
petitioner to the T.B Hospital. The plea of the respondent no.2 is that
the explanation given by the hospital was not satisfactory and as
petitioner was a habitual absentee and as he had forfeited the
confidence reposed in him, he was dismissed and he is not entitled for
the relief of reinstatement.
12.    The petitioner filed an additional affidavit relying on an office
order dated 6th February, 1991 stipulating that it has been decided
not to invoke clause 14 (10) of the D.R.TA (Conditions of Appointment
and Service) Regulations, 1952 in cases where the employees
remain/are found absent without prior permission or prior sanction of
leave. By the said order the concerned units were also advised to take
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                            Page 8 of 20

disciplinary action against such employees in accordance with the
standing orders governing the conduct of D.T.C employees. The
petitioner contended that in case the respondent no.2 was not
satisfied with the medical certificates and the explanation given by the
concerned medical hospital, then he should have been given an
opportunity before resorting to invocation of clause 14(10) (c) of
D.R.T.A (Conditions of appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952. It
was further asserted that the medical certificates were issued by the
concerned doctors and that the respondent no.2 cannot contend that
the explanation given by the hospital was not satisfactory.
13. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in detail. The
order impugned by the petitioner dated 20th September, 1985 only
stipulates that since the petitioner had remained absent for more
than three months, his absence beyond the period of three months
cannot be regularized under clause 14(10) (b) of D.R.T.A (Conditions
of appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952 and therefore it was
declared that he has deemed to have resigned his appointment from
the respondent no.2 w.e.f 19th May, 1985. From the said order it is
apparent that neither the medical certificates given by the petitioner
from Dr.Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital were considered nor the
explanation sought from the said hospital was considered.          In the
counter affidavit filed by the respondent no.2 it is rather contended
that the explanation given by the hospital was not found to be
  WP(C) 718 of 1987                                             Page 9 of 20

satisfactory. The genuineness of the medical certificates given by the
petitioner were doubted on the ground that they did not bear any
serial number.     The hospital however, admitted that the medical
certificates were genuine. In the circumstances how the explanation
given by the hospital was not satisfactory has not been explained by
the respondent no.2. This cannot be doubted, in the facts and
circumstances that the petitioner was suffering from tuberculosis.
Can the rest advised by the medical hospital on the ground that the
petitioner was suffering from tuberculosis be denied on the ground
that the case of the petitioner was not referred by the Hospital to the
T.B. Hospital? The respondent no.2 is unable to show how the leave
sought by the petitioner could be denied to him in the present facts
and circumstances and how clause 14(10) (c) of D.R.T.A (Conditions of
appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952 could be invoked in the
present facts and circumstances.
14.     It is no more res-Integra that when a statutory functionary
makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged
by the reasons mentioned therein and cannot be supplemented by
fresh reasons. The order dated 20th September, 1985 is based on the
ground that the absence beyond three months could not                  be
regularized. The medical certificates given by the petitioner have not
been considered at all nor the explanation given by the Medical
Hospital pursuant to the clarification sought by the respondent no.2.
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                           Page 10 of 20

The     respondent      no.2  could   not    contend   in  the  facts     and
circumstances that the explanation given by the Medical Hospital
regarding the two medical certificates and the petitioner suffering
from Tuberculosis was not found to be satisfactory. The Apex Court in
AIR 1978 SC 851 = (1978) 1 SCC 405, Mohinder Singh Gill v. The
Chief Election Commissioner had held that the orders cannot be
supplemented by fresh reasons as otherwise an order bad in the
beginning may, by the time it comes to Court on account of a
challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought out.
Consequently the respondent no.2 cannot validate its order dated 20th
September, 1985 on the ground that the explanation given was not
satisfactory. The Apex Court in case of Mohinder Singh Gill(supra) in
para 8 at page 417 had held as under:
                 “8. The second equally relevant matter is that when a
                statutory functionary makes an order based on certain
                grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so
                mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons
                in the shape of affidavit or otherwise. Otherwise, an order
                bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to court
                on account of a challenge, get validated by additional
                grounds later brought out. We may here draw attention to
                the observations of Bose, J. in Gordhandas Bhanj (AIR
                1952 SC 16):
                      “Public orders, publicly made, in exercise of a
                      statutory authority cannot be construed in the light
                      of explanations subsequently given by the officer
                      making the order of what he meant, or of what was
                      in his mind, or what he intended to do. Public
                      orders made by public authorities are meant to
                      have public effect and are intended to affect the
                      actings and conduct of those to whom they are
                      addressed and must be construed objectively with
                      reference to the language used in the order itself.”
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                                Page 11 of 20

15.     The petitioner has been dismissed from service on the basis of
Regulation 14(10) of the respondent Corporation which is as under:-
                “10(a). Extraordinary leave without pay may be granted to
                an employee in Special circumstances:-
                       i) when no other leave is admissible, or
                       ii) when other leave is admissible but the employee
                       concerned applies in writing for the grant of
                       extraordinary leave.
                b) The duration of extraordinary leave shall not ordinarily
                exceed three months on any one occasion. In exceptional
                cases; it may be extended to eighteen months subject to
                such conditions as the Authority may be general or
                special orders prescribed only when the employee
                concerned is undergoing treatment for:-
                       i) Pulmonary       tuberculosis    in  a   recognized
                       sanatorium, or
                       ii) Tuberculosis of any other part of the body by a
                       qualified tuberculosis specialist, or
                       iii) leprosy in a recognized leprosy institution or a
                       specialist in leprosy recognized as such by the State
                       Administrative Medical Officer concerned.
                Note:-1. The concession of extraordinary leave upto
                eighteen months will be admissible also to an employee,
                who for want of accommodation in any recognized
                sanatorium at or near the place of his duty receives
                treatment at his residence under a tuberculosis
                specialists recognized as such by the State Administrative
                Medical Officer concerned and produces a certificate
                signed by that Specialist to the effect that he is under his
                treatment and that he has reasonable chances of recovery
                on the expiry of the leave recommended.
                Note 2:- The concession of extraordinary leave upto
                eighteen months under this scheme will be admissible
                only to those employees, who have been in continuous
                service of the authority for a period exceeding one year.
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                                 Page 12 of 20

                c) Where an employee fails to resume duty on the expiry
                of the maximum period of extraordinary leave granted to
                him, or where such an employee, who is granted a lessor
                amount of extraordinary leave than the maximum
                amount admissible, remains absent from duty for any
                period which together with the extraordinary leave
                granted exceeds the limit upto which he could have been
                granted such leave under clause (b), he shall be deemed
                to have resigned his appointment and shall,
                accordingly cease to be in the employment of the
                authority.
                d) The officer empowered to grant leave may commute
                retrospectively periods of absence without leave into
                extraordinary leave.
                e) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub clause (b)
                extraordinary leave may be granted in excess of the limit
                of three months to an employee who is in receipt of
                disablement or sickness benefit from the Employees' State
                Insurance Corporation, in order to allow him a total
                period of six months absence from duty.”
16.     The question before the Court is whether the petitioner could be
dismissed from service without any enquiry on the basis of D.R.T.A
(Conditions of appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952. In the case
of Jai Shankar (Supra) relied on by the petitioner the Supreme Court
was concerned with a similar regulation which was as under:-
                “13. An individual who absents himself without
                permission or who remains absent without permission for
                one month or longer after the end of his leave should be
                considered to have sacrificed his appointment and may
                only be reinstated with the sanction of the competent
                authority.”
17.     Regarding the said regulation it was held by the Apex Court that
the regulation involves a punishment for overstaying one's leave and
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                             Page 13 of 20

the burden is also thrown on the incumbent to secure reinstatement
by showing cause. It was observed that though the Government is
entitled to impose punishment of discharge or removal from the
service but this cannot be done and should not be done without at
least telling such a person that the authorities propose to remove him
and giving him an opportunity of showing cause as to why he should
not be removed. It was held by the Apex Court that a removal is
removal and even after abandonment of service by overstaying one's
leave, an opportunity must be given to the person against whom such
an order is proposed, no matter how the regulation describes it and
not to give any opportunity is to go against Article 311 of the
Constitution of India.
 18.    Comparison of the Regulation 13 in the case of Jai Shankar
(Supra) and Regulation 14(10)(C) reflect that they are quite similar.
Under the regulation of the respondent Corporation, if an employee
fails to resume duties on the expiry of maximum period of
extraordinary leave granted to him, he is deemed to have resigned his
appointment and would cease to be in employment of the authority.
As has been held in the case of Jai Shankar (Supra) such deemed
resignation of an employee of respondent Corporation which is also
without affording him an opportunity of hearing, will be contrary to
and shall be against Article 311 of the Constitution of India. The
respondent no.2, therefore, cannot be allowed to take shelter under
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                            Page 14 of 20

their Regulation 14(10)(c) for deemed resignation of the petitioner and
his removal from the service without giving him an opportunity of
hearing and without conducting an enquiry against him.
19.     The learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied on
D.K.Yadav (Supra) where the Apex Court had held that deemed
abandonment of the service and losing the lien on the appointment
under Clause 13(2)(iv) of the certified standing orders was arbitrary,
unjust, unfair and violative of Article 14, as the principle of natural
justice must be read into the standing order. The principle of natural
justice contemplates that no man should be condemned unheard and
consequently not even a      valid act can affect the rights of such a
person and no decision must be taken which will affect the right of
any person without first being informed of the case and without giving
him/her an opportunity of putting forward his/her case and an order
involving civil consequences must be made consistently with the rules
of natural justice. It was held that it is not so much to act judiciously
but to act fairly that is by adopting a procedure which must be just,
fair and reasonable. In this case the management had not conducted
any domestic enquiry nor had given the employee any opportunity to
put forth his case and, therefore, the abandonment of the service and
losing the lien of the employee under Clause 13(2)(iv) was held to be
invalid and the employee was granted reinstatement with 50% of the
back wages.
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                             Page 15 of 20

20.     In another judgment relied on by the petitioner, Syndicate Bank
(Supra) the reliance was placed by the Supreme Court on D.K.Yadav‟
case (Supra). The Supreme Court had also held that an enquiry would
have been necessary, if the employee had submitted his explanation
which was not acceptable to the employer or that the employee
reported for duty but was not allowed to join the employer. In either
case, it was held that the enquiry would have been necessary.
21.     In a number of petitions which were filed against the different
awards with respect to various workmen who had been dismissed by
the respondent no.2/Corporation invoking clause 14 (10) of D.R.T.A
(Conditions of appointment and Service) Regulation, 1952, holding the
dismissal of the workmen to be illegal and invalid, the Learned Single
Judge had dismissed the writ petitions filed by the respondent no.2
Corporation. The lead matter in this batch of petitions was DTC Vs
Om Kumar decided on 19th October, 2001 being WP(C) 4231/1997 =
2002 III AD (DELHI) 52. The respondent no.2 corporation had
challenged the judgment of Single Judge in the Appeal which appeals
were also dismissed by the Division Bench by order dated 7th May,
2002. The Special leave petition filed against the order of the Division
Bench was also dismissed. These facts were also noticed by another
Single Judge in 2007 V AD (DELHI) 461, DTC Vs Govt. of NCT Delhi &
ors. The learned Single Judge in para 4 on page 462 had held as
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                            Page 16 of 20

under:
                4.     Counsel for the respondent states that during the
                pendency of the present writ petition, the issue that is the
                subject matter of the present writ petition was dealt with
                by a learned Single Judge of this Court in a batch of
                matters, the lead matter being 2002 III AD (DELHI) 52 =
                WP (C) No.4231/1997 entitled DTC Vs. Om Kumar,
                decided on 19.10.2001, wherein the Court dismissed the
                writ petition filed by the DTC, petitioner therein, against
                different awards passed with respect to various workman
                on the same ground, by holding that invocation of Clause
                14 (10) (c) of the Regulations by the petitioner/
                management was not legal. The petitioner DTC then
                challenged the aforementioned order by filing a series of
                appeals before the Division Bench of this Court. Vide
                judgment dated 7.5.2002, the Division Bench of this
                Court dismissed the appeals filed by the petitioner/ DTC
                and upheld the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
                The said judgment was taken in appeal to the Supreme
                Court by the petitioner. It is stated by counsel for the
                parties that the said SLPs have been disposed of by giving
                certain directions to the parties to the effect that the
                respondent/ workmen therein shall be reinstated without
                allowing any claim for back wages and that the period
                covered shall be taken into account by the DTC/
                management for the purpose of continuity of service so
                that retrial/ pensionary benefits could be availed of by
                the respondent/ workmen. It was also ordered that if the
                respondent/ workmen filed their joining reports within
                three weeks of the said order at the Headquarter of the
                DTC, their joining reports shall be considered by the
                authorities and with these directions, the petitions were
                disposed of.
22.     Therefore, in the present facts and circumstances, the order
dated 20th September, 1985 dismissing the services of the petitioner
without holding any enquiry and without giving a reasonable
opportunity to the petitioner, merely on the basis of invoking clause
14   (10)     of   D.R.T.A   (Conditions   of appointment     and   Service)
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                                Page 17 of 20

Regulation, 1952 cannot be sustained and therefore, the order of
dismissal dated 20th September, 1985 is set aside and the petitioner is
reinstated with continuity of service and a direction is given to the
respondent no.2 to reinstate the petitioner with continuity of service.
23.     The next question is whether the petitioner is entitled for back
wages as the order of his termination has been set aside and if so how
much? The Learned counsel for respondent no.2 has contended that
the petitioner is not entitled for any back wages as his services were
terminated in 1985. She has relied on an order dated 25th April, 2006
of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeals nos.7110-7111 of 2004. In the
said appeals, the Supreme Court without going into question of law
raised and considering the special circumstances involved in the
interest of justice had reinstated the employees without their claim for
back wages as the respondents/employees were willing to join back
without laying any claim for back wages. It is apparent that in the
said matter before the Supreme Court the workmen had agreed to
reinstatement without laying claim for back wages. In another matter
relied on by the respondent no.2, WA 13 of 2004, DTC Vs Naresh
Kumar decided on 30.05.2006, since the writ appeal was got
adjourned by the parties awaiting the decision in the case of Prakash
Chand (supra), the writ appeal was disposed of ordering re-
instatement of the employee subject to his foregoing all claims of back
wages. The order of the Supreme Court in the case of Prakash Chand
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                             Page 18 of 20

(supra) was a consent order and the parties before the Division Bench
in the matter of Naresh Kumar (supra) also followed the same and
gave implied consent whereby the employee did not claim back wages.
In another order dated 16.10.2006, Ram Kishan Vs DTC in WP(C)
15176 of 2006 the Single Judge had rather stayed the recovery of the
back wages already paid to the employee and had also ordered that
the amount already recovered be paid back to the employee within a
period of four months. Reliance was placed by the Single Judge in the
case of Ram Kishan (supra) on the order of the Division Bench in LPA
No. 156 of 2001, Ram Dutt Vs DTC & anr where it was held that the
period during which the employee remained out of the service will be
taken     into    account for the  purposes   of  continuity  so    that
retrial/pensionary benefits could be given to the employee. Since the
employee had agreed not to claim back wages, it was also ordered that
the employee will not claim any back wages for the period when he
was out of service. All the orders relied on by the respondent no.2 in
the facts and circumstances are distinguishable. The Supreme Court
had allowed reinstatement in the case of Prakash Chand (supra)
without back wages as the employees had agreed to forgo their claim
for back wages.
24.     Another Single Judge of this Court in the matter of DTC Vs
Govt. of NCT (supra)rather in similar circumstances had modified the
award of the Labor Court granting full back wages to 50% of the back
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                           Page 19 of 20

wages. Considering the facts and circumstances and the trends of the
orders passed from time to time, in the present facts and
circumstances it will be just an appropriate if 50% of the back wages
are awarded to the petitioner. The petitioner is not awarded full back
wages as he has not contributed anything to the organization.
25.     Consequently, for the foregoing reasons the writ petition is
allowed and the impugned order dated 20th September, 1985
dismissing the petitioner from the service of the respondent no.2 is set
aside and the petitioner is reinstated with continuity of service but
with 50 per cent of the back wages. The petitioner in the facts and
circumstances be reinstated within two weeks. The petitioner is
directed to report to the headquarter of the respondent no.2 within
two weeks and on petitioner reporting for duty, his joining report be
accepted by the concerned authority. The back wages in terms of this
order be calculated and paid to the petitioner within four weeks.
Considering the facts and circumstance, the parties are however, left
to bear their own costs.
July 01, 2008.                                    ANIL KUMAR J.
„Dev‟
 WP(C) 718 of 1987                                            Page 20 of 20


