*                   IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                              W.P.(C.) No.6635/2007
%                           Date of Decision: 20.08.2009
Vivek Pratap Singh                                             …. Petitioner
                           Through Mr.Shiv Sagar Tiwari, Advocate
                                     Versus
Vice Chancellor and others                                 …. Respondents
                           Through Mr.Sanjeev     Goel   and    Mr.Praveen
                                     Kumar, Advocates
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
1.       Whether reporters of Local papers may be                YES
         allowed to see the judgment?
2.       To be referred to the reporter or not?                  NO
3.       Whether the judgment should be reported in              NO
         the Digest?
ANIL KUMAR, J. (ORAL)
*
          The petitioner by present petition seeks refund of fees deposited
by him amounting to Rs.30,000/- along with interest at the rate of 18%
per annum from the date of deposit. The petitioner also seeks quashing
of communication dated 7th November, 2006 by which the request of
the petitioner for refund of fees was disallowed. The petitioner has also
sought payment of Rs.5.00 lakh towards damages caused to the
petitioner and his family members.
          Brief facts to comprehend the dispute between the parties are
that the petitioner had applied for admission in MBBS Course under
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                 Page 1 of 9

the handicap category for the academic year 2006-2007. The petitioner
contended that he was called for counseling.
          Relying on the Bulletin of Information for Admission to the MBBS
course, it is contended that after admission during first counseling, if a
student had applied for withdrawal of admission on or before 12th July,
2005, his 50% of the fee was liable to be refunded, however, if any
candidate was found unfit in the medical examination, such a
candidate was entitled for refund of his entire fees.
          According to the petitioner, the first counseling was on 3rd
August, 2006.          The petitioner, therefore, got the demand draft of
Rs.30,000/- made which was payable at State Bank of India, Service
Branch, New Delhi, in favour of Principal MS V.M.M.C. & S.J. Hospital,
Delhi which was deposited at the time of counseling.
          At the time of admission the petitioner had submitted certificates
from the appropriate authority regarding his disability indicating the
extent of his disability. The certificate which was given by the petitioner
was issued by Government of India and had shown his disability to be
50% to 60%. After the admission was given to the petitioner, a Medical
Board was constituted at the instance of the college and the Medical
Board by communication dated 8th August, 2006 opined that the
petitioner does not qualify for admission under physically handicapped
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                  Page 2 of 9

quota as his disability was assessed to be below 3% and therefore the
admission of the petitioner was cancelled.
          Pursuant to the cancellation of the admission, as the petitioner
was found unfit in the medical examination, according to the petitioner,
he became entitled for refund of entire fees, but the respondent on the
contrary forfeited his entire fees. The petitioner represented against the
forfeiture of his fee and after the respondents failed to refund the fee,
the present petition was filed.
          The petition is contested by the respondent contending inter alia
that the petitioner has not come to the court with clean hands and he is
misleading and mis-representing. Reliance has been placed on Clause
22 (x) of Bulletin of Information, which is as under:-
                    “ 22(x)     It will also be the sole responsibility of the
                    candidates themselves to make sure that they are eligible
                    and fulfill all the conditions prescribed for admission.
                    Before filling up the verification slip at the time of
                    counselling/allotment of seats, candidate should ensure
                    that he/she fulfills all eligibility conditions as laid down in
                    his Admission Brochure. If it is found at any stage during
                    the entire period of the programme that the candidate does
                    not fulfill the requisite eligibility conditions, his/her
                    admission will be cancelled and also disciplinary action will
                    be initiated against him/her and entire fee will also be
                    forfeited.”
          The respondent has contended that the petitioner sought
admission and was granted provisional admission under physically
handicapped category. The petitioner had also submitted the medical
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                          Page 3 of 9

certificate        in  the  prescribed    form    which  did not  indicate     the
extent/percentage          of  disability   as   required.   According  to     the
respondent,           candidates    seeking      admission   under   physically
handicapped category were required to have 50% to 70% locomotive
disability, however, after the Medical Board of the Vardhman Mahavir
Medical College, examined the petitioner and the disability was
assessed to be only 3% and consequently the Medical Board did not
find the petitioner fit for admission. It is also contended that since the
petitioner had mis-stated the facts the respondents forfeited the amount
of the entire fee. According to the respondents, the certificate which was
issued by Government of India, vocational rehabilitation centre for
handicapped did not give complete and full information.
          The college therefore, intimated the petitioner about his disability
being only 3% by letter dated August 8th, 2006. The letter sent to the
petitioner categorically stipulated that he did not qualify for admission
under physical handicap quota. The assertion of the respondent is that
Clause 20 of the admission brochure is not applicable to the case of the
petitioner         as   he  had   applied    for   admission  under  physically
handicapped category. The case of the petitioner, according to the
respondent, is covered under Clause 22(x) of bulletin of information and
therefore, his fees was forfeited.
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                     Page 4 of 9

          Under clause 20 of the bulletin of information it is contemplated
that in case any candidate is found unfit in the medical examination,
his fees will be refunded. Clause 20 is as under:-
                    “20:- Withdrawal of admission and refund of fee:
                          After admission during first counseling, if a student
                    applies for withdrawal of admission on or before 12th July,
                    2006 upto 5.00 pm the fee after deduction of 50% of the
                    entire fee will be refundable. The request for withdrawal of
                    admission is to be submitted in Room No.108 in the office
                    of Deputy Registrar (Academic-I) of the University and
                    proper receipt will be issued by the University in this
                    regard. However, if any candidate found unfit in the
                    medical examination, his/her entire fee will be refunded. In
                    case withdrawal application is received after 5.00 pm of
                    12th July, 2006 then no money excepting the security
                    deposit of Rs.5,000/- shall be refunded.”
          This is not disputed that the petitioner had submitted his
disability certificate issued by the Government of India. The plea of the
respondents is that the certificate submitted by the petitioner about his
disability did not disclose the extent of his disability, as he could be
admitted in the said category only if he had 50% to 70% locomotive
disability. This plea on behalf of the respondents is not correct. An
additional affidavit was filed by the respondents along with the copy of
the medical certificate submitted by the petitioner. The said certificate
categorically stipulated that the disability of the petitioner is 50% to
70%. If that be so then the petitioner had submitted the certificate in
compliance with clause 22 (x) of bulletin of Information about the extent
of his disability.
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                      Page 5 of 9

          This cannot be disputed by the respondents that the petitioner
was asked to appear before the medical board constituted by the
college. The petitioner did not appear before the medical board on his
own but at the direction of the college. This also cannot be disputed by
the respondents that the petitioner was assessed to be having less
disability and therefore he was found to be medically unfit for
admission in the category of physically disabled candidates. Physical
disability in a person also makes such a person medically fit. Under
clause 20 of bulleting of information, if any candidate is found unfit in
medical examination, he becomes entitled for refund of entire fees. If on
the account of physical disability a candidate is denied admission, it is
because the candidate was found to be unfit in medical examination.
          Reliance of the respondents on Clause 22(x) of bulletin of
information in forfeiting the fees of the petitioner, in the facts and
circumstances, is therefore, misplaced. The said clause contemplates
that if the admission of a candidate is cancelled, then disciplinary
action shall be taken against him and his entire fees will also be
forfeited. Admittedly no disciplinary action has been taken by the
respondents against the petitioner. The petitioner had submitted an
appropriate disability certificate which was not issued by some private
medical         practitioner but by  Government      of  India,  vocational
rehabilitation centre. In the circumstances it cannot be said that the
petitioner did not file the appropriate certificate regarding his disability.
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                  Page 6 of 9

Since the respondents were not satisfied with the extent of disability of
the petitioner, therefore, the petitioner was subjected to medical board
constituted by the college. The medical board of the college has
reassessed the petitioner as unfit medically as his disability was not
found to be 50% to 70%.
          A bare reading of clause 22(x) reveals that not only at the time of
admission, but the admission of a candidate can be cancelled on
account of not fulfilling the eligibility conditions during the entire period
of programme.         The respondents under the said clause were also
entitled to take disciplinary action and were also entitled to forfeit his
fees. Admittedly no disciplinary action has been taken against the
petitioner and just after giving him provisional admission, he was asked
to appear before the medical board constituted by the college which
board did not find the disability of the petitioner to the extent it would
have entitled him for admission under physical disability quota and
therefore, the petitioner was found to be medically unfit.
          In the circumstances it is inevitable to infer that the petitioner
had applied for the withdrawal of admission as he had been found unfit
in the medical examination conducted by the respondent. In these
peculiar circumstances the case of the petitioner shall be covered under
clause 20 of bulletin of information which will entitle him for refund of
the fees.
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                   Page 7 of 9

          The petitioner has also claimed interest on the said amount of
Rs.30,000/- at the rate of 18% per annum. The learned counsel for the
petitioner is, however, unable to show any provision under the bulletin
of information which would entitle him to interest at the rate of 18% per
annum. Even by letter dated September 27th , 2006 while demanding
return of fees, the petitioner did not demand interest on the amount of
fees at the rate of 18% per annum. What was demanded was only
return of fees as early as possible. The request of the petitioner for
refund of fees on account of cancellation of his admission on account of
his medical unfitness was declined by the respondents by their letter
dated November 7th, 2006. The reason as alleged now by the
respondents were not disclosed. The petitioner had written yet another
letter dated November 10th, 2006 seeking a refund of his fees. Even at
that time no demand was made for payment of interest by the petitioner
to the respondent. In the circumstances the petitioner is not entitled for
any interest from the respondents on the amount of fees which the
respondents are liable to refund to the petitioner.
          The next demand of the petitioner is for compensation of rupees 5
lakhs. The learned counsel for the petitioner is however, unable to
explain as to how the petitioner is entitled for damages of rupees five
lakh. This has not been established that the admission of the petitioner
was cancelled unlawfully or illegally. The extent of disability of the
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                 Page 8 of 9

petitioner was assessed by the medical board of the college to be less
than what would have entitled the petitioner for admission in the
physically disabled category, which was accepted by the petitioner. The
decision of the respondents to cancel the admission of the petitioner as
he had been found to be medically unfit has not been challenged. In the
circumstances         the    petitioner   is   not   entitled    for       any
damages/compensation from the respondents.
          Therefore, for the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is partly
allowed. The respondent is directed to refund the entire fee of
Rs.30,000/- (Rupees thirty thousand) to the petitioner within two
months failing which the respondents shall be liable to pay simple
interest on the said amount @ 9% per annum from the date of this
order till the time the amount will be paid to the petitioner. The
petitioner, however, shall not be entitled for interest @ 18% from the
date the amount was paid by the petitioner and as has been claimed by
him. The relief of the petitioner to claim Rs.5.00 lakh as damages is also
declined. Parties are also left to bear their own costs.
August 20, 2009                                          ANIL KUMAR, J.
‘Dev’
W.P(C) No.6635/2007                                                  Page 9 of 9


