            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                     Date of decision : January 23rd , 2008
                           WP(C) No.1052/2006
#       Lloyd Sales Pvt Ltd              ….…       PETITIONER
!                          Through: Mr. Deepak Sinha, Advocate.
                                  Versus
$       Anil Gupta                     .........   RESPONDENT
^                          Through : Nemo.
CORAM :-
* HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ANIL KUMAR
    1. Whether reporters of Local papers may             YES
        be allowed to see the judgment?
    2. To be referred to the reporter or not?            NO
    3. Whether the judgment should be reported           NO
        in the Digest?
ANIL KUMAR, J. (Oral)
1.      The petitioner in the present petition has impugned the order of
the Industrial Tribunal dated 13th September, 2005 disallowing the
amendment to the written statement of the proposed plea that the
company is closed and not doing business since 1997.
2.      The respondent was in the services of petitioner management
since the year 1979 and his allegation was that he was transferred
from one place to other frequently against the applicable service
conditions. The respondent alleged that he was served with a memo
on 12th September, 1987 alleging that he remained absent from duty
for about 8 days without prior permission and intimation to the
 WP(C) 1052 of 2006                                         Page 1 of 6

management and as per standing orders of the company he was liable
to be punished subject to disciplinary action. The respondent
challenged the same on the ground that the memo tantamount to
letter of termination which is in violation of principles of natural
justice. It was further alleged by the respondent that despite the
repeated demands he has not been reinstated in service.
3.      Before the Industrial Tribunal parties led their evidence in
support of their contention and the matter was fixed for arguments
where the petitioner filed an application dated 12th May, 2005 seeking
amendment to the written statement. The petitioner contended that
by inadvertence the management could not take legal objection to the
effect that the Industrial Tribunal has no territorial jurisdiction and
the reference made to the Court under Section 10(1)(C) is ultra virus
and that the management has closed down its business since 1997.
4.      The application was contested by the respondent workman
contending inter-alia that the application for amendment is not
bonafide and the petitioner management is delaying the proceedings
and the application for amendment is filed after the matter became
ripe for arguments merely with a view to delay the whole case.
5.      The Industrial Tribunal relying on the fact that the case is very
old as the reference was made in the year 1989 held that the plea of
 WP(C) 1052 of 2006                                          Page 2 of 6

closure of management business since 1997 is not relevant as the
reference is made about the legality of the termination of the services
of the workman and, therefore, the same cannot be allowed. The
Industrial Tribunal, however, allowed the legal objection that the
Industrial Tribunal does not have territorial jurisdiction.
6.      Aggrieved by the order dated 13th September, 2005 the present
petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India against
disallowing the plea of closure of the management business since
1997.
7.      The learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to explain as to
how the alleged closure of management business since 1997 is
relevant. The learned counsel states that no business activity is being
carried on. Merely because no business activity is carried on or the
company suffering losses is not a ground for negating the rights of a
workman whose services is allegedly terminated illegally by the
management.
8.      The learned counsel for the petitioner/management company
admits that there has not been voluntary winding up or winding up
or dissolution of the company. It has also not been denied that the
company does not have any assets. If a limited company has assets,
the alleged closure of the management business since 1997 shall not
 WP(C) 1052 of 2006                                          Page 3 of 6

be relevant for considering whether the termination of the services of
the respondent is legal or not. The services of the respondent
workman has not been terminated on the ground that there is no
work in the company or the management has closed its business
activity but on the ground that the respondent remained absent for
about eight days without prior permission and intimation to the
management.
9.      In the facts and circumstances the learned counsel for the
petitioner is unable to show as to how the alleged closure of
management business is relevant. The plea itself is vague as no
particulars have been given as to what activities were carried on by
the company and what activities have been stopped by the company
since 1997. The petitioner company is also unable to disclose whether
it is following statutory obligation about various meetings and
liabilities of a company.
10.      The learned counsel for the petitioner is also unable to show
any precedent holding that if a company is allegedly not carrying on
any business, the same shall be material for determination whether
the termination of the workman on the ground that he remained
absent from duties without prior permission for 8 days will be legal or
illegal.
 WP(C) 1052 of 2006                                        Page 4 of 6

11.     In the circumstances the order dated 13th September, 2005
impugned by the petitioner does not suffer from any manifest error
nor there is denial of principles of natural justice to the petitioner in
passing the said order so as to entail interference by this Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. It is a settled position of law
that in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, the Court should not interfere with factual findings of the lower
courts while exercising powers of judicial review. Reliance for this
proposition can be placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court,
Government of A.P. and Ors. v. Mohd. Nasrullah Khan reported as
(2006) 2 SCC 373. Writ court should refrain from interfering with the
orders of an inferior tribunal or subordinate court unless it suffers
from an error of jurisdiction or from a breach of the principles of
natural justice or is vitiated by a manifest or apparent error on the
law. The objective of judicial review is that a person receives a fair
treatment and objective is not to re-appreciate the entire pleas and
evidence and draw inferences again. Judicial review is not an appeal
from a decision but a review of the manner in which the decision is
made. Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual
receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion which
the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eyes of the court.
12.     The writ petition in the facts and circumstances is without any
merit and is dismissed and the interim order dated 25th January,
 WP(C) 1052 of 2006                                          Page 5 of 6

2006 staying the proceedings before the Industrial Tribunal No.I in ID
No.615/89 titled The Management of M/s. Lloyd Sales (P) Ltd and Its
Workman Sh.Anil Gupta is vacated. Considering the facts and
circumstances the parties are left to bear their own cost.
January 23rd, 2008.                         ANIL KUMAR, J.
'k'
 WP(C) 1052 of 2006                                        Page 6 of 6


