                           W.P.(C) No. 26082 of 2013
                Present :     Mr. S.B. Jena, Advocate for the petitioners.
                              None for opposite parties.
 02. 11.12.2013          This petition seeks direction against initiation of
                coercive measures by the Corporation for recovery of loan
                under the provisions of the SARFAESI Act, 2002.
                         Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the
                petitioners are willing to repay the loan subject to decision
                of their application to the Corporation for grant of time and
                extending benefit under the One Time Settlement Scheme, if
                applicable.      Learned counsel further states that the
                petitioners are willing to pay a sum of Rs.1,75,000/- (rupees
                one lakh & seventy five thousand) within two months from
                today    along     with  the   proposal   for  repayment    for
                consideration of the Bank.
                         Without expressing any opinion on merits, we direct
                that if the petitioners make deposit as aforesaid and file an
                application    for   consideration of   the   Corporation, the
                Corporation may take decision thereon in accordance with
                law within one month from the date of such proposal and till
                decision is taken, the Corporation may not take coercive
                measures.
                         The petition is disposed of accordingly.
                         It is made clear that if the petitioners default in
                making the deposit, this petition will be treated to have been
                dismissed. It is further made clear that if the Corporation is
                aggrieved by this order, it will be at liberty to move this
                Court.
                                                          ……......………………
                                                      A.K.Goel, C.J.
AD
                                                   ………………………..
                                                     Dr. A.K. Rath, J.


