                             W.P (C) No.7923 of 2013
               Present :      Miss.Mitalee Jesthi, Advocate
                             for the petitioner.
                            None for the Bank
04. 27.01.2014                This petition seeks direction against initiation of
               coercive measures by the Bank for recovery of loan under the
               provisions of the SARFAESI Act, 2002.
                          Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the
                 petitioner is willing to repay the loan subject to decision of
                 his application to the Bank for grant of time and extending
                 benefit   under     the    One  Time   Settlement  Scheme,    if
                 applicable.      Learned counsel further states that the
                 petitioner    is willing to pay a sum of Rs.8,50,000/- (rupees
                 eight lakh fifty thousand) within two months from today
                 along with the proposal for repayment for consideration of
                 the Bank.
                          Without expressing any opinion on merits, we direct
                 that if the petitioner makes deposit as aforesaid and file an
                 application for consideration of the Bank, the Bank may
                 take decision thereon in accordance with law within one
                 month from the date of such application and till decision is
                 taken, the Bank may not take coercive measures.
                          The petition is disposed of accordingly.

                        -2-
           It is made clear that if the petitioner     defaults in
   making the deposit, this petition will be treated to have been
   dismissed.    It is further made clear that if the Bank is
   aggrieved by this order, it will be at liberty to move this
   Court.
                                     ……......………………
                                      A.K.Goel, C.J.
AD
                                    ………………………..
                                      Dr A.K.Rath, J.


