                                        W.P.(C) No.588 of 2014
                   Present :      Mr. J. Mohanty, Advocate
                                  for the petitioners.
02.     27.01.2014               This petition seeks direction against initiation of coercive
                        measures by the Bank for recovery of loan under the provisions of the
                        SARFAESI Act, 2002.
                                 Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the petitioners
                        are willing to repay the loan subject to decision of their applications to
                        the Bank for grant of time and extending benefit under the One Time
                        Settlement Scheme, if applicable. Learned counsel further states that the
                        petitioners are willing to pay a sum of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees Twenty-five
                        Thousand) within two months from today along with the proposal for
                        repayment for consideration of the Bank.
                                 Without expressing any opinion on merits, we direct that if the
                        petitioners make deposits as aforesaid and file an application for
                        consideration of the Bank, the Bank may take decision thereon in
                        accordance with law within one month and, till such decision is taken,
                        the Bank may not take coercive measures.
                                 The petition is disposed of.
                                 It is made clear that if the petitioners default in making the
                        deposit, this petition will be treated to have been dismissed. It is further
                        made clear that if the Bank is aggrieved by this order, it will be at
                        liberty to move this Court.
                                                             ……......………………
                                                                  A.K.Goel, C.J.
                                                              ………………………..
                                                                 Dr A.K.Rath, J.
CRB/BKB


