                 HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                             R.S.A.No.234 of 2012
     From a judgment and decree dated 29.2.2012 and 15.3.2012
     respectively passed by Shri Sovan Kumar Dash, learned
     Ad hoc Additional District Judge, Fast Track Court No.1, Phulbani
     in R.F.A.No.12/02 of 2002-2011 confirming the judgment and
     decree dated 22.5.2010 and 24.6.2010 respectively passed by the
     learned Civil Judge (Jr.Division), Baliguda in Title Suit No.4 of 1996.
                                   -------------
     Jayasingh Mallick                      ….                 Appellant
                                      Versus
     The State of Odisha and another        ….                 Respondents
                       For Appellant        --    Mr.P.K.Rath
                                                  Advocate
                       For Respondents --         Ms.Samapika Mishra
                                                  A.S.C.
                                JUDGMENT
     PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
     Date of Hearing: 29.9.2016        &     Date of Judgment: 05.10.2016
DR.A.K.RATH, J. Plaintiff is the appellant against a confirming judgment.
     2.           The plaintiff instituted Title Suit No.4 of 1996 in the
     court of the learned Civil Judge (Junior Division), Balliguda for
     declaration of right, title, interest and possession over the suit
     schedule property and permanent injunction. Case of the plaintiff is
     that he belongs to Kandha caste, which is recognized as scheduled
     tribe. His father had some agricultural land at mouza Bataguda

                                   2
under Baliguda Tahasil. He lived separately after his marriage and
was earning his livelihood by cultivating agricultural land. While
matter stood thus, the Tahasildar, Baliguda settled the suit land on
30.11.1977 in Lease Case No.2280 of 1977 and put him into
possession. After delivery of possession, he reclaimed the suit land
and raised crops. He dug a pucca well over the said land for the
purpose of irrigation and also constructed a pucca house over a
portion of the suit land to look after his agricultural operation.
During settlement operation, he could not take steps before the
settlement authorities to record the suit land in his name. In spite of
the same, he possessed the          suit land uninterruptedly and
continuously without any interference from any authority. Thus he
has perfected his title over the suit land by way of adverse
possession. It is further stated that the lease granted by the
Tahasildar was not revoked or cancelled by any competent
authority. Despite the same, the Additional Tahasildar, Baliguda
initiated Land Encroachment Case No.199 of 1990 against him and
passed an order on 21.7.1993 for eviction from the said land.
Thereafter   he preferred    an appeal before       the Sub-Collector,
Balliguda, which was dismissed. He challenged the said order of the
appellate court before the Additional District Magistrate, Phulbani in
R.C.No.67 of 1994. The A.D.M. remanded the case to the Tahasildar
vide its order dated 22.4.1995 and directed the Tahasildar to verify
the physical possession and to dispose the case on merit. After
remand, the Additional Tahasildar, Balliguda passed an order on
9.1.1996 directing to evict him from the suit land. Thereafter he
instituted the suit. Though it was required to serve notice against
the defendants under Section 80 C.P.C. prior to institution of the
suit, but he instituted the suit by filing a petition under Section 80

                                       3
(2) of C.P.C. seeking leave for exemption of service of the notice as
some urgent and immediate relief was necessary.
3.           Pursuant to issuance of summons, the defendants
entered appearance and filed a written statement denying the
assertions made in the plaint. It is stated that though a lease patta
was created in favour of the plaintiff, but he was not given
possession of the same nor he ever possessed the suit land at any
point of time. The Tahasildar has passed a legal and reasonable
order for eviction of the plaintiff from the suit land. The plaintiff has
no right to initiate the suit and he is not entitled to get any relief.
4.           On the inter se pleadings of the parties, the learned trial
court struck four issues. The same are as follows:-
             “1.    Whether the suit is maintainable ?
             2.     Whether the plaintiff has preferred his right,
                    title and interest over the suit land by
                    adverse possession ?
             3.     Whether the plaintiff is a landless person and he
                    is entitled to the suit schedule land ?
             4.     To what relief, if any, the plaintiff is entitled ?”
5.           To substantiate the case, the plaintiff had examined
three witnesses including himself as P.W.1 and eight documents on
its behalf were exhibited. The defendant no.1 was examined as
D.W.1.     The suit was dismissed. The plaintiff unsuccessfully
challenged the same before the learned Additional District Judge,
Fast Track Court No.1 in R.F.A.No.12/02 of 2002-2011, which was
eventually dismissed.

                                     4
6.           This Second Appeal was admitted on the following
substantial questions of law:-
             “(1) As to whether the courts below are justified in non-
             suiting the plaintiff when the defendants have admitted
             that notice under Section 80 C.P.C. has been received
             by them;
             (2) As to whether the courts below are justified in
             ignoring the leased patta vide Ext.1, when the same was
             not cancelled by any other authority and attained
             finality.”
7.           Mr.P.K.Rath,      learned   counsel    for  the    appellant,
submitted that the courts below committed manifest illegality and
impropriety in holding that the suit was not maintainable for non-
service of notice to the defendants under Section 80 C.P.C. He
further submitted that the suit was filed along with a petition under
Section 80 (2) C.P.C. The learned trial court admitted the plaint and
decided the matter on merit and, as such, it is to be held that leave
was impliedly granted. He further submitted that lease patta was
granted in favour of the plaintiff, vide Ext.1. The same was not
cancelled. Initiation of proceedings under the Orissa Prevention of
Land Encroachment Act, 1972 is bad in law. The appellant is in
possession of the suit property. Since the day patta was granted in
his favour, he is in possession of the land peacefully and
continuously with hostile animus to the defendants. Thus the
plaintiff has perfected title by way of adverse possession.
8.           Per contra, Ms.S.Mishra, learned Additional Standing
Counsel supported the judgments of the courts below.

                                     5
9.            Admittedly, the suit was filed along with a petition
under Section 80 (2) of C.P.C. for waiver of notice on the defendants.
The learned trial court has not passed any express order granting
leave. The suit was admitted. Issues were framed. Both parties
adduced evidence. The learned trial court held that the suit was not
maintainable for non-service of notice under Section 80 C.P.C. but
decided the suit on merit. The learned lower appellate court
concurred with the findings of the learned trial court. Both the
courts held that suit is bad for non-service of notice under Section
80 C.P.C.
10.           Section 80 C.P.C. prohibits institution of suit unless the
conditions enumerated therein are satisfied. Sub-section (1) of
Section 80 C.P.C. provides that no suit shall be instituted against
the Government or against a public officer in respect of any act
purporting to be done by such public officer in his official capacity,
until the expiration of two months from the service of notice in the
manner prescribed. Sub-section 2 of Section 80 C.P.C. carves out
exception. It enables the Court to grant urgent or immediate relief
against the Government or a public officer in certain circumstances
without service of notice as required under sub section (1) of Section
80 C.P.C.. Proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 80 C.P.C. postulates
that the Court shall, if it is satisfied, after hearing the parties, that
no urgent or immediate relief need be granted in the suit, return the
plaint for presentation to it after complying with the requirements of
sub-section (1).
11.           In Gangappa Gurupadappa Gugwad Vrs. Rachawwa
and others, AIR 1971 S.C.442, the apex Court held that where the
plaintiff’s cause of action is against a Government and the plaint

                                    6
does not show that notice under Section 80 claiming relief was
served in terms of the said section, it would be the duty of the Court
to reject the plaint recording an order to that effect with reasons for
the order. In such a case the Court should not embark upon a trial
of all the issues involved and such rejection would not preclude the
plaintiff from presenting a fresh plaint in respect of the same cause
of action.
12.           The necessary corollary is that once the plaint is
presented along with an application under Section 80(2) of C.P.C,
the Court shall pass an order. In the event the Court is satisfied
that no urgent or immediate relief need be granted in the suit, it
shall return the plaint for presentation after complying with the
requirements of sub-section (1).      No fault can be found with the
plaintiff. A party can not be made to suffer on account of an act of
the Court. There is a well-recognised maxim of equity, namely, actus
curiae neminem gravabit which means an act of the court shall
prejudice no man. This maxim is founded upon justice and good
sense which serves a safe and certain guide for the administration
of law. In view of the same, the courts below committed patent
illegality in holding that suit is bad for non-service of notice under
Section 80 C.P.C.. Accordingly, the substantial question of law no.(i)
has been answered in favour of the plaintiff.
13.           The learned appellate court held that the suit plot was
recorded in the name of the Government under ‘Rakhit Khata’ with
kissam ‘Unata Jojona Jogya’. The land was not dereserved before
issuance of lease patta. It was further held that the plaintiff was a
Government servant at the time of issuance of lease patta and was
not a landless person. He had sufficient landed properties. Thus,

                                      7
lease patta, vide Ext.1 is not a valid and genuine document. The
learned appellate court negatived the plea of adverse possession.
14.             The lease patta, vide Ext.1, shows that the same was
unauthorizedly          occupied  by   the    plaintiff. The   land was
objectionable. Patta was granted without taking prior approval of
the higher authority and without taking salami. The plaintiff was a
Government servant. He was not a landless person. The land was
recorded under Rakhit Khata (reserved land) for future development.
In view of proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 7 of the Orissa
Prevention of Land Encroachment Act, no such settlement can be
made, if the land recorded as Gochar, Rakhit or Sarbasadharan in
any record-of-rights prepared under any law. The lease patta, vide
Ext.1, is not valid. Adverse possession is a mixed question of fact
and law. The plea of adverse possession has been negatived by the
learned courts below. The substantial question of law enumerated
in ground no.(ii) is answered in affirmative against the plaintiff.
15.             In the result, the appeal is dismissed. No costs.
                                                 ……..…………………..
                                                   Dr.A.K.Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 5th October, 2016/CRB.

8

