                           HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                W.P.(C) No.15618 of 2014
       In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
       Constitution of India.
                                         -----------
       Alok Kumar Agrawal                            ….                   Petitioner
                                              Versus
       State of Orissa & others                      ….            Opposite parties
                For Petitioner           …    Mr. A.R. Dash, Advocate
                For Opp. Parties         …    Mr.P.K. Muduli, ASC
       PRESENT:
                      THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
       Date of hearing:    29.04.2015      :          Date of judgment: 06.05.2015
Dr. A.K.Rath, J     By this writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the
       Constitution of India, challenge is made to the order No.562 dated
       2.8.2014 passed by the District Agricultural Officer, Padampur, opposite
       party no.4, cancelling the licence of the petitioner to carry on business of
       seeds.
       2.           Shorn of unnecessary details, the case of the petitioner is that
       he is the proprietor of M/s.Venkateswar Seeds. On 9.7.2014, the District
       Agriculture Officer, Bargarh, opposite party no.4, issued licence to
       M/s.Venkateswar Seeds to carry on business of seeds, vide Annexure-1.
       On 10.7.2014, opposite party no.4 issued a letter conveying the decision of
       the Government about the appointment of the petitioner. While the matter

                                        2
stood thus, on 2.8.2014, vide Annexure-3, opposite party no.4 cancelled
the licence granted to the petitioner on the following grounds;
                     “xxx               xxx                 xxx
             1. Ms Baisnodevi Seeds proprietor Hariram Agrawal,
             Paikmal is black listed in seed transaction under the
             Lisence issued by JDA (Farm & Seed) who happens to be
             the father of Sri Alok Kumar Agrawal proprietor
             Venkateswar seeds, Paikmal.
             2. Ms Balajee seeds Paikmal proprietor Sri Deepak Kumar
             Agrawal vide Lisence is also blacklisted in seed transaction
             under Lisence issued by JDA (Farm & Seed) vide Letter No
             21 dated 25/11/2011 who happens to be the elder brother
             of Sri Alok Kumar Agrwal, paikmal.
             3. Mischief future seeds transaction by Sri Alok Kumar
             Agrawal is also apprehended as he belongs to the same
             family.”
                     xxx                xxx                 xxx”
3.           Pursuant to issue of notice, a counter affidavit has been filed
by the opposite parties 2 to 4. The sum and substance of the case of the
opposite parties 2 to 4 is that the petitioner was the proprietor of M/s.
Venkateswar Seeds. He applied for the seed licence to the opposite party
no.4 for doing transaction of seeds for paddy, groundnut, moong and arhar
certified seeds at the storage place and the place of sale at Paikmal in the
district of Bargarh. The seed licence was issued in favour of the petitioner
on 10.7.2014, vide Annexures 1 and 2. The petitioner misled the opposite
party no.4 by mentioning different storage address at different points in his
application like in source certificate obtained from another Government
agency, i.e., Odisha Agro Industries Corporation Ltd. mentioning his
address as “At/PO/G.P-Paikmal”, but in the application Form ‘A’, the
address has been mentioned as “At-Kendubhata, P.O.-Mithapali, Block-
Paikmal”. Further, in the rent agreement, the address has been mentioned

                                       3
as “Plot No.305/873, Mouza-Dunguripalli, Tehsil-Paikmal”. It is further
stated that the petitioner is the son of Hariram Agrawal. Hariram Agrawal
was the proprietor of M/s. Maa Vaisnodevi Seeds of Paikmal, Dist.-
Bargarh. He had earlier committed serious irregularities for which, the
proprietorship was blacklisted by the Government. Thereafter, Deepak
Kumar Agrawal, elder brother of the petitioner, started the business in the
name and style of M/s.Balaji Seeds. It was found that M/s. Balaji Seeds
had utilized forged purchase bills of a prestigious State Agriculture
University of Karnataka, i.e. University of Agriculture Sciences, Bangalore
and utilised the forged bills, forged breeder certificate, forged breeder tags
for foundation seed production by registering a non-existent groundnut
variety, i.e., TMV-2 which was ascertained from the Director, Odisha State
Seed and Organic Products Certification Agency vide letter no.1011 dated
28.4.2014.      The  University   of Agriculture   Sciences,   Bangalore    had
recommended for initiating legal action against the brother of the petitioner
vide letter no.26 dated 25.4.2014. Thereafter, the Seed Certification Officer,
Sambalpur lodged an FIR against Deepak Kumar Agrawal for submission
of fake and forged documents in the groundnut seeds production during
Kharif Season of 2013 and misled the Government officials for which his
licence was cancelled after affording opportunity of hearing to him.
4.             Further case of the opposite parties is that when the petitioner
had applied for seed licence, opposite party no.2 issued instructions to the
opposite party no.4 to enquire into the background of the petitioner, his
past dealings with the department. As the licence of M/s. Vaishnodevi

                                       4
Seeds, proprietor Hariram Agrawal, was blacklisted and M/s. Balaji Seeds,
proprietor Deepak Kumar Agrawal, was cancelled, the petitioner succeeded
with his diabolical plan. As per Section 18(2) of the Seed Control Order,
1983, the petitioner being a dealer of seed was required to deposit the
monthly seed transaction report of the preceding month of his organisation
in Form-D to the opposite party no.4 by 5th day of each succeeding month,
failing which, the authority reserves the right to suspend/cancel the
licence. From the date of issue of licence, the petitioner had never
submitted the monthly seeds transaction statement to the licensing
authority and kept the authority in dark about the seeds transaction made
by him in a clandestine manner. Further, the petitioner is not mentally
developed to carry on the business and the father and brother might be the
de facto operators. Thus opposite party no.4 cancelled the seed licence of
the petitioner for misrepresentation of facts.
5.           It is further stated that there has been no infraction of the
principle of natural justice. There is every scope of carrying forward the
business of the family in seed business by the petitioner particularly when
the father and brother of the petitioner were blacklisted for doing various
irregularities in seeds transaction. This was a sinister plot and would have
shattered the whole seeds supply chain of breeder to foundation certified
seeds. It is further stated that the writ petition being WP(C) No.11118 of
2014 filed by the brother of the petitioner for the self-same issue has been
dismissed by this Court.

                                       5
6.             Mr. A.R.Dash, learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted
that no opportunity of hearing was provided to the petitioner before
cancelling the seed licence of the petitioner, vide Annexure-3. Further, in
the counter affidavit the opposite parties cannot supplement the reasons.
7.             Per contra Mr. Muduli, learned Addl. Standing Counsel for the
opposite parties, submitted that clause 15(a) of the Seeds (Control) Order,
1983 provides that licensing authority may suspend or cancel the licence,
if it is found that the licence had been obtained by misrepresentation as to
material particular. The petitioner has suppressed the facts regarding
blacklisting of M/s. Baisnodevi Seeds and cancellation of licence of M/s.
Balajee Seeds. He further submitted that the writ petition in its present
form is not maintainable in view of availability of alternative remedy of
appeal provided under clause 16(b) of the Seeds (Control) Order, 1983. He
further submitted that the principle of natural justice has no application to
the commercial transactions and no notice is required for cancellation of
the seed licence. In support of his contention, Mr. Muduli relied on the
decisions of the Supreme Court in the cases of Thansingh Nathmal v. The
Superintendent of Taxes, Dhubri and others, AIR 1964 SC 1419, Sadhana
Lodh v. National Insurance Co. Ltd. and another, (2003) 3 SCC 524, Ram
Narain      Arora   v.  Asha    Rani  and   others,  (1999)   1  SCC     141,
M/s.Radhakrishna Agarwal and others v. State of Bihar and others, (1977)
3 SCC 457 and Siemens Public Communication Networks Private Limited
and another v. Union of India and others, (2008) 16 SCC 215.

                                         6
8.           On the rival pleadings of the parties and the submissions
made at the Bar, really three points arise for consideration of this Court.
             I. Whether the existence of alternative remedy would
             operate as a bar in entertaining a writ petition under Article
             226 of the Constitution?
             II. Whether the reasons mentioned in the order of
             cancellation of seed licence dated 2.8.2014, vide Annexure-
             3, can be supplemented by fresh reasons in shape of
             affidavit?
             III. Whether the order of cancellation of seed licence dated
             2.8.2014, vide Annexure-3, is an infraction of principle of
             natural justice?
9.           Point No.I
             In Thansingh Nathmal (supra), the Supreme Court held that
the High Court does not act as a court of appeal against the decision of a
court or tribunal, to correct errors of fact, and does not by assuming
jurisdiction under Article 226 trench upon an alternative remedy provided
by statute for obtaining relief. Where it is open to the aggrieved petitioner
to move another tribunal, or even itself in another jurisdiction for obtaining
redress in the manner provided by a statute, the High Court normally will
not permit by entertaining a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution
the machinery created under the statute to be bypassed, and will leave the
party applying to it to seek resort to the machinery so set up.
10.          In Sadhana Lodh (supra), the Supreme Court held that where
a statutory right to file an appeal has been provided for, it is not open to
High Court to entertain a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution.

                                           7
11.           After survey of the earlier decisions, the Supreme Court in
Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai and others,
(1998) 8 SCC 1 in paragraphs 15 and 20 of the report held as follows:
              “15. Under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court,
              having regard to the facts of the case, has a discretion to
              entertain or not to entertain a writ petition. But the High
              Court has imposed upon itself certain restrictions one of
              which is that if an effective and efficacious remedy is
              available, the High Court would not normally exercise its
              jurisdiction. But the alternative remedy has been
              consistently held by this Court not to operate as a bar in at
              least three contingencies, namely, where the writ petition
              has been filed for the enforcement of any of the
              Fundamental Rights or where there has been a violation of
              the principle of natural justice or where the order or
              proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or the vires of
              an Act is challenged. There is a plethora of case-law on this
              point but to cut down this circle of forensic whirlpool, we
              would rely or some old decisions of the evolutionary era of
              the constitutional law as they still hold the field.”
                     xxx                  xxx                   xxx
              “20. Much water has since flown under the bridge, but
              there has been no corrosive effect on these decisions which,
              though old, continue to hold the field with the result that
              law as to the jurisdiction of the High Court in entertaining a
              writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, in spite
              of the alternative statutory remedies, is not affected,
              specially in a case where the authority against whom the
              writ is filed is shown to have had no jurisdiction or had
              purported to usurp jurisdiction without any legal
              foundation.”
12.           Thus alternative remedy is not a bar to entertain a writ
application under Article 226 of the Constitution in at least three
categories mentioned in Whirlpool Corporation (supra), namely, where the
writ petition has been filed for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental
Rights or where there has been a violation of the principle of natural
justice or where the order or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or
the vires of an Act is challenged.

                                       8
13.          Point No.II
             More than sixty years back, the Supreme Court, in the case of
Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji, AIR 1952 SC 16,
speaking through the Bench Justice Vivian Bose in para-9 of the report,
held that the public orders, publicly made, in exercise of a statutory
authority cannot be construed in the light of explanations subsequently
given by the officer making the order of what he meant, or of what was in
his mind, or what he intended to do. Public orders made by public
authorities are meant to have public effect and are intended to affect the
acting and conduct of those to whom they are addressed and must be
construed objectively with reference to the language used in the order
itself.
14.          The same view was echoed in Mohinder Singh Gill and another
v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others, AIR 1978 SC
851. It was held that when a statutory functionary makes an order based
on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so
mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of
affidavit or otherwise. Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by
the time it comes to court on account of a challenge, get validated by
additional grounds later brought out. Orders are not like old wine
becoming better as they grow older.
15.          On the anvil of the decisions cited supra, this Court is required
to examine the impugned order dated 2.8.2014 passed by the District
Agricultural Officer, Padampur, opposite party no.4, vide Annexure-3.

                                       9
              The order of cancellation of seed licence, vide Annexure-3, has
been made on three grounds mentioned in the preceding paragraphs. As
would be evident from the impugned order, Hariram Agrawal (father of the
petitioner) was the proprietor of M/s.Venkateswar Seeds and was
blacklisted, the seed licence of Deepak Kumar Agrawal (elder brother of the
petitioner), proprietor of M/s.Balaji Seeds, had been cancelled and there is
apprehension that the petitioner may commit mischief in future seeds
transaction. The same has been tried to be justified by Mr. Muduli on the
ground that the petitioner has suppressed the material facts and violated
the provision of Seed Control Order, 1983, but the same has not been
reflected in the impugned order. When a statutory functionary makes an
order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons
so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape
of affidavit or otherwise. Merely because the father of the petitioner was
blacklisted and the seed licence of his brother has been cancelled, the
same per se cannot be a ground to cancel the seed licence of the petitioner.
In the absence of any allegations or infraction of the provisions of the Seed
Control Order, 1983, the petitioner cannot be punished or made to suffer
for the action of his father and brother. The third ground shows that there
is apprehension that the petitioner may commit mischief in future seeds
transaction as he belongs to the same family. This is based on surmises
and conjectures.
16.           Point No.III
              The concept of natural justice has undergone a sea change in
recent years. The old distinction between a judicial act and an

                                          10
administrative act has withered away. Even an administrative order which
involves civil consequences must be consistent with the rules of natural
justice. The expression “civil consequences” encompasses infraction of not
merely property or personal rights, but of civil liberties, material
deprivations, and non pecuniary damages. It takes within its sweep
everything that affects a citizen in his civil life.
17.          In Uma Nath Pandey and others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and
another, AIR 2009 SC 2375, the Supreme Court held as follows:-
             “6.    Natural justice is another name for commonsense
             justice. Rules of natural justice are not codified canons. But
             they are principles ingrained into the conscience of man.
             Natural justice is the administration of justice in a
             commonsense liberal way. Justice is based substantially on
             natural ideals and human values. The administration of
             justice is to be freed from the narrow and restricted
             considerations which are usually associated with a
             formulated law involving linguistic technicalities and
             grammatical niceties. It is the substance of justice which
             has to determine its form.
             7.     The expressions “natural justice” and “legal justice”
             do not present a water-tight classification. It is the
             substance of justice which is to be secured by both, and
             whenever legal justice fails to achieve this solemn purpose,
             natural justice is called in aid of legal justice. Natural
             justice relieves legal justice from unnecessary technicality,
             grammatical pedantry or logical prevarication. It supplies
             the omissions of a formulated law. As Lord Buckmaster
             said, no form or procedure should ever be permitted to
             exclude the presentation of a litigants’ defence.
             8.     The adherence to principles of natural justice as
             recognized by all civilized States is of supreme importance
             when a quasi-judicial body embarks on determining
             disputes between the parties, or any administrative action
             involving civil consequences is in issue. These principles
             are well settled. The first and foremost principle is what is
             commonly known as audi alteram partem rule. It says that
             no one should be condemned unheard. Notice is the first
             limb of this principle. It must be precise and unambiguous.
             It should appraise the party determinatively the case he has
             to meet. Time given for the purpose should be adequate so
             as to enable him to make his representation. In the absence
             of a notice of the kind and such reasonable opportunity, the

                                        11
            order passed becomes wholly vitiated. Thus, it is but
            essential that a party should be put on notice of the case
            before any adverse order is passed against him. This is one
            of the most important principles of natural justice. It is
            after all an approved rule of fair play. The concept has
            gained significance and shades with time. When the historic
            document was made at Runnymede in 1215, the first
            statutory recognition of this principle found its way into the
            “Magna Carta”. The classic exposition of Sir Edward Coke of
            natural justice requires to “vocate, interrogate and
            adjudicate”. In the celebrated case of Cooper v. Wandsworth
            Board of Works [(1863) 143 ER 414], the principle was thus
            stated:
                   “Even God did not pass a sentence upon Adam,
            before he was called upon to make his defence. “Adam”
            says God, “where are thou? hast thou not eaten of the tree
            whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat”.”
18.         It is apt to refer here the verdict in Kesar Enterprises Limited
V. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, (2011) 13 SCC 733 wherein the
Supreme Court was considering the applicability of principles of natural
justice to Rule 633 (7) of the Utter Pradesh Excise Manual. The said Rule
provided that if certificate was not received within the time mentioned in
the bond or pass, or if the condition of bond was infringed, the Collector of
the exporting district or the Excise Inspector who granted the pass shall
take necessary steps to recover from executant or his surety the penalty
due under the bond. In para-30 of the report, it is held as under;
            “30……..we are of the opinion that keeping in view the
            nature, scope and consequences of direction under sub-
            rule (7) of Rule 633 of the Excise Manual, the principles of
            natural justice demand that a show cause notice should be
            issued and an opportunity of hearing should be afforded to
            the person concerned before an order under the said Rule is
            made, notwithstanding the fact that the said Rule does not
            contain any express provision for the affected party being
            given an opportunity of being heard.”
19.         The submission of Mr. Muduli, learned Addl. Standing Counsel
that natural justice is not required to be followed before cancelling the seed

                                      12
licence of the petitioner is difficult to fathom. In Radhakrishna Agarwal
(supra), the petitions filed by the appellants under Article 226 were
directed against the orders of the State Government revising the rate of
royalty payable by them under the lease granted to them by the State,
through its Forest Department, permitting them to collect sal seeds from
the forest area. The subsequent cancellation of the lease was also
challenged. The petitioners raised the question of breach of contract and
mala fides for the action taken. The questions raised also related to
constitutional provisions regarding exercise of executive power and
entering into contracts by the Government under Articles 298 and 299,
and if the same continued to be subject to Part III of the Constitution. In
the said context, the Supreme Court held that the proposition that
whenever a State or its agents or officers deal with the citizen, either when
making a transaction or, after making it, acting in exercise of powers under
the terms of a contract between the parties, there is a dealing between the
State and the citizen which involves performance of “certain legal and
public duties”, is too wide to be acceptable. The remedy of Article 226 is
not open for such complaints.
20.          In Siemens Public Communication Networks Private Limited
(supra), the Supreme Court held that a contract is a commercial
transaction and evaluating tenders and awarding contracts are essentially
commercial functions. In such cases principles of equity and natural
justice stay at a distance. If the decision relating to award of contracts is
bona fide and is in public interest, courts will not exercise the power of

                                        13
judicial review and interfere even if it is accepted for the sake of argument
that there is a procedural lacuna.
21.           A bare reading of the said decisions, however, shows that there
is a significant difference in the factual matrix in which the said case arose
for consideration. The reliance placed upon Radhakrishna Agarwal (supra)
and Siemens Public Communication Networks Private Limited (supra),
therefore, is of no assistance to the opposite parties.
22.           The submission of Mr. Muduli that the order of cancellation
dated 2.8.2014, vide Annexure-3, is a speaking one and no prejudice has
been caused to the petitioner is like a billabong. The decision cited by Mr.
Muduli in Ram Narain Arora (supra) is also distinguishable on facts. The
Supreme Court in Ram Narain Arora had the occasion to deal with the
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.
23.           No case has been set out by the opposite parties that non
issuance of show-cause notice has not caused any prejudice to the
petitioner. Had the show cause notice been issued, the petitioner could
have mentioned as to why such extreme order was not justified. The
petitioner could have come out with extenuating circumstances defending
such an action, even if defaults were there and the opposite party no.4 was
not satisfied with the explanation qua the charges. It is not at all possible
to accept the submission of Mr. Muduli, learned Addl. Standing Counsel
that no prejudice has been caused to the petitioner due to non issuance of
show cause notice. Further the extreme nature of cancellation of seed
licence with severe consequence would itself amount to causing prejudice

                                     14
to the petitioner. Thus there has been clear violation of principles of
natural justice, which invalidates the order of cancellation of seed licence
dated 2.8.2014, vide Annexure-3.
24.          On taking a holistic view of the matter, this Court is of the
considered opinion that the order of cancellation of seed licence of the
petitioner dated 2.8.2014, vide Annexure-3, by the opposite party no.4, is
an infraction of principle of natural justice and the same is hereby
quashed. While quashing the same this Court leaves it to the opposite
parties to grant an opportunity to the petitioner to have his say in relation
to allegations or complaints, which according to the authority concerned
provide foundation for taking action against the petitioner and only after
grant of such opportunity, the action as authorised under law should be
taken.
25.          The writ petition is allowed. There shall be no order as to
costs.
                                                        ………………………..
                                                        DR. A.K.RATH, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 6th May, 2015/Pradeep.


