                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                              S.A.No.183 of 2001
    From the judgment and decree dated 1.3.2001 and 8.3.2001
    respectively passed by Mr.M.P.Mishra, learned District Judge,
    Ganjam-Gajapati, Berhampur in T.A.No.55 of 1997 confirming the
    judgment and decree dated 30.6.1997 and 9.7.1997 passed by the
    learned Civil Judge, (Junior Division), Berhampur in T.S.No.119 of
    1994.
                                    -------------
    Manikeswari Prasad Dev                   ….                Appellant
                                      Versus
    Executive Officer, N.A.C.,
    Digapahandi and another                  ….                Respondents
                         For Appellant       --    Mr.P.K.Das,
                                                   Advocate
                         For Respondents --        None
                                JUDGMENT
    PRESENT:
                 THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
    Date of Hearing :9.3.2018          &         Date of Judgment:19.3.2018
Dr.A.K.RATH, J. Plaintiff is the appellant against a confirming judgment
    in a suit for eviction and permanent injunction.
    2.            The case of the plaintiff is that the suit schedule land
    belongs to him. The same has been recorded in his name in the
    Settlement Record of Right. He is in possession of the suit land. The
    suit land is situated by the side of the road which connects

                                   2
Berhampur-Digapahandi main road. The said road is the only
passage to connect Digapahandi bus stand. The plaintiff and other
persons, who have their agricultural land on both sides of the road,
use it as a passage for taking their bullock carts and plough their
land. Defendant no.1 constructed the shop rooms by encroaching
upon the suit land as well as the road, as a result of which, road has
narrowed. The same has caused serious inconvenience to the road
side land owners. With this factual scenario, the suit was instituted
seeking the reliefs mentioned supra.
3.           The defendants have filed a written statement denying
the assertions made in the plaint. The case of the defendants is that
construction of shop rooms on the road side of the Government land
has been made as per the resolution passed by the Council for the
benefit of the local public. The Council has right to develop the road
side land. The shop rooms have been constructed on the road side
land. The shop rooms do not cover any part of the suit land. No
encroachment has been made on the plaintiff’s land. The road has
been transferred to the Council for its maintenance. The land on
which the shop rooms have been constructed was never in
possession of the plaintiff.
4.           On the inter se pleadings of the parties, learned trial
court framed four issues. Parties led evidence. Learned trial court
dismissed the suit holding, inter alia, that the plaintiff has failed to
prove that    the   defendants have     encroached upon      his land.
Unsuccessful plaintiff filed Title Appeal No.55 of 1997 before the
learned District Judge, Ganjam-Gajapati, Berhampur, which was
eventually dismissed. It is apt to state here that during pendency of

                                       3
the first appeal, the plaintiff filed an application under Order 26 Rule
9 C.P.C. for appointment of a Survey Knowing Commissioner. The
same having been rejected, he filed Civil Revision No.89 of 1999
before this Court, which was dismissed on 9.8.2000.
5.           The appeal was admitted on the substantial questions of
law enumerated in ground nos.1 to 3 of the appeal memo. The same
are-
             “(A) Whether the findings of the learned Courts below
             that in absence of examination of Amin, the Ext.1 has no
             evidentiary value are illegal and contrary to the statute
             when Ext.1/ the Amin’s report is once marked as Exhibit
             without any objection has got the evidentiary value as
             per Section 58 of the Evidence Act since settled law is
             that when a document is marked on admission without
             observation, the contents are not only evidence but are
             taken as admitted and cannot be challenged and no
             further proof is necessary especially when same is
             prepared by the statutory authority under Statute and
             has been accepted in the D.M.C. Case No.51/94 ?
             (B)    Whether the findings of the learned Courts below
             regarding construction of the shopping complex by
             defendant no.1 over road margin land and not on suit
             land are illegal and perverse being contrary to the
             evidence on record and law when the law is that once a
             specific once a specific plea regarding road margin land
             is taken the burden lies on Respondent no.1 to prove the
             same in terms of Section 110 of the Evidence Act in view
             of the contrary being proved that there is no other land
             as per Ext.‘C’ where it has been described as road ?
             (C)    Whether the findings of the learned courts below
             regarding construction of the market complex by the
             Respondent no.1 over the Government Plot and the
             public road (Ext.A & B) which are under the
             management and maintenance of the Respondent no.1
             are illegal and contrary to the evidence on record when
             Ext.A & Ext.B do not reveal that the Government land

                                    4
              and public road have actually been transferred by
              Government in favour of Respondent no.1 as required
              under law ?”
6.            Heard   Mr.P.K.Das,   learned  Advocate  on  behalf  of
Mr.Manoj Kumar Mishra, learned Senior Advocate for the appellant.
None appeared for the respondents.
7.            Mr.Das, learned Advocate for the appellant submitted
that defendant no.1 has constructed the shop rooms by encroaching
upon a portion of the suit land. The shop rooms have been
constructed on the road side. By that process, the passage leading to
the paddy filed of the nearby owners has been blocked. He further
submitted that the Tahasil Amin has measured the land. The report
submitted by the Tahasil Amin has been exhibited as Ext.1. From
Ext.1, it is evident that defendant no.1 has encroached upon the suit
plot.
8.            Learned lower appellate court discarded the Amin’s
report, vide Ext.1, on the ground that defendant no.1 was not
present at the time of measurement. The Tahasil Amin was not
summoned to the Court. The defendants did not get any chance to
cross-examine him in order to test his veracity and correctness of
procedure adopted by him during measurement. It further held that
Ext.1 has not been properly proved, since its author was not brought
to witness box.
9.            In Sait Tarajee Khimchand and others Vrs. Yelamarti
Satyam and others, AIR 1971 SC 1865, the apex Court held that
mere marking of document does not dispense with its proof. Since
the defendants were not parties to the demarcation case, in which

                                     5
Ext.1 was prepared, the same cannot be used against them.
Application filed by the plaintiff before the first appellate court under
Order 26 Rule 9 C.P.C. has been rejected. Thereafter the plaintiff
filed Civil Revision No.89 of 1999 before this Court. The same was
dismissed.
10.           On an analysis of the evidence on record and pleadings,
the courts below currently held that the defendants have not
encroached upon the suit land. There is no perversity or illegality in
the findings of the courts below. The substantial questions of law are
answered accordingly.
11.           In the wake of aforesaid, the appeal, sans merit,
deserves dismissal. Accordingly, the same is dismissed. No Costs.
                                              …..………...………………..
                                                    Dr.A.K.Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 19th March, 2018/CRB

6

