                       HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                S.A. No.294 of 1990
      From the judgment and decree dated 23.7.1990 and 8.8.1990
      respectively passed by Shri S.P. Acharya, learned 2nd Addl. District
      Judge, Berhampur in T.A. No.119 of 1988 (T.A. No.35/88 G.D.C.)
      reversing the judgment and decree dated 30.3.1988 and 12.4.1988
      respectively passed by Shri B.N. Jena, learned Munsif, Berhampur in
      T.S. No.55 of 1986.
                                       ----------
      State of Orissa and another             ………………             Appellants
                                              ---versus—
      Sukuru Polai and others                 ………………             Respondents
             For Appellants     :   Additional Standing Counsel
             For Respondents :      None
                                    JUDGMENT
      P R E S E N T:
                        THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K. RATH
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Date of Hearing : 17.08.2017        │ Date of Judgment: 17.08.2017
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. A.K. Rath, J.         This is a defendants’ appeal against a reversing
      judgment.
      02.           The respondents as plaintiffs instituted T.S. No.55 of
      1986 in the court of the learned Munsif, Berhampur for declaration
      of right, title and interest and possession impleading the appellants
      as defendants. The case of the plaintiffs is that the land measuring
      area Ac.0.47 cents in Old S.No.1/1A of village Berhampur originally
      recorded as village site. The same adjoins to the compound of the
      deity Sri Sri Kasi Viswanath Mohaprabhu. The land was full of
      ditches. In the settlement operation, the same had been recorded in

                                   2
the Rakhita khata of the Government. The plaintiffs spent an
amount of Rs.500/-, filled up the ditches, made it plain and used the
same as their threshing floor. Since 1942 till date, they are in
possession of the same. In the last settlement operation, the lands
were wrongly recorded in favour of the deity Sri Sri Kasi Viswanath
Mohaprabhu. Thereafter, the plaintiffs filed objection before the
Tahasildar, Berhampur, defendant no.1, requesting him to make
physical enquiry about their long possession and correct the record
of right. The defendant no.1 by letter dated 18.2.1980 directed the
concerned R.I. to enquire and report. The R.I. made an enquiry and
submitted a report on 26.2.1980 stating that the plaintiffs were in
possession since 30 years. Thereafter the plaintiffs applied for
mutation of the said plots, but no effect. They filed R.P. Case
No.233/80 before the Commissioner, Land Records and Settlement
for correction of ROR. By order dated 16.2.1983, the Commissioner
directed that the suit plot shall be taken from out of khata no.242
and be recorded in Rakhita khata of Government. Accordingly, the
suit plots had been recorded in Rakhita khata. It is further pleaded
that they were in possession for more than 30 years by the time the
order was passed by the Commissioner and as such perfected title
by way of adverse possession.
03.          The defendants filed a joint written statement denying
the assertions made in the plaint. The specific case of the
defendants is that the suit land had been recorded in the Rakhita
khata as per the order of the Commissioner of Land Records and
Settlement in R.P. Case No.233 of 1980. The plaintiffs were not in
possession of the suit land. No notice under Sec.80 C.P.C. was
issued.
04.          On the interse pleadings of the parties, learned trial
court struck as many as five issues. Both parties led evidence, oral

                                         3
and documentary, to substantiate their cases. On an analysis of the
evidence on record and pleadings, learned trial court came to hold
that the entry of the plaintiffs into the suit land was surreptitious
and without the knowledge of the defendants. The R.I. had not
examined any witness to know who planted the trees. The R.I. is not
an expert to give the age of the trees as more than 30 years. He
was deputed only to furnish a report with regard to possession of
the suit land. He had not verified any document of the plaintiffs. The
conclusion reached by the R.I. is without any basis. The report does
not reveal the whole truth and accordingly rejected the report. It
negatived the plea of the plaintiffs for adverse possession. The suit
was dismissed. Felt aggrieved, the plaintiffs filed appeal before the
learned    District   Judge,    Berhampur,        which    was    subsequently
transferred to the court of the learned 2nd Additional District Judge,
Berhampur and renumbered as T.A. No.119 of 1988. Learned
appellate court laid much credence to the report of the R.I. and held
that the same is a document prepared by a Government servant in
due discharge of his official duties and as such due credibility and
presumption of correctness ought to be attached to the same. The
defendants had not proved by any convincing evidence that the
report was incorrect. The defendants had failed to prove that they
are in possession of the suit land. It further held that the plaintiffs
had been in possession of the suit properties continuously, openly
and without any interruption to the knowledge of all concerned. Held
so, it set aside the judgment and decree and decreed the suit.
05.           The second appeal was admitted on 14.3.1997 on the
following substantial question of law.
                    “Whether there was any acceptable evidence to
                    establish the claim of adverse possession as put
                    forth by the plaintiffs-respondents ?”

                                    4
06.           Heard learned Additional Standing Counsel for the
appellants. None appears for the respondents.
07.           Learned Additional Standing Counsel for the appellants
submits that there is no pleading or evidence on record that the
plaintiffs were in possession of the land peacefully, continuously and
to the hostile animus of the defendants for more than the statutory
period. Learned appellate court committed a manifest illegality in
allowing the report of the R.I., Ext.1 and declared the title of the
plaintiffs without any evidence on record.
08.           On a cursory perusal of paragraph 3 of the plaint, it is
evident that the suit property has been recorded in the name of Sri
Sri Kasi Viswanath Mohaprabhu. The deity is a perpetual minor. In
the absence of the deity, the suit is not maintainable. The courts
below did not delve into the same, but proceed to decide the suit on
merit.
09.           Reliance placed on the report of the R.I. by the learned
appellate court is totally misplaced. The R.I. exceeded its jurisdiction
and submitted the report without verifying any document. He opined
that the trees standing on the suit land had been planted by the
plaintiffs and the age of the trees seems more than 30 years. The
word “seems” imply that the report was based on surmises and
conjectures. He has no expertise to assess the age of the trees.
10.           Burden of proof lies on the person who claims to acquire
title of the land by way of adverse possession. Adverse possession is
not a pure question of law, but a blended one of fact and law.
11.           In the celebrated judgment, the Privy Council in the
Secretary of State v. Debendra Lal Khan, AIR 1934 Privy Council 23
held that the classical requirement of adverse possession is that the
possession should be nec vi nec clam nec precario. Their Lordships

                                          5
quoted with approval the decision in the case of Radhamoni Devi v.
The Collector of Khulna and others, Indian Appeals 1900 Vol. XXVII
at page 140 that “the possession required must be adequate in
continuity, in publicity, and in extent to shew that it is possession
adverse to the competitor”.
12.          In Karnataka Board of Wakf vs. Govt. of India and
others, (2004) 10 SCC 779, the apex Court observed as under :-
             "In the eye of the law, an owner would be deemed to be in
             possession of a property so long as there is no intrusion. Non-
             use of the property by the owner even for a long time won't
             affect his title. But the position will be altered when another
             person takes possession of the property and asserts a right
             over it. Adverse possession is a hostile possession by clearly
             asserting hostile title in denial of the title of the true owner. It
             is a well-settled principle that a party claiming adverse
             possession must prove that his possession is "nec vi, nec
             clam, nec precario", that is, peaceful, open and continuous.
             The possession must be adequate in continuity, in publicity
             and in extent to show that their possession is adverse to the
             true owner. It must start with a wrongful disposition of the
             rightful owner and be actual, visible, exclusive, hostile and
             continued over the statutory period.
                     The court further observed that plea of adverse
             possession is not a pure question of law but a blended one of
             fact and law. Therefore, a person who claims adverse
             possession should show: (a) on what date he came into
             possession, (b) what was the nature of his possession, (c)
             whether the factum of possession was known to the other
             party, (d) how long his possession has continued, and (e) his
             possession was open and undisturbed. A person pleading
             adverse possession has no equities in his favour. Since he is
             trying to defeat the rights of the true owner, it is for him to
             clearly plead and establish all facts necessary to establish his
             adverse possession.”                               (emphasis laid)
13.          On the anvil of the decisions cited supra, the instant
appeal may be examined. There is no pleading that the plaintiffs are
in possession of the land peacefully, continuously and to the hostile
animus of the defendants. The date of entry into the suit land has
not been mentioned. Mere possession of the suit land for long time
is not suffice to hold that the plaintiffs have perfected title by way of

                                             6
adverse possession, unless the classical requirements of adverse
possession nec vi, nec clam, nec precario are pleaded and proved.
14.                      In paragraph 2 of the plaint, it is averred that in or
about the year 1942, the plaintiffs spent an amount of Rs.500/-.
They filled up the ditches, made it plain and used as their threshing
floor. The suit was instituted in the year 1986. Plaintiff no.5 was 40
years at the time of institution of the suit. Thus, he was born in the
year 1946. Similarly, plaintiff nos.6 and 7 were 45 years each. They
were born in the year 1941. If assertion of the plaintiffs is accepted,
then plaintiff no.5 was in possession of the suit land 4 years prior to
his birth and plaintiff nos.6 and 7 one year after their birth. Thus the
plea put forth by the plaintiffs that they have acquired title by way
of adverse possession is untenable. As held above, mere possession
howsoever long is not suffice to hold that the plaintiffs are perfected
title by way of adverse possession, unless the classical requirements
of adverse possession nec vi, nec clam, nec precario are pleaded
and proved.
15.                    Resultantly, the plaintiffs’ suit must fail. The appeal is
allowed, but in the circumstances of the case, parties shall bear
their own costs throughout.
                                                      ……………………………….
                                                         Dr. A.K. Rath,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 17th August, 2017/Basanta


