                        HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                  S.A. No.77 of 1997
      From the judgment and decree dated 7.1.1997 and 22.1.1997
      respectively passed by Shri B.K. Nayak, learned A.D.J., Balangir in
      T.A. No.29/35 of 1991-92 reversing the judgment and decree dated
      5.3.1991 and 14.3.1991 respectively passed by Sri S. Nayak,
      learned Subordinate Judge, Bolangir in T.S. No.9 of 1982.
                                        ----------
      Prasad Kumar Naik (since dead)
      through L.Rs.                            ………..……           Appellants
                                            ---versus—
      Parbati Naik                             ………………            Respondent
             For Appellants       :  Mr. Sagar Ranjan Panigrahi, Advocate
             For Respondent       :  None
                                     JUDGMENT
      P R E S E N T:
                         THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K. RATH
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Date of Hearing :02.02.2018         │ Date of Judgment:12.02.2018
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. A.K. Rath, J.           This appeal is by the defendant.
      02.            Plaintiff-respondent instituted the suit for declaration of
      right, title and interest or in the alternative for partition of the suit
      land. The case of the plaintiff was that the suit land originally
      belonged to one Ghuman. He had four sons, namely, Goutam, Hari,
      Bansi and Ashok. In a family partition, the suit land fell to the share
      of Goutam. He was in possession of the same. Niladri was the wife
      of Goutam. Prasad, defendant, was the son of Ashok. Goutam had a
      daughter, namely, Dhubuni. She predeceased her parents. Parbati,
      plaintiff, is the daughter of Dhubuni and grand-daughter of Goutam
      and Niladri. Goutam died about 20 years back leaving behind him

                                    2
widow, Niladri, who possessed the suit land. Niladri died on 1.11.76
leaving behind the plaintiff as her only heir. The plaintiff was in
possession of the suit land. The defendant managed to get his name
recorded in the current settlement R.O.R. He falsely claimed to be
the adopted son of Goutam. He is not the adopted son of Goutam
and Niladri. With this factual scenario, she instituted the suit seeking
the reliefs mentioned supra.
03.          The defendant entered contest and filed a written
statement denying the assertions made in the plaint. The specific
case of the defendant was that the plaintiff was a stranger to the
family of Goutam. Goutam and Niladri adopted the defendant in
October, 1935, when he was a child. Since the date of adoption, he
had been treated as the son of Goutam. He had performed the
obsequies of Goutam and Niladri. It was further pleaded that
Goutam     executed   a   registered  deed   of   acknowledgement     of
adoption in his favour on 21.6.1951. He disputed the dates of death
of Goutam and Niladri. According to him, Goutam died on 10.1.55.
Niladri died in October, 1974. After the death of Goutam and before
the Hindu Succession Act came into force, he succeeded to the suit
property and is in possession of the same.
04.          Stemming on the pleadings of the parties, learned trial
court struck ten issues. Parties led evidence, both oral and
documentary, to substantiate their respective cases. Though the
defendant pleaded that plaintiff was a stranger to the family of
Goutam, during the stage of trial the said plea was abandoned. It
was admitted that the plaintiff is the grand-daughter of Goutam
being the daughter of his pre-deceased daughter-Dhubuni. Learned
trial court came to hold that defendant is the adopted son of
Goutam. Goutam died on 10.1.1955. The daughter had no right over
the property of her father. Since Goutam died prior to coming into

                                    3
force of the Hindu Succession Act leaving Niladri, widow and the
defendant as his adopted son, the plaintiff had no interest over the
suit land. The plaintiff is not entitled to any share. Held so, it
dismissed the suit. Challenging the judgment and decree of the
learned trial court, the plaintiff filed appeal before the learned
District Judge, Bolangir, which was transferred to the court of the
learned A.D.J., Bolangir and renumbered as T.A. No.29/35 of 1991-
92. Learned appellate court concurred with the finding of the
learned trial court that the defendant is the adopted son of Goutam.
It held that Goutam died on 10.1.55. His wife-Niladri died in
October, 1974. Hindu Women’s Right to Property Act, 1937 (“Act,
1937”) came into force in Bolangir on 1.1.1948. Under Sec.3(2) of
the Act, 1937, Niladri had limited interest in the property. Goutam
had half interest in the property at the time of his death. Niladri
would be entitled to the said half interest. She became the full
owner under Sec.14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. The
limited interest of Niladri in respect of the property on the death of
her husband is “property” within the meaning of Sec.14(1) of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956. The expressions “in possession” do not
mean that the Hindu female should be physical possession in real or
constructive possession of the property. Taking a cue from the
decisions of the apex Court in the case of Mangal Singh and others
vs. Smt. Rattno (dead) by her legal Representatives and another,
AIR 1967 SC 1786 and Jagannathan Pillai vs. Kunjithapadam Pillai
and others, AIR 1987 SC 1493, it held that there is nothing on
record to show that at the time when the Hindu Succession Act
came into force, the half interest which Niladri got in the suit
property was not possessed by her or that she was incapable of
taking over possession of the same. It further held that on the death
of Nilardi in 1974, half of the suit property in respect of which she

                                       4
became absolute owner had devolved on the plaintiff as well as the
defendant. Both will be entitled to equal share. Thus the plaintiff is
entitled to 1/4th share in the suit land. Held so, it allowed the appeal
in part and decreed the suit preliminary. It is apt to mention here
that during pendency of the second appeal, the defendant-appellant
died. The legal heirs had been substituted.
05.          The second appeal was admitted on the substantial
questions of law enumerated in ground nos.2 and 3 of the
memorandum of appeal. The same are:
             “2. For that the learned appellate court illegally allowed
             1/4th share of the plaintiff in the suit land on a finding
             that plaintiff being the daughter of ‘Dhobani’ and
             ‘Dhobani’ being daughter of Gautam and Niladri, after
             death of Niladri, the plaintiff became entitled to succeed
             the properties left by Niladri u/s.15(1)(a) of the Hindu
             succession Act, 1956. Such a finding is not only illegal
             but also perverse because there was no pleading by the
             plaintiff nor evidence laid and issue framed as to
             whether the plaintiff is the daughter of pre-deceased
             daughter of Niladri. There is absolutely no evidence as
             to whether plaintiff’s mother Dhobani pre-deceased
             Niladri.
             3. For that in view of the admitted fact that the
             appellant was the adopted son of Goutam and during
             the life time of Niladri, the entire suit land in respect of
             holding no.149 of mouza-Bishumunda having been
             exclusively recorded in the name of appellant in the final
             record of right vide Ext.C and such recording having not
             been challenged by Niladri, the learned A.D.J. in
             agreement with the learned sub-Judge should have held
             that the appellant was the sole owner of the suit
             property and Niladri had no share therein and
             consequently plaintiff is not entitled to any relief. ”
06.          Heard Mr. Sagar Ranjan Panigrahi, learned counsel on
behalf of Mr. N.C. Panigrahi, learned Senior Advocate for the
appellants. None appeared for the respondent.
07.          Mr.    Panigrahi,   learned     counsel    for  the    appellants,
submitted that the learned appellate court committed a manifest

                                     5
illegality and impropriety in allowing 1/4th share to the plaintiff in
the suit land. There is neither any pleading nor any evidence that
the plaintiff is the daughter of pre-deceased daughter of Niladri.
Since Goutam died prior to Hindu Succession Act, 1956, the issue of
succession would be governed by the Act, 1937. Under Act, 1937,
daughter had no right. The defendant is the adopted son of Goutam.
The suit land had been recorded in the name of the defendant in the
final ROR, Ext.C. The same had not been challenged by Niladri or
the plaintiff. The defendant is the absolute owner of the suit
property. The plaintiff is not entitled to any share over the same.
08.          Before adverting to the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the appellants, it will necessary to set out the
provisions of the Act, 1937 and the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
Sec.3(2) of the Act, 1937 postulates that when a Hindu governed by
any School of Hindu law other than the Dayabhaga School or by
customary law dies having at the time of his death an interest in a
Hindu joint family property, his widow shall, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (3), have in the property the same interest
as he himself had. Further sub-sec.(3) of Sec.3 thereof provides
that any interest devolving on a Hindu widow under the provisions
of this section shall be the limited interest known as a Hindu
Women’s estate, provided however, that she shall have the same
right of claiming partition as a male owner.
09.          Sec.14 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 deals with
property of a female Hindu to be her absolute property. The same is
quoted hereunder.
             “14. Pproperty of a female Hindu to be her absolute
             property–(1) Any property possessed by a female
             Hindu, whether acquired before or after the
             commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full
             owner thereof and not as a limited owner.

                                      6
            Explanation.—In this sub-section, “property” includes
            both movable and immovable property acquired by a
            female Hindu by inheritance or devise, or at a partition,
            or in lieu of maintenance or arrears of maintenance, or
            by gift from any person, whether a relative or not,
            before, at or after the marriage, or by her own skill or
            exertion, or by purchase or by prescription, or in any
            other manner whatsoever, and also any such property
            held by her as stridhana immediately before the
            commencement of this Act.
                    (2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall
            apply to any property acquired by way of gift or under a
            will or any other instrument or under a decree or order
            of a civil Court or under an award where the terms of
            the gift, will or other instrument or the decree, order or
            award prescribe a restricted estate in such property.”
10.         The apex Court in the case of V. Tulasamma & others
vs. Sesha Reddy (dead) by L.Rs, (1977) 3 SCC 99 held :
            “Section 14(1) and the Explanation thereto of the Hindu
            Succession Act, 1956 provide that any property
            possessed by a female Hindu, whether acquired before
            or after the commencement of the 1956 Act, shall be
            held by her as full owner thereof and not as a limited
            owner; and that ‘property’ includes both movable and
            immovable property acquired by her by inheritance or
            devise, or at a partition, or in lieu of maintenance or
            arrears of maintenance, or by gift from any person,
            whether from a relative or not, before, at or after her
            marriage, or by her own skill or exertion, or by purchase
            or by prescription, or in any other manner whatsoever,
            and also any such property held by her as stridhana
            immediately before the commencement of the 1956 Act.
            The language is in the widest possible terms and must
            be liberally construed in favour of the females so as to
            advance the object of the Act and promote the socio-
            economic ends, namely, to enlarge her limited interest
            to absolute ownership in consonance with the changing
            temper of the times sought to be achieved by such a
            long legislation.
            xxx                          xxx                     xxx”
11.         Goutam had half interest in the property at the time of
his death on 10.1.55. As per Sec.3(2) of the Act, 1937, his widow,
Niladri had in the property the same interest as Goutam had. Thus,
the limited interest of Niladri blossoms in full interest after coming

                                  7
into operation of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 by virtue of
Sec.14(1) of the said Act.
12.          In Sukh Ram and another vs. Gauri Shankar and
another, AIR 1968 SC 365, Hukam Singh and Sukhram were two
brothers. Chidda was the son of Sukhram. Hukam Singh, Sukhram
and Chidda constituted a Hindu joint family and were governed by
the Mitakshara Law of the Benares School. Hukam Singh died in
1952 leaving him surviving his wife Kishan Devi. Kishan Devi sold a
half share in a house and a shop belonging to the joint family to one
Gauri Shankar. Sukhram and his son Chidda then commenced an
action the court of the Munsif of Ghaziabad for a decree declaring
that the sale by Kishan Devi to Gauri Shankar was without
consideration and for an order cancelling the sale deed. The suit was
dismissed by the court of First Instance, the District Court, Meerut
and the High Court of Allahabad. The matter went to apex the
Court. The apex Court held that on the death of Hukam Singh in
1952, Kishan Devi is acquired by virtue of Sec.3(2) of the Hindu
Women’s Right to Property Act, 1937, the same interest in the
property of the joint family which Hukam Singh had. That interest
was limited interest known as the ‘Hindu Woman’s Estate’ Sec.3(3)
of the Hindu Women’s Rights to Property Act, 1937. Sec.14(1) of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 provides that any property possessed
by   a  female   Hindu,   whether   acquired   before  or   after the
commencement of this Act, shall be held by her as full owner
thereof and not as a limited owner. Clearly therefore, on the express
words of Section 14(1) of the Hindu Succession Act, Kishan Devi
acquired on June 17, 1956, rights of full ownership in the interest
which Hukam Singh had in the property of the family during his life-
time, and she was competent without the consent of the male
members of the family to sell the property for her own purposes. It

                                   8
further held that the words of Sec.14 of the Hindu Succession Act
are express and explicit, thereby a female Hindu possessed of
property whether acquired before or after the commencement of the
Act holds it as full owner and not as a limited owner. The interest to
which Kishan Devi became entitled on the death of her husband
under Sec.3(2) of the Hindu Women’s Rights to Property Act, 1937,
in the property of the joint family indisputably her “property” within
the meaning of Sec.14 of the Act 30 of 1956 and when she became
“full owner” of that property she acquired a right unlimited in point
of user and duration and uninhibited in point of disposition.
13.          The next question crops up for consideration that what
is the meaning of “possessed by” appearing in Sec.14(1) of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956. The apex Court in the case of Mangal
Singh and others (supra) held that the use of the expression
“possessed by” instead of the expression “in possession of” in
Sec.14(1) was intended to enlarge the meaning of this expression.
It is commonly known in English language that a property is said to
be possessed by a person, if he is its owner, even though he may,
for the time being, be out of actual possession or even constructive
possession. The expression used in Sec.14(1) of the Act was
intended to cover cases of possession in law also, where lands may
have descended to a female Hindu and she has not actually entered
into them. It would, of course cover the other cases of actual or
constructive possession. On the language of Sec.14(1), therefore,
this provision will become applicable to any property which is owned
by a female Hindu, even though she is not in actual, physical or
constructive possession of that property. The same view was
reiterated in Jagannathan Pillai (supra).

                                              9
14.                    Thus the inescapable conclusion is that the plaintiff has
1/4th interest over the suit schedule property. The substantial
questions of law are answered accordingly.
15.                    A priori, the appeal fails and is dismissed. Consequently
the suit is decreed in part. There shall be no order as to costs.
                                                      ……………………………….
                                                        Dr. A.K. Rath,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 12th February, 2018/Basanta


