                       HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                 S.A. No.242 of 1996
      From the judgment and decree dated 26.6.96 and 6.7.96
      respectively passed by Shri M.K. Mohanty, learned Ist Additional
      District Judge, Berhampur in T.A. No.4/92 (T.A. No.20/91 GDC)
      reversing the judgment and decree dated 12.4.91 and 29.4.91
      respectively passed by Shri S.K. Ray, learned Munsif, Berhampur in
      T.S. No.21 of 1989.
                                       ----------
      Smt. Anusuya Patra                      ….….…..……          Appellant
                                             ---versus—
      O.S.E.B., Bhubaneswar and another ……..…………                 Respondents
             For Appellant       :  Mr. Ajit Kumar Choudhury, Advocate
             For Respondents :      Mr. Bhaskar Chandra Panda, Advocate
                                    JUDGMENT
      P R E S E N T:
                        THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K. RATH
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Date of Hearing :08.02.2018         │     Date of Judgment:19.02.2018
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. A.K. Rath, J.         Plaintiff is the appellant against a reversing
      judgment in a suit for mandatory injunction.
      02.          The case of the plaintiff was that her mother, Ulli
      Sahuani, purchased a piece of land by means of a registered sale
      deed dated 2.7.1957. She was in possession of the same. After her
      death, the plaintiff constructed a boundary wall leaving 15 feet
      space for compound on the western side of the vacant side. An
      electric transformer had been installed by the defendant no.2 in the
      space left for the compound without her permission. In the proposed
      building of the plaintiff, the transformer would be by the side of the
      building, which will be less than a foot or two to the building. She

                                    2
requested the defendants to shift the transformer. All persuasions
ended in a fiasco. With this factual scenario, she instituted the suit
seeking the reliefs mentioned supra.
03.           The defendants filed written statement. It was pleaded
that the purchaser was in possession of the suit land. The plaintiff
had not left 15 feet space for the compound. The plaintiff had no
right over the suit land. The transformer was not installed on any
space left by the plaintiff for compound wall. The transformer had
been installed on a vacant unoccupied land for the interest of public
without any objection from anybody. The plaintiff had no manner of
right, title and interest over the suit land. It was further pleaded
that they had fixed transformers as per the Indian Telegraphs Act,
1885. The plaintiff’s predecessor had not made any complain before
them. The plaintiff had started construction without permission from
the Development Authority. Shifting of transformer requires heavy
expenses. Person requesting to shift the transformer has to deposit
the advance shifting charges. The plaintiff had not deposited the
amount.
04.           On the interse pleadings of the parties, learned trial
court struck five issues. Parties led evidence, oral and documentary,
to substantiate their cases. Learned trial court came to hold that
plaintiff is the owner of the suit plot. The transformer had been
installed in her land. The defendants had no authority to install the
transformer on the land of the plaintiff. Held so, it decreed the suit.
Feeling aggrieved, the defendants filed appeal before the learned
District Judge, Berhampur, which was subsequently transferred to
the court of the learned 1st A.D.J., Berhampur and renumbered as
T.A. No.4/92. Learned lower appellate court came to hold that
taking some plea or other and on imagination of facts, the court
below held that the land belonged to the plaintiff. Ext.2, the sale

                                    3
deed is not enough to hold the possession of the land or the plaintiff
over which, the transformer has been installed. The defendants
installed the transformer at a distance of 1 and 1½ feet away from
the foundation wall. It came to a conclusion that the person in
actual possession is only entitled to the relief of mandatory
injunction. Plaintiff had claimed her right over the suit land, but not
recovery of possession. There is no evidence that the plaintiff is the
owner of the piece of land over which the defendants installed the
transformer. She is not willing to deposit necessary costs for shifting
of the transformer. Held so, it allowed the appeal.
05.           The second appeal was admitted on the following
substantial question of law.
              “Whether the court below erred in             law    in
              misconstruing the evidence on record ?”
06.           Heard Mr. Ajit Kumar Choudhury, learned counsel for
the appellant and Mr. Bhaskar Chandra Panda, learned counsel for
the respondents.
07.           Mr. Choudhury, learned counsel for the appellant,
argued     with  vehemence     that   the  defendants    installed    the
transformer on the land of the plaintiff. The plaintiff has been
dispossessed without following the procedure prescribed by law.
Right to property is a constitutional as well as human right. Learned
trial court on an analysis of the evidence on record and pleading
held that the defendants had installed the transformer on the land of
the plaintiff, but then learned lower appellate court upset the same
on unsupportable and untenable ground. The finding of the learned
lower appellate court that there is no material on record that the
defendants had installed the transformer over the land of the
plaintiff is perverse. He relied on the decision of the apex Court in

                                    4
the case of Chairman, Indore Vikas Pradhikaran vs. M/s.Pure
Industrial Cock and Chem. Ltd. and others, 2007 AIR SCW 4387.
08.          Per   contra,  Mr.   Panda,    learned    counsel  for  the
respondents, submitted that plaintiff was not examined as a
witness. Her husband, power of attorney holder, was examined as a
witness. The power of attorney holder cannot depose for the
principal in respect of the matter which only the principal can have a
personal knowledge and in respect of which the principal is entitled
to be cross-examined. Plaintiff had never raised any objection to the
installation of the transformer. She remained silent. She is not
entitled to the relief of mandatory injunction. He further submitted
that the plaintiff had not filed any application for deputing a survey
knowing commissioner to ascertain whether the transformer has
been installed on the land or not. A survey knowing commissioner
may be appointed to ascertain the truth.
09.          Before proceeding further, it is apt to refer the decision
cited at the Bar. In Chairman, Indore Vikas Pradhikaran (supra), the
apex Court held that the right to property is now considered to be
not only a constitutional right but also a human right. It further held
that property, while ceasing to be a fundamental right would,
however, be given express recognition as a legal right, provisions
being made that no person shall be deprived of his property save in
accordance with law. There is no quarrel over the proposition of law.
10.          Learned trial court held that plaintiff is the owner of the
suit plot and the transformer had been installed on her land.
Learned lower appellate court negatived the finding holding, inter
alia, that the defendants installed the transformer at a distance of 1
and 1½ feet away from the foundation wall. It further held that
there is no evidence that plaintiff is the owner of the land over which

                                          5
the transformer had been installed. Counsel for both the parties are
in consensus ad idem that a survey knowing commissioner be
appointed.
11.                    In view of the same, the impugned judgment is set
aside. The matter is remitted back to the learned District Judge,
Berhampur. Learned District Judge, Berhampur shall appoint a
survey knowing commissioner for measurement of the land and
dispose of the appeal. Since the matter is remitted back to the
learned appellate court, this Court refrains from answering the
substantial questions of law.
                                                 ……………………………….
                                                  Dr. A.K. Rath,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 19th February, 2018 /Basanta


