                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                            S.A.No.219 of 1998
    From a judgment and decree dated 4.4.1998 and 10.4.1998
    respectively passed by Mr.Niranjan Nayak, Additional District
    Judge, Rairangpur in Money Appeal No.1/10 of 1997-88
    reversing the judgment and decree dated 28.1.1988 and
    15.2.1988 passed by the learned Sub-Judge, Rairangpur in
    M.S.No.26 of 1986.
                                -------------
    Orissa Agro Industries
    Corporation Ltd.                     …….             Appellant
                                   Versus
    Budhiram Mandal                      …….             Respondent
                For Appellant     --     Mr.B.Baug, Advocate
                For Respondent --        Mr.S.Rout, Advocate
                             JUDGMENT
    PRESENT:
             THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
    Date of Hearing: 7.4.2017 &         Date of Judgment: 17.04.2017
Dr.A.K.RATH, J. This appeal is by the plaintiff. The relevant facts
    are that the plaintiff is a Government Company. The company
    has its registered office at Bhubaneswar and branches in
    different parts of the State including at Baripada. The
    defendant was appointed as a dealer of fertilizer in the year
    1983. The plaintiff used to supply the fertilizer to the

                                   2
defendant, received money, which was duly entered in the
books of accounts of the plaintiff. The last transactions were
made on 27.9.1983. It was found that an amount of
Rs.6,392.90 was outstanding against him. Notice was issued to
the defendant demanding payment of outstanding dues. Since
all the persuasions made by the plaintiff ended in a fiasco, the
suit was filed for realization of the amount as aforesaid.
2.    The case of the defendant is that Srikanta Mohanty, Sales
Representative of the plaintiff used to receive cash and issue
delivery order to the defendant and other retailers. He lifted the
stock from the Ware House, Rairangpur on the basis of the
delivery order. The plaintiff had not issued delivery order on
credit. The transaction was always made on cash/draft. The
specific case of the defendant is that on 27.9.1983, the Sales
Representatives received cash of Rs.6,393/- from him and
issued delivery order. The Sales Representative received the
cash promising that he will make a draft of the said amount
either in Bank of India or in Canara Bank.
3.    On the inter se pleadings of the parties, the learned trial
court framed six issues, out of which, issue no.4 is pivotal. The
same is :
                       “4.    Whether the plaintiff received the
                            claimed amount from the defendant
                            through the Sales Representative Sri
                            Srikanta Mohanty ?”
4.    To substantiate the case, the plaintiff had examined one
witness and on its behalf, four documents had been exhibited.

                                   3
The defendant had examined one witness and on his behalf,
nine documents had been exhibited. The learned trial court
came to hold that the defendant was getting the delivery orders
of fertilizer from the plaintiff through his Sales Representative
on credit. Whenever cash was paid to the plaintiff, the factum
of such payment was reflected in the delivery order.         Any
payment made by way of bank draft was also reflected in the
delivery order. The defendant has admitted in his cross-
examination that though he paid the cash on 27.9.1983 to
Srikanta Mohanty, he did not demand for money receipt. He
insisted upon the Sales Representative to reflect in the delivery
order    instead   of   the  bank    draft, but then  the   Sales
Representative assured him that there will be no difficult even if
word ‘cash’ was not written. It held that the defendant had
failed to prove payment of Rs.6,329.90 against delivery order
dated 27.3.1983 and decreed the suit. The unsuccessful
defendant filed Money Appeal No.1/10 of 97-88 before the
learned A.D.J., Rairangpur. The learned appellate court came to
hold that Srikanta Mohanty, the Sales Representative of the
plaintiff had not been examined by the plaintiff. The plaintiff
had business dealings with the defendant. In the year 1984,
vide Ext.E, an amount of Rs.60,118.12 was outstanding against
the defendant but in the suit filed on 19.9.1986 it only
preferred claim of the transaction of 27.9.1983. The plaintiff
had failed to establish that the transaction in question was on
credit. Held so, it allowed the appeal.

                                    4
5.     The Second Appeal was admitted on 26.8.2016 on the
following substantial question of law.
                        “Whether the lower appellate court is
                        justified in putting the burden on the
                        plaintiff to prove that defendant has not
                        paid the alleged amount under the
                        transaction dated 27.9.1983 by examining
                        Srikanta       Mohanty,        the    Sales
                        Representative of the plaintiff ?”
6.     Mr.Baug, learned Advocate for the appellant submitted
that the plaintiff was a dealer in fertilizer. He had taken
fertilizer on credit. Since the amount was not paid, the plaintiff
after issuing notice, instituted the suit. The learned trial court,
on analysis of the evidence on record and pleadings, decreed
the suit, but the learned appellate court committed a manifest
illegality in dismissing the suit holding inter alia that the
burden of proof lies on the plaintiff to prove that the defendant
has paid the amount as claimed.
7.     Per contra, Mr.Rout, learned Advocate for the respondent
submitted that the transaction between the plaintiff and
defendant was made either in cash or draft. The plaintiff has
not allowed the defendant to the credit facilities. No document
has been proved with regard to supply of goods on credit.
8.     Exhibit-1,   the   delivery order-cum-challan-cum-invoice
dated 27.9.1983 issued to the defendant shows that 60 bags of
fertilizer sold for an amount of Rs.6,393/-. The payment
reference column has four heads. Under the heading bank,
“D.D.Canara Bank” has been mentioned. The column meant for

                                  5
D/D/Pay Order No., it has been mentioned as ‘Cuttack’. The
reference column date is blank. There is no reference in the
Ext.1 that goods were supplied to the defendant on credit.
There is also no evidence on record that goods were supplied to
the defendant on credit. In absence of any document with
regard to supply of goods to the defendant on credit, it is
difficult to believe that goods were supplied to the defendant on
credit. The learned appellate court is not correct in placing the
burden of proof on the plaintiff that money was not paid. This is
not the only ground on which the learned appellate court set
aside the judgment of the learned trial court. The learned
appellate, on a thread bare analysis of the evidence on record
as well as pleadings, held that the plaintiff has failed to
substantiate its case.
9.     Resultantly,   the   appeal, being   devoid  of  merit,  is
dismissed. No costs.
                                           ……..…………………..
                                             Dr.A.K.Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 17th April, 2017/CRB.


