                        HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                               W.P.(C) No.5022 of 2013
      In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
      Constitution of India.
                                             ----------
      Ritanjali Giri @ Paul                      ……………                 Petitioner
                                                 ---versus—
      State of Odisha represented through its
      Commissioner-cum-Secretary, School and Mass
      Education Department, Secretariat Building,
      Bhubaneswar and others                     ……………                 Opp. Parties
                     For Petitioner       :  Mr. Gopinath Sethi, Advocate
                     For Opp. Parties     :  Mr. Mrityunjay Bisoi, Standing Counsel,
                                             School and Mass Education Department
                                                    (For O.P. Nos.1 to 4)
                                         -------------
      P R E S E N T:
                           THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K. RATH
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Date of Hearing: 04.05.2016             │ Date of Judgment: 11.05.2016
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. A.K. Rath, J.           This petition challenges the order dated 13.07.2012
      passed by the District Education Officer, Balasore, opposite party no.4,
      whereby and whereunder the claim of the petitioner for appointment under
      the Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme was rejected.
      2.              The short facts of the case are that Manoj Kumar Paul,
      husband of the petitioner, was appointed as an Assistant Teacher on
      01.01.2008 in Krushna Bhanu High School (hereinafter referred as

                                       2
“School”). He joined in the said post on 02.01.2008. He discharged his
duty with the utmost satisfaction of the authorities. His post was duly
approved by the Circle Inspector of Schools, Balasore Circle, Balasore. He
received grant-in-aid (Block Grant) w.e.f.01.04.2008. While the matter
stood thus, he passed away from the mortal world. After his untimely
death, his family members received a serious setback, since he was the
sole bread-earner of his family. Thereafter, the petitioner filed an
application on 25.06.2012 before the opposite party no.4 for being
appointed    under   the  Rehabilitation   Assistance  Scheme     (hereinafter
referred as “Scheme”). By order dated 13.07.2012, the opposite party
no.4 rejected the application of the petitioner holding inter alia that the
Scheme is not available with the legal heirs of teachers/employees of
Block Grant High Schools.
3.            Pursuant to issuance of notice, counter affidavit has been
filed by the opposite party no.4. It is stated that the School in question is
a Block Grant High School. The petitioner is not entitled for appointment
under Rehabilitation Assistance Rule, 1990. The service condition of the
employee of Block Grant High School has not been finalized by the
Government. It is further stated that the Finance Department in its letter
dated 02.02.2000 imposed restriction of filling up the vacancies in the
aided educational institutions for which the benefits of the Scheme was not
extended to the member of the families of the employees of fully aided
educational institutions. Recently, the Finance Department have agreed to
fill up the base level vacancies in the educational institutions by extending

                                        3
the Scheme in fit cases by Resolution dated 26.04.2011. Thereafter, the
Government of Orissa in School and Mass Education Department have
issued clarification on 21.06.2011 stating therein that all pending
applications under the Scheme of aided educational institutions (Fully
Aided under direct control of Government due to death of invalid on or
after 24.09.1990) shall be scrutinized by the existing screening committee
for consideration of appointment under the Scheme. The School where the
husband of the petitioner was serving does not come within the meaning
of fully aided educational institutions.
4.            Heard Mr. G. Sethi, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr.
M. Bisoi, learned Standing Counsel for the School and Mass Education
Department.
5.            In course of hearing, Mr. Bisoi, learned Standing Counsel for
the School and Mass Education Department produced the Scheme issued
by the Government of Orissa in G.A. Department on 14.10.1998. On a
cursory perusal of the said Scheme, it is evident that the Government of
Orissa have decided that the benefit of the Scheme shall be extended to
the family members of non-Government Primary School Teachers,
Teaching and non-Teaching staff of aided educational institutions under
the Education Department, the work charged employees of the State
Government and the employees of the Public Sector Undertakings under
the State Government. It further postulates that the provision laid down in
the Orissa Civil Service (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules, 1990 as

                                         4
amended from time to time shall mutatis mutandis be applicable to the
families of the employees of the above categories w.e.f.24.09.1990.
6.            The sole question that hinges for consideration is as to
whether the benefit of the Scheme applies to the family members of an
aided educational institution, which is receiving Block Grant ?
7.            Section 3(b) of the Orissa Education Act, 1969 defines the
Aided Educational Institutions, which is quoted hereunder:
              “3(b) Aided Educational Institutions means private
              educational institution which is eligible to, and is receiving
              grant-in-aid from the State Government, and includes an
              educational institution which has been notified by the
              State Government to receive grant-in-aid.”
8.            On a bare perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is abundantly
clear that private educational institution which is eligible to, and is
receiving grant-in-aid from the State Government, and includes an
educational institution which has been notified by the State Government to
receive grant-in-aid is an aided educational institution. The Act does not
make any distinction between the full Grant School or Block Grant School.
Moreover, the private educational institution which has been notified by
the State Government to receive grant-in-aid is also an aided educational
institution.
9.            The application of the petitioner was rejected by the opposite
party no.4 on untenable and unsupportable ground. In view of the above
discussion, this Court has no option but to quash the order dated
13.07.2012 passed by the District Education Officer, Balasore, opposite

                                                 5
party no.4. The matter is remitted back to the opposite party no.4. The
opposite party no.4 is directed to consider the application of the petitioner
within a period of three months from the date of production of a certified
copy of this order.
                       The writ petition is allowed. No costs.
                                                          ……………………………….
                                                            Dr. A.K. Rath,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 11th May,2016/Barik


