                   HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                               W.P.(C) No.11660 of 2015
     In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
     Constitution of India.
                                      -------------
     Kashinath Das Mohapatra                      ….                   Petitioner
                                        Versus
     State of Orissa and others                   ….               Opposite parties
                  For Petitioner           --     Mr.Pitambar Acharya,
                                                  Sr.Advocate
                                                  Mr.Biren Sankar Tripathy,
                                                  Advocate
                  For Opposite parties     --     Addl. Govt. Advocate
                                                  (For O.P.No.1)
                                                  Mr.Patitapaban Panda,
                                                  Advocate
                                                  (For O.Ps.2 & 3)
     PRESENT:
                     THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
     Date of Hearing: 17.07.2015           :         Date of Judgment: 24.07.2015
Dr.A.K.Rath, J.    The instant challenge is to laciniate the order of suspension
     dated 24.6.2015 passed by the Chief Administrator, Shree Jagannath
     Temple, Puri-opposite party no.2, vide Annexure-2 and the memorandum of
     charges dated 24.6.2015, vide Annexure-3.
     2.           Shorn of unnecessary details, the short facts of the case of the
     petitioner are that he is a Daitapati Sevak of Shree Jagannath Temple. In
     the record of rights of Shree Jagannath Temple, late Adhar Das Mohapatra,

                                        2
father of the petitioner, has been recorded as “Daita”. Being the successor,
the petitioner used to do seva puja of Lord Shree Jagannath, Balabhadra
and Devi Subhadra in the Nabakalebar as per the record of rights. Though it
is the duty of the ‘Badagrahi’ to change the “Ghata” of the Lords, other
“Daitapaties” may also remain present inside the temple. On 16.6.2015 four
numbers of “Badagrahi” had been to the temple to change the “Ghata”. The
petitioner, being a “Daitapati”, was also present inside the temple to perform
the seva puja. It is further stated that due to delay in “Niti”, there was delay
in change of “Ghata” for about four hours, which created dissatisfaction
amongst the devotees. While the matter stood thus, vide Office Order
No.17/Con dated.24.6.2015, the opposite party no.2 placed the petitioner
under suspension pending drawal of disciplinary proceedings against him,
vide Annexure-2. The order of suspension was passed under Section 21-B of
Shree Jagannath Temple Act, 1954 ( hereinafter referred to as “the Act”)
during morning hours of 24.6.2015. In the evening of the same day, the
petitioner received a notice issued by the opposite party no.2 under Section
21-A of the Act calling upon him to file reply within a period of thirty days
on the allegations that he created disturbance for which there was delay in
“Niti” of changing “Ghata” by the Badagrahis, vide Annexure-3. With this
factual scenario, the present writ application has been filed.
3.           Pursuant to issuance of notice, a counter affidavit has been
filed by the opposite parties 2 and 3. It is stated that as per the temple
record of rights, “Ghata Paribartan” ritual is a secret/gupta ritual. For
performance of the said ritual, four main doors of the temple were closed
from about 3.30 A.M. on 15.6.2015 till 8.00 P.M. of the next day. As per the
prevailing custom and tradition, only Daita Sevaks, Pati Mahapatra were
supposed to stay in the inner bedha of the temple and Deulakaran and
Tadhau Karan in outer bedha of the temple for performance of “Ghata
Paribartan” ritual. No staff or officer of the temple administration was
present inside the temple during the said period. Since reports have been

                                       3
published in print as well as electronic media that there was delay and
disturbance in performance of “Ghata Paribartan” ritual, the Chief
Administrator initiated proceeding, being Misc. Case No.8 of 2015, to
enquire into the cause of alleged delay and disturbance in “Ghata
Paribartan” ritual. During preliminary inquiry, it was prima facie revealed
that there was delay and disturbance in “Ghata Paribartan” ritual. The
petitioner was the instrumental in causing delay and disturbance in “Ghata
Paribartan” and his continuance will seriously subvert the smooth
performance of Ratha Yatra, 2015. The opposite party no.2 in exercise of its
power conferred under Section 21-B of the Act,             pending drawal of
disciplinary proceedings has placed the petitioner under suspension with
immediate effect until further order, vide Office Order No.17/Con dated
24.6.2015. On the same day show cause notice under Section 21-A of the
Act has also been issued to the petitioner, vide Notice No.23/Con dated
24.6.2015 directing him to submit his reply on the charges levelled against
him within thirty days from the receipt of notice. The misconduct is serious
in nature and detrimental to the interest of the temple administration as
well as the devotees. The opposite party no.2 prima facie taking into
consideration the gravity and seriousness of the allegations has issued the
order of suspension against the petitioner. It is further stated that father of
the petitioner, namely, Adhar Das Mohapatra has been recorded in the
temple record of rights as a “Daita Sevak”. The petitioner and his son, being
the successors of late Adhar Das Mohpatra, are performing the “Daita Seva”.
The details of “Daita Seva” have been recorded at Seva Sl. No.20 of the
temple record of rights. Daita Seva is a group seva. All Daita Sevaks perform
their seva during Nabakalebar as a team. This being a group seva, absence
of one or two Daita Sevaks no way affects smooth performance of rituals
required to be performed by Daita Sevaks. In the remark column of Seva Sl.
No.20, it is mentioned that only the Badagrahis perform the “Ghata
Partibartan’ ritual. The other Daitas may be present and work. As per the

                                       4
custom and tradition prevailing since long, only four Badagrahis are
competent to enter the Anasar Pindi to perform the “Ghata Paribartan”
ritual. The other Daita Sevaks may remain present inside the temple, but
they have no right to enter the Anasar Pindi with the Badagrahis. It is
further stated that enquiry is going on. None of the witnesses, so far
examined, has alleged that due to negligence of Badagrahis, “Ghata
Paribartan” ritual was delayed by four hours. Prima facie, it is found that
the petitioner insisted to remain present in the Anasar Pindi along with the
Badagrahis to witness the “Ghata Paribartan” ritual. Since the Badagrahis
opposed to the same, the petitioner and his son, Jayakrushna Das
Mohapatra, obstructed the Badagrahis to enter the Anasar Pindi for
performing “Ghata Paribartan’ ritual and scolded them. The misconduct and
unruly behavior of the petitioner and his son acted as a catalyst in causing
delay in performance of “Ghata Paribartan”. The assertion of the petitioner
that in the “Ghata Paribartan” 1977 and 1996 Nabakalebar, except four
Badagrahis, other sevaks/Badagrahi were allowed to perform the change of
“Ghata” ritual has been specifically denied.
4.           Heard Mr.Pitambar Acharya, learned Senior Advocate along
with Mr.Biren Sankar Tripathy, Advocate for the petitioner, learned
Additional Government Advocate for the opposite party no.1 and Mr.
Patitapabana Panda, learned Advocate for the opposite parties 2 and 3.
5.           Mr.Acharya, learned Senior Advocate argued with vehemence
that the impugned order of suspension smacks mala fide and violative of
Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India. No opportunity of hearing
was provided under Section 21-A of the Act before placing the petitioner
under suspension. He submitted that the grounds/charges mentioned in
the show cause notice, vide Annexure-3, are not so grave, which warrants a
drastic action by the Chief Administrator, Shree Jagannath Temple-opposite
party no.2. He further submitted that the petitioner is a hereditary sevak of

                                       5
Lord Jagannath Mahaprabhu. In the record of rights prepared by Shree
Jagannath Temple Administration Act, 1952 and Rules made thereunder,
name of Adhar Das Mohapatra, father of the petitioner, has been mentioned
in Chapter-20 Form-‘D’. Drawing attention of this Court to the record of
rights, Mr. Acharya, learned Senior Advocate submitted that Badragrahis
perform the “Ghata Partibartan” ritual. At the same time other Daitas may
also remain present. He further submitted that the allegations made in the
show cause notice are unfounded and baseless. Neither the petitioner nor
his son created any disturbance during “Ghata Paribartan” ritual. An
attempt has been made to oust the petitioner from doing seva puja of the
Lords during Nabakalebar, 2015. He further submitted that delay in
causing the “Ghata Paribartan” cannot be attributed to the petitioner.
6.            Per contra, Mr.Panda, learned Advocate for the opposite parties
2 and 3 submitted that since there was delay and disturbance in the “Ghata
Paribartan” ritual, the opposite party no.2 initiated proceeding, being
Misc.Case No.8 of 2015, to enquire into the cause of delay and disturbance
in performance of “Ghata Paribartan” ritual. Enquiry is going on. During
enquiry, it is prima facie revealed that the petitioner and his son obstructed
the Badagrahis, insisted upon to enter the Ansar Pindi and abused the
Badagrahis in the obscene language, for which the opposite party no.2 in
exercise of power under Section 21-B of the Act placed the petitioner under
suspension. Section 21-B of the Act does not contemplate to provide
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. He further submitted that the
charges levelled against the petitioner are very serious warranting no
interference of this Court in the order of suspension as well as
memorandum of charges. He further submitted that misconduct of the
petitioner is serious in nature and detrimental to the interest of the temple
administration as well as the devotees.

                                           6
7.           Provisions of Sections 21-A and 21-B of the Act, which are
relevant, may be noticed. The same are quoted hereunder:-
                    “21-A. Control of Sevaks, etc. –All sevaks, office-holders
           and {Employees} attached to the Temple or in receipt of any
           emoluments or perquisites the reform shall, whether such service
           is hereditary or not, be subjected to the control of [Chief
           Administrator] who may, subject to the provisions of this Act and
           the regulations, made by the Committee in that behalf, after giving
           the person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard.-
                    (a)     withhold the receipt of emoluments or requisites;
                    (b)     impose a fine of an amount not exceeding [two
                            thousand rupees];
                    (c)     suspend; or
                    (d)     dismiss;
           any of them for breach of trust, incapacity, disobedience of lawful
           orders, neglect of or willful absence from duty, disorderly
           behaviour or conduct derogatory to the discipline or dignity of the
           Temple or for any other sufficient cause.
                    21-B. “Suspension pending inquiry- The Chief
           Administrator may place any sevak, office holder or employee
           attached to the Temple under suspension,-
                    (a)     where a disciplinary proceeding against him is
                            contemplated or is pending; or
                    (b)     where a case against him in respect of any criminal
                            offence is under investigation, inquiry or trial.”
8.           The general law on the subject of suspension has been laid
down by the apex Court in a catena of judgments. After survey of the earlier
decision, the apex Court in the case of State of Orissa v. Bimal Kumar
Mohanty, AIR 1994 Supreme Court 2296 in paragraph-12 of the report held
as follows:-
                    “It is thus settled law that normally when an appointing
             authority or the disciplinary authority seeks to suspend an
             employee, pending inquiry or contemplated inquiry or pending
             investigation into grave charges of misconduct or defalcation of
             funds or serious acts of omission and commission, the order of
             suspension would be passed after taking into consideration the

                                          7
             gravity of the misconduct sought to be inquired into or
             investigated and the nature of the evidence placed before the
             appointing authority and on application of the mind by
             disciplinary authority. Appointing authority or disciplinary
             authority should consider the above aspects and decide
             whether it is expedient to keep an employee under suspension
             pending aforesaid action. It would not be as an administrative
             routine or an automatic order to suspend an employee. It
             should be on consideration of the gravity of the alleged
             misconduct or the nature of the allegations imputed to the
             delinquent employee. The Court or the Tribunal must consider
             each case on its own facts and no general law could be laid
             down in that behalf. Suspension is not a punishment but is
             only one of forbidding or disabling an employee to discharge
             the duties of office or post held by him. In other words it is to
             refrain him to avail further opportunity to perpetrate the
             alleged misconduct or to remove the impression among the
             members of service that dereliction of duty would pay fruits
             and the offending employee could get away even pending
             inquiry without any impediment or to prevent an opportunity
             to the delinquent officer to scuttle the inquiry or investigation
             or to win over the witnesses or the delinquent having had the
             opportunity in office to impede the progress of the investigation
             or inquiry etc. But as stated earlier, each case must be
             considered depending on the nature of the allegations, gravity
             of the situation and the indelible impact it creates on the
             service for the continuance of the delinquent employee in
             service pending inquiry or contemplated inquiry or
             investigation. It would be another thing if the action is
             actuated by mala fides, arbitrary or for ulterior purpose. The
             suspension must be a step in aid to the ultimate result of the
             investigation or inquiry. The authority also should keep in
             mind public interest of the impact of the delinquent's
             continuance in office while facing departmental inquiry or trial
             of a criminal charge.”
9.           On the anvil of the decision citied supra, this Court has
examined the case. The submission of Mr.Acharya, learned Senior Advocate
for the petitioner that the order of suspension is an infraction of principles
of natural justice though at first blush appears to be attractive, but on a
deeper scrutiny of the provisions contained in Sections 21-A and 21-B of the
Act, the same is like a billabong.
10.          On a conspectus of Section 21-B(a) of the Act, it is evident that
the Chief Administrator may place any sevak, office holder or employee

                                        8
attached to the temple under suspension, where a disciplinary proceeding
against him is contemplated or is pending. (emphasis laid)
11.          On a cursory perusal of Section 21-A of the Act, it is manifest
that the Chief Administrator after giving the person concerned a reasonable
opportunity of hearing may impose any of the punishment prescribed under
Clauses “a to d”. The same can only be done after conclusion of inquiry.
Under Section 21-A of the Act, the Chief Administrator may impose penalty
of suspension, but the same can be imposed after the charges levelled
against the person concerned is proved. Sections 21-A and 21-B of the Act
operate in different filed.
12.          It is trite that suspension pending inquiry is not a punishment.
An interim suspension can be passed against a sevak while an inquiry is
pending into his misconduct as has been held by the apex Court in the case
cited supra. Suspension is not a punishment, but is only one of forbidding
or disabling a sevak to discharge the duties of office, it is to refrain him to
avail further opportunity to perpetrate the alleged misconduct or to remove
the impression among the members of the public that dereliction of duty
would pay fruits and the offending sevak could get away even pending
inquiry without any impediment or to prevent an opportunity to the
delinquent to scuttle the inquiry. A Daita Sevak performs the seva for a
limited period of the Lords starting from Jyestha Sukla Trayadoshi Tithi till
Niladree Bije and on some festive occasions, such as Chitalagi Amabasya,
Gamha Purnami, Radhastami, Kumar Purnima and Rekha Panchami. From
the charge-sheet, it is vivid and luminescent that the allegations made
against the petitioner are grave. The charges reveal that not only the
petitioner obstructed the Badagrahis for performance of “Ghata Paribartan”,
but also abused them. The “Ghata Paribartan” is a scared ritual of the
Lords. Due to unreasonable delay and disturbance in performance of “Ghata
Paribartan”, the same brought disrepute to the ancient temple. Devotees

                                           9
were shocked and flabbergasted. The temple administration apprehends
that continuance of the petitioner will cause serious bottleneck in the
smooth conduct of the Rath Yatra, 2015. The submission of Mr.Acharya,
learned Senior Advocate for the petitioner that the order of suspension
smacks mala fide and violative of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of
India has no legs to stand. There is no material on record to justify the
stand of the learned Senior Counsel.
13.               On taking a holistic view of the matter, this Court is of the
opinion that the order of suspension dated 24.6.2015 passed by the Chief
Administrator, Shree Jagannath Temple, Puri-opposite party no.2, vide
Annexure-2 as well as the memorandum of charges dated 24.6.2015, vide
Annexure-3 does not suffer from any illegality and infirmity so as to warrant
interference of this Court.          The writ application, sans any merit, is
dismissed. No Costs.
14.               Before parting with the case, this Court observes that various
words pertaining to Seva Puja and Nitikranti of the Lords have been used,
taking a cue from the record of rights. This Court does not find any
synonyms words in English.
                                                           ……………………..
                                                            Dr.A.K.Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 24th July, 2015/CRB.


