                    HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                              W.P.(C) No.17588 of 2006
     In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
     Constitution of India.
                                      -------------
     Smt.Minati Behera and others           ….                 Petitioners
                                        Versus
     Chairman-Cum-Managing Director,
     Grid Corporation of Orissa Limited
     and others                             ….                 Opposite parties
                  For Petitioners    --     Mr.Saswat Das, Advocate
                                            Amicus Curiae
                  For Opp. Parties --       Mr.B.P.Das, Advocate
                                            ( For O.P.No.2).
     PRESENT:
                    THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
     Date of Hearing :18.7.2016           &        Date of Judgment:25.7.2016
Dr.A.K.Rath, J. Petitioner nos.1 and 2 are the unfortunate parents and
     petitioner nos.3 to 6 are the brothers and sisters of one Saraswati
     Behera, who died in electrocution. By this writ petition under Article 226
     of the Constitution of India, they have prayed, inter alia, for a direction
     to the opposite parties to pay an amount of Rs.5,00,000/- towards
     compensation for the death of Saraswati Behera.
     2.           Shorn of unnecessary details, the short facts of the case of
     the petitioners are that on 28.5.1999 while Saraswati Behera was going

                                       2
to her bari to tie the goat, she along with the goat came in contact with a
live electric wire, as a result of which, the goat died at the spot. She was
shifted to the District Headquarter Hospital at Bhadrak, where she was
declared dead. Thereafter, father of the deceased lodged an F.I.R. before
the Town Police Station at Bhadrak about the occurrence. The same was
registered as U.D. Case No.52 of 1999. The dead body on completion of
inquest was sent for autopsy. The doctor, who was in-charge of the
postmortem, opined that the cause of death was due to electrocution.
The deceased was 11 years old and was reading in Class-VI. With this
factual scenario, the writ petition has been filed for compensation.
3.            Pursuant to issuance of notice, a counter affidavit has been
filed by opposite party no.1 stating therein that the writ petition is not
maintainable in view of Transfer Scheme Rules, 1998. Since the alleged
accident occurred on 28.5.1999 within the Distribution Net-work of
NESCO and in view of Transfer Scheme Rules, 1998, NESCO is liable to
settle all the claims.
4.            A counter affidavit has also been filed by opposite party no.3
stating therein that the writ petition is not maintainable as the same
involves adjudication of disputed question of facts. The deceased met
with an accident at the backyard of Purna Chandra Behera and Kuna @
Narendra Behera, who had unauthorisedly used electricity by hooking
from the Pump house of one Kangali Behera. Further in G.R. Case
No.369/1999 (Trial No.351/2006), both the persons have been convicted

                                       3
under Section 304(A)/34, IPC and sentenced to undergo S.I. for six
months. Therefore, the opposite parties are no way responsible for the
alleged accident. There was no negligence on the part of the opposite
party in maintaining the electric line. The opposite party had taken all
care for proper maintenance of the electric lines. Neither the petitioners
nor any of the villagers had ever intimated to the opposite parties for the
alleged accident at any point of time. It is further stated that the
petitioners have not furnished any documents in support of their
relationship and status with the deceased and the age and wages of the
deceased. Opposite party no.2 has also taken the similar plea as that of
opposite parties 1 and 3.
5.           Heard Mr.Saswat Das, learned counsel for the petitioners
and Mr.B.P.Das, learned counsel for the opposite party no.2.
6.           Really two points arise for consideration of this Court ;
             (1)   Whether a writ application under Article 226 of the
                    Constitution of India is maintainable for payment of
                    compensation when death is caused due to
                    electrocution ?
             (2)    Whether opposite parties can deny the liability on the
                    ground that the death of Saraswati Behera was due to
                    act of a third party ?
 Point Nos.1 and 2.
 7.          An identical matter came up for consideration before a
 Division Bench of this Court in the case of T. Bimala v. Cuttack

                                           4
Municipal Corporation, Cuttack and others, 2015(I) OLR-637. It was held
as follows:-
      “9.    The language of Article 226 of the Constitution does not admit of
      any limitation on the powers of the High Court for the exercise of
      jurisdiction thereunder. The power conferred upon the High Courts
      under Article 226 of the Constitution is wide enough to reach injustice
      wherever it is found. The apex Court in catena of the decisions laid
      down certain guidelines and self-imposed limitations have been put
      there subject to which the High Courts would exercise jurisdiction.
      Those guidelines cannot be mandatory in all circumstances. When a
      citizen approaches the High Court in writ petition that a wrong is
      caused, the High Court will step into protect him, whether that wrong
      was done by the State or an instrumentality of the State. The High Court
      cannot pull down the shutters.
      10.    In M.S. Grewal v. Deep Chand Sood, (2001) 8 SCC 151, the apex
      Court observed as under :
             “Next is the issue of “maintainability of the writ petition” before the High
             Court under Article 226 of the Constitution. The appellants though
             initially very strongly contended that while the negligence aspect has
             been dealt with under penal laws already, the claim for compensation
             cannot but be left to be adjudicated by the civil laws and thus the Civil
             Court’s jurisdiction ought to have been invoked rather than by way of a
             writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution. This plea of non-
             maintainability of the writ petition though advanced at the initial stage of
             the submissions but subsequently the same was not pressed and as
             such we need not detain ourselves on that score, excepting however
             recording that the law Courts exist for the society and they have an
             obligation to meet the social aspirations of citizens since law Courts must
             also respond to the needs of the people. In this context, reference may be
             made to two decisions of this Court : the first in line is the decision in
             Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa, (AIR 1993 SC 1960) wherein this
             Court relying upon the decision in Rudal Sah (Rudal Sah v. State of
             Bihar), (AIR 1983 SC 1086) decried the illegality and impropriety in
             awarding compensation in a proceeding in which the Court’s power
             under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution stands involved and thus
             observed that it was a clear case for award of compensation to the
             petitioner for custodial death of her son. It is undoubtedly true, however,
             that in the present context, there is no infringement of the State’s
             obligation, unless of course the State can also be termed to be joint
             tortfeasor, but since the case of the parties stands restricted and without
             imparting any liability on the State, we do not deem it expedient to deal
             with the issue any further except noting the two decisions of this Court
             as above and without expression of any opinion in regard thereto.”
      11.    In this connection, we would like to profitably quote a paragraph
      from a decision of Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case of Ramesh

                                      5
Singh Pawar v. Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board and others, AIR 2005
MP 2. It is held as follows:
          “Currently judicial attitude has taken a shift from the old doctrine
          concept and the traditional jurisprudentia system – affection of the
          people has been taken note of rather serious and the judicial concern
          thus stands on a footing to provide expeditious relief to an individual
          when needed rather than taking recourse to the old conservative
          doctrine of the Civil Court’s obligation to award damages. As a matter
          of fact the decision in D.K. Basu has not only dealt with the issue in a
          manner apposite to the social need of the “Country but the learned
          Judge with his usual felicity of expression firmly established the
          current trend of justice-oriented approach”. Law Courts will lose their
          efficacy if they cannot possibly respond to the need of the society –
          technicalities their might be many but the justice-oriented approach
          ought not to be thwarted on the basis of such technicality since
          technicality cannot and ought not to outweigh the course of justice.”
12.     Thus we hold that a writ application for payment of compensation
for the death of a person in electrocution is maintainable when the
undisputed facts clearly reveal the same.
13.     A person undertaking an activity involving hazardous or risky
exposure to human life is liable under law of torts to compensate for the
injury suffered by any other person, irrespective of any negligence or
carelessness on the part of the managers of such undertakings. The
basis of such liability is the foreseeable risk inherent in the very nature
of such activity. The liability cast on such person is known, in law, as
“strict liability”.
14.     The doctrine of strict liability has its origin in English Common
Law when it was propounded in the celebrated case of Rylands v.
Fletcher, 1868 Law Reports (3) HL 330, Justice Blackburn had observed
thus:
        “The rule of law is that the person who, for his own purpose, brings on
        his land and collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it
        escapes, must keep it at his peril, and if he does so he is prima facie
        answerable for all the damage which is the natural consequence of its
        escape.”
15.     There are seven exceptions formulated by means of case law to
the said doctrine. One of the exceptions is that “Act of stranger i.e. if the
escape was caused by the unforeceable act of a stranger, the rule does
not apply”. (Winfield on Tort, 15th Edn. Page 535).
16.     The rule of strict liability has been approved and followed in many
subsequent decisions in England and decisions of the apex Court are a
legion to that effect. A Constitution Bench of the apex Court in Charan
Lal Sahu v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC 1480 and a Division Bench in
Gujarat State Road Transport Corpn. V. Ramanbhai Prabhatbhai, AIR
1987 SC 1690 had followed with approval the principle in Rylands

                                     6
(supra). The same principle was reiterated in Kaushnuma Begum v. New
India Assurance Co. Ltd., AIR 2001 SC 485.
17.    Sukamani Das (supra), Timudu Oram (supra) on which reliance
has been placed, the question of a strict liability was not taken up in
those cases.
18.    Sukamani cannot be understood as laying a law that in every
case of tortious liability recourse must be had to a suit. When there is
negligence on the face of it and infringement of Article 21 is there, it
cannot be said that there will be any bar to proceed under Article 226 of
the Constitution, since right of life is one the basic human rights
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.(emphasis laid)
19.    In M.P. Electricity Board v. Shail Kumar and others, AIR 2002 SC
551, one Jogendra Singh, a workman in a factory, was returning from
his factory on the night of 23.8.1997 riding on a bicycle. There was rain
and hence the road was partially inundated with water. The cyclist did
not notice the live wire on the road and hence he rode the vehicle over
the wire which twitched and snatched him and he was instantaneously
electrocuted. He fell down and died within minutes. When the action
was brought by his widow and minor son, a plea was taken by the Board
that one Hari Gaikwad had taken a wire from the main supply line in
order to siphon the energy for his own use and the said act of pilferage
was done clandestinely without even the notice of the Board and that
the line got unfastened from the hook and it fell on the road over which
the cycle ridden by the deceased slided resulting in the instantaneous
electrocution. In paragraph 7, the apex Court held as follows:
       “It is an admitted fact that the responsibility to supply electric energy in
       the particular locality was statutorily conferred on the Board. If the
       energy so transmitted causes injury or death of a human, being, who
       gets unknowingly trapped into if the primary liability to compensate the
       sufferer is that of the supplier of the electric energy. So long as the
       voltage of electricity transmitted through the wires is potentially of
       dangerous dimension the managers of its supply have the added duty to
       take all safety measures to prevent escape of such energy or to see that
       the wire snapped would not remain live on the road as users of such
       road would be under peril. It is no defence on the part of the
       management of the Board that somebody committed mischief by
       siphoning such energy of his private property and that the electrocution
       was from such diverted line. It is the look out of the managers of the
       supply system to prevent such pilferage by installing necessary devices.
       At any rate, if any live wire got snapped and fell on the public road the
       electric current thereon should automatically have been disrupted.
       Authorities manning such dangerous commodities have extra duty to
       chalk out measures to prevent such mishaps.” (emphasis laid)
20.    The principle of res ipsa loquitur is well known. It is explained in
a very illustrative passage in Clerk & Lindsell on Torts, 16th Edn., pp.
568-569, which reads as follows:

                                            7
            “Doctrine of res ipsa loquitur. The onus of proof, which lies on a party
            alleging negligence is, as pointed out, that he should establish his case
            by a pre-ponderance of probabilities. This he will normally have to do by
            proving that the other party acted carelessly. Such evidence is not always
            forthcoming. It is possible, however, in certain cases for him to rely on
            the mere fact that something happened as affording prima facie evidence
            of want of due care on the other’s part: ‘res ipsa loquitur is a principle
            which helps him to do so’. In effect, therefore, reliance on it is a
            confession by the plaintiff that he has no affirmative evidence of
            negligence. The classic statement of the circumstances in which he is
            able to do so is by Erle, C.J.:
                    ‘There must be reasonable evidence of negligence. But where the
            thing is shown to be under the management of the defendant or his
            servants, and the accident is such as in the ordinary course of things
            does not happen if those who have the management use proper care, it
            affords reasonable evidence, in the absence of explanation by the
            defendants, that the accident arose from want of care.’
            It is no more than a rule of evidence and states no principle of law. “This
            convenient and succinct formula”, said Morris, L.J., “possesses no magic
            qualities; nor has it any added virtue, other than that of brevity, merely
            because it is expressed in Latin”. It is only a convenient label to apply to
            a set of circumstances in which a plaintiff proves a case so as to call for a
            rebuttal from the defendant, without having to allege and prove any
            specific act or omission on the part of the defendant. He merely proves a
            result, not any particular act or omission producing the result. The court
            hears only the plaintiff’s side of the story, and if this makes it more
            probable than not that the occurrence was caused by the negligence of
            the defendant, the doctrine res ipsa loquitur is said to apply, and the
            plaintiff will be entitled to succeed unless the defendant by evidence
            rebuts that probability. It is not necessary for res ipsa loquitur to be
            specifically pleaded.”
8.          On the anvil of the decisions cited supra, the case of the
petitioners may be examined. Immediately after the occurrence, the
matter was reported to the Town Police Station at Bhadrak. Thereafter,
U.D. Case No.52 of 1999 was registered. The postmortem report reveals
that the cause of death was due to electrocution. In view of the clinching
material on record, the conclusion is irresistible that the daughter of
petitioner nos.1 and 2 and sister of petitioner nos.3 and 6 died due to
electrocution. As held above, a person undertaking an activity involving
hazardous or risky exposure to human life is liable under law of torts to

                                            8
compensate for the injury suffered by any other person, irrespective of
any negligence or carelessness on the part of the managers of such
undertakings. The basis of such liability is the foreseeable risk inherent
in the very nature of such activity. Authorities manning such dangerous
commodities have extra duty to chalk out measures to prevent such
mishaps. The opposite parties can not shirk their responsibility on trivial
grounds. For the lackadaisical attitude exhibited by the opposite parties,
a valuable life was lost. The deceased was 11 years old at the time of
accident. Keeping in view the age of the deceased, this Court directs the
opposite parties to pay interim compensation of Rs.1,50,000/-(One Lakh
Fifty Thousand) to the petitioners within two months leaving the
petitioners to work out their remedies in the common law forum for
higher compensation.
9.                This Court appreciates the valuable assistance rendered by
Mr. Saswat Das, learned Advocate as amicus curiae.
                  The writ petition is allowed. No costs.
                                                          …………..……………
                                                           Dr.A.K.Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 25th July, 2016/CRB.

9

