                       HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                 S.A. No.31 of 1991
      From the judgment and decree dated 16.11.1990 and 23.11.1990
      respectively passed by Sri D. Barik, learned Addl. District Judge,
      Bargarh in T.A. No.10/21 of 1986-87 reversing the judgment and
      decree dated 20.12.1985 and 6.1.1986 respectively passed by Sri
      S.K. Pradhan, learned Subordinate Judge, Bargarh in T.S. No.50 of
      1984.
                                       ----------
      Smt. Drupati Sahu                       ….….…..……          Appellant
                                             ---versus—
      Sri Santosh Sahu                        ……..…………           Respondent
             For Appellant      :   Mr. Siddhartha Mishra, Advocate
             For Respondent     :   None
                                    JUDGMENT
      P R E S E N T:
                        THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K. RATH
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Date of Hearing :27.03.2018         │     Date of Judgment:27.03.2018
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. A.K. Rath, J.         This is a defendant’s appeal against reversing
      judgment.
      02.          Plaintiff-respondent instituted the suit under Sec.9 of the
      Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 for restitution of conjugal rights. The case
      of the plaintiff was that the defendant is his legally married wife.
      She left the house of the plaintiff two days before Kartika Purnima,
      1982 on the pretext of attending the Balijatra at Khuntapali against
      the wish of the plaintiff. She did not return. All his attempt to bring
      her back was futile. With this factual scenario, he instituted the suit
      seeking the reliefs mentioned supra.
      03.          The    defendant    entered    contest    and    filed  written
      statement pleading inter alia that after marriage, the plaintiff and
      his mother treated her with cruelty. While she was in advanced

                                    2
stage of pregnancy, she was driven out by the plaintiff. She was
compelled to stay in the house of her parents. She gave birth to a
daughter. The plaintiff never came to see her and the daughter. He
did not take care of them. A panchayat was convened in Aswin
1982, whereafter the plaintiff took her and the daughter. Again she
was tortured and driven out from the house in Margasira, 1982. The
reconciliation made by her father failed. She was compelled to
initiate proceeding under Sec.125 Cr.P.C. for maintenance.
04.           On the interse pleadings of the parties, learned trial
court struck five issues. Parties led evidence, oral and documentary.
Learned trial court dismissed the suit holding, inter alia, that there is
no evidence that the witnesses examined by the plaintiff had gone
to the house of the defendant to bring her back at any point of time.
The defendant was not staying in her parent’s house for ten years.
The husband had not made any attempt to bring her back. The
plaintiff was not guilty of deserting the defendant after ill-treatment.
The application for restitution of conjugal rights had been filed was
not bona fide. Feeling aggrieved, the plaintiff filed T.A. No.10/21 of
1986-87 before the learned Additional District Judge, Bargarh.
Learned lower appellate court came to hold that the learned trial
court had placed burden on the plaintiff to prove that the defendant
had withdrawn from the plaintiff without just or reasonable cause.
Her testimony cannot be accepted to be the gospel truth with regard
to cruelty, ill-treatment. Held so, it allowed the appeal.
05.           The second appeal was admitted on the substantial
question of law enumerated in ground no.6(a) of the memorandum
of appeal. The same is:
              “6(a) Whether the learned lower appellate court
              committed error in disbelieving the testimony of the
              defendants relating to torture, ill-treatment and
              cruelty on the ground that the said testimony has

                                            3
                       not been corroborated by other witnesses and
                       whether in every case there should be independent
                       corroboration ?”
06.                    Heard Mr. Siddhartha Mishra, learned counsel, on behalf
of Mr. S.N. Mohapatra, learned counsel for the appellant. None
appears for the respondent.
07.                    Learned counsel for the appellant submits that learned
trial court on an assessment of evidence on record held that the wife
had been separated from the husband before ten years before
institution of the suit, but no attempt had been made by the
husband to bring her back. But the learned lower appellate court
reversed the decree on the ground that there is no independent
corroboration with regard to torture and ill-treatment of the
defendant. The finding is perverse.
08.                    On an anatomy pleading of the parties and evidence on
record, learned trial court came to hold that the defendant was
residing with her parents. The plaintiff had not made any attempt to
bring her back. Learned lower appellate court reversed the decree
and disbelieved the testimony of the defendant on the ground that
the same has not been corroborated. To say the least, the finding is
perverse. It is not expected that the others will remain present as
spectators at the time of torture or ill-treatment. The substantial
question of law has been answered accordingly.
09.                    In    the ultimate analysis,  the  appeal   is allowed.
Consequently, the suit is dismissed.
                                                    ……………………………….
                                                     Dr. A.K. Rath,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 27th March, 2018/Basanta


