                         HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                R.S.A. No.369 of 2009
       From the judgment and decree dated 07.08.2009 and 21.08.2009
       respectively passed by Shri Soma Sekhar Jena, learned Civil Judge
       (Senior Division, Khallikote in R.F.A. No.05 of 2009 affirming the
       judgment and decree dated 15.03.2004 and 24.03.2004 respectively
       passed by Shri H.H. Biswal, learned Additional Civil Judge (Junior
       Division), Khallikote in T.S. No. 06 of 2002.
                                        -----------
       Ganapati Tarai and another                   ….            Appellants
                                                 Versus
       State of Orissa and another                  ….           Respondents
                For Appellants        …    Mr. Raghunandan Das Mohapatra,
                                           Adv.
                For Respondents       …    Mr.Swayambhu Mishra, A.S.C.
       PRESENT:
                     THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
       Date of hearing: 20.11.2017                       Judgment: 27.11.2017
Dr. A.K.Rath, J     This appeal is by the plaintiff. The suit was for declaration
       of right, title and interest and the order passed by the Settlement
       authority is void.
       02.          The case of the plaintiff is that the suit schedule land
       originally belongs to the ex-intermediary. The ex-intermediary granted
       rayati banjar patta to one Punia Tarei. He was in possession of the suit
       property. While matter stood thus, the Tahasildar, Khallikote initiated
       Encroachment Cases bearing Nos. 466/68 and 3356/69 in respect of
       Ac.6.00 cents of land against him.       In Lease Case No. 1176/80, the

                                     2
Tahasildar settled Ac.3.00 dec. of land in his favour and issued patta.
The Tahasildar had not settled the entire area donated by the ex-
intermediary. He is a landless person. He has perfected title by way of
adverse possession. The Tahasildar ought to have settled the land in
his favour. In the settlement operation, the land had been recorded in
the Government Khata and classified as a Gramya Jungle.            In the
remarks column, his name found place. He filed an application for
mutation of the land, but the same was rejected.         With this factual
scenario, he instituted the suit seeking the relief mentioned supra.
03.          The defendants entered contest and filed written statement
denying the assertions made in the plaint. It was pleaded that the suit
land had been recorded as “Abada Jogya Anabadi” in Government
Khata in the sabik settlement. The estate vested in settlement on
01.06.1953.    The ex-intermediary had no right to transfer the land.
Any settlement made by the Tahasildar in favour of the plaintiff is void.
In the settlement R.O.R., the land had been recorded as Gramya
Jungle.    The Tahasildar had no jurisdiction to settle Ac.3.00 dec. of
land. The plaintiff had no right, title and interest or possession of the
suit land.
04.          On the, inter se, pleadings of the parties, the learned trial
court struck eight issues. To substantiate the case, plaintiff had
examined two witnesses and on his behalf, thirteen documents had
been exhibited. The defendants had not adduced any evidence. The
learned trial court came to hold that banjar patta, Ext.1 was a
fabricated one. There are over writings and manipulations. The lease
granted by Tahasildar in Lease Case No. 1176/80 in respect of Ac.3.00
dec. was not in accordance with law.       The plaintiff had not acquired
title by way of adverse possession. Held so, it dismissed the appeal.
The unsuccessful plaintiff challenged the judgment and decree of the

                                     3
learned trial court before the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division),
Khallikote in R.F.A. No. 05 of 2009, which was eventually dismissed.
05.          The   Second    Appeal   was   admitted     on  the   following
substantial question of law:-
          “Whether on the basis of the settlement of the suit land
          in favour of the plaintiff by the competent authority
          under OPLE Act the courts below ought to have declared
          the right, title and interest of the plaintiff over the suit
          land in spite of the publication of record of rights
          thereafter which has been made ignoring the settlement
          as aforesaid ?”
06.          Heard Mr. Raghunandan Das Mohapatra, learned counsel
for the appellants and Mr. Swayambhu Mishra, learned A.S.C. for the
respondents.
07.          Mr. Das Mohapatra, learned counsel for the appellants
submitted that the ex-intermediary granted banjar patta in favour of
the plaintiff in respect of Ac.6.00 dec. of land.      The plaintiff was in
possession of the same.      In Lease Case No. 1176/80, the Tahasildar
settled Ac.3.00 dec. of land in favour of the plaintiff under the lease
principles of the Government of Orissa. The plaintiff had paid rent to
the Government. The land was wrongly recorded in the name of
Government.     The plaintiff made an application before the Tahasildar
for settlement of the land in his favour, vide Ext.8, but the same had
not been done.       He further contended that the plaintiff was in
possession of the suit land peacefully, continuously and with hostile
animus to the defendants for more than thirty years and, as such,
perfected title by way of adverse possession. Since the Tahasildar had
settled Ac.3.00 dec. of land in favour of the plaintiff, the courts below
ought to have declared right, title and interest over the suit land.

                                     4
08.          Per contra, Mr. Mishra, learned A.S.C. submitted that both
the courts below held that banjar patta granted by the ex-intermediary
is fabricated. The plaintiff failed to prove the plea of adverse
possession. The Tahasildar has no jurisdiction to lease the land.
09.          On a cursory perusal of the banjar patta, Ext.1, it is
evident that the same was granted in favour of one Gopi Tarai, son of
Tunia Tarai on 18.10.1928.       But then, the manager of the estate
affixed the seal on 16.11.1928, i.e., two days prior to execution of
patta. The name of the leasee, his father’s name, area as well as name
of the village have been erased. Thereafter the name of Gopi Tarai, his
father’s name, area and mouza have been written. There are several
over writings and interpolation. It is pleaded that the banjar patta was
granted to one Punia Tarei, plaintiff, but then the same was granted to
Gopi Tarei, son of Tunia Tarei.         There is variance between the
pleadings and proof.
10.          In Ram Nath Mandal and others vrs. Jojan Mandal and
others, AIR 1964 Pat-1, the Full Bench of Patna held that under Section
117 of the T.P. Act, a lease for agricultural purposes is not necessary to
be made by a written instrument and it may be effected by an oral
agreement in which case the question of registration will not arise.
However, if the transaction is reduced to writing, then in the case of
lease from year to year or for any term exceeding a year or reserving a
yearly rent, registration would be required under Section 17 of the
Registration Act, and if unregistered the lease will be inadmissible in
evidence under Section 49 of the Registration Act and other evidence
of its terms will be precluded under Section 91 of the Evidence Act. In
that case, the claim of creating of tenancy on the basis of rent receipts
in pursuance of an oral agreement was negatived on the ground that
no such case had been put forward by the plaintiff in the plaint.

                                     5
11.           Ext.1 is  an   unregistered patta.   The  same   was   not
registered. In para one and two of the plaint, it is stated that the ex-
intermediary has granted patta. The ex-intermediary has donated the
land. The plaintiff has taken prevaricating stand. The kissam of land is,
Gramya Jungle and Gochar. The estate vested in the settlement free
from all encumbrances. Encroachment cases had been initiated against
the plaintiff.
12.           Sub-Sec. 1 of Sec.7 of the Orissa Prevention of Land
Encroachment Act (in short, “the O.P.L.E. Act”) provides that any
person unauthorisedly occupying land for which he is liable to pay
assessment under Sec.4 shall be summarily evicted by the Tahasildar
and any crop or other product raised on the land, any encroachments
such as a building, other construction or anything deposited thereon
shall be liable to forfeiture.    Sub-Sec. 2 contains a non-obstante
clause. It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-
Sec.(1) where any land is in the unauthorised occupation of a landless
person. Clause 1 of Sub-Sec.2 of Sec.7 of the O.P.L.E. Act provides
that the Tahasildar may instead of evicting such person from the land
in his authorised occupation, settle the same with provided condition
enumerated therein as satisfied. Sub-Sec. (1) of Sec.8-A of the
O.P.L.E. Act provides that where in the course of any proceeding
instituted under Secs. 4,6,7 or 8 against any person unauthorisedly
occupying date of institution of the proceeding, the Tahasildar shall
refer the cases to the Sub-divisional Officer. Sub-Sec. (2) of Sec.8-A
provides that on receipt of a reference under Sib-sec.(1) the Sub-
divisional Officer shall give the Department of the State Government
(other than the Revenue Department) to which the land belongs, an
opportunity to show cause against the settlement of the land and may
make such further enquiry as he deems necessary.          Sub-Sec.(3) of

                                       6
Sec.8-A provides that if after making such enquiry the Sub-divisional
Officer is satisfied that such person has been in such occupation of the
land as aforesaid, he may by order, settle the land with him and every
such settlement shall be subject to such conditions, regarding
assessment and payment of rent (including arrears of rent) as may be
prescribed by rules made under this Act.
13.           The plaintiff claims that he was in possession of the land
for thirty years. In such a contingency, it was incumbent on the part
of the Tahasildar to refer the matter to the Sub-Collector. The
Tahasildar under the O.P.L.E. Act is a creature of statute. He cannot
pass any order contrary to the provisions of O.P.L.E. Act.       Any order
passed by him in contravention of the provisions of O.P.L.E. Act is null
and void. Thus reliance placed on the lease granted by the Tahasildar
is totally misplaced.
14.           Adverse possession is a not a pure question of law but a
blended one of fact and law. In T.Anjanappa and others vs.
Somalingappa and another, (2006) 7 SCC 570, the apex Court held:-
              “12. The concept of adverse possession contemplates a
        hostile possession i.e. a possession which is expressly or
        impliedly in denial of the title of the true owner. Possession
        to be adverse must be possession by a person who does not
        acknowledge the other's rights but denies them. The
        principle of law is firmly established that a person who bases
        his title on adverse possession must show by clear and
        unequivocal evidence that his possession was hostile to the
        real owner and amounted to denial of his title to the
        property claimed. For deciding whether the alleged acts of a
        person constituted adverse possession, the animus of the
        person doing those acts is the most crucial factor. Adverse
        possession is commenced in wrong and is aimed against
        right. A person is said to hold the property adversely to the
        real owner when that person in denial of the owner's right
        excluded him from the enjoyment of his property.

                                           7
                          13. Possession to be adverse must be possession
          by a person who does not acknowledge the other's rights
          but denies them:
                          “24. It is a matter of fundamental principle
               of law that where possession can be referred to a
               lawful title, it will not be considered to be adverse.
               It is on the basis of this principle that it has been
               laid down that since the possession of one co-
               owner can be referred to his status as co-owner, it
               cannot be considered adverse to other co-owners.”
15.              The appellate court held that the plaintiff had applied for
lease in respect of the suit plots on 13.08.1993 vide Ext.9. The same
indicates that he has accepted the superior title of the State
Government over the suit properties. He had not set up any hostile
possession to the knowledge of the State authorities.             The date of
entry into the suit land by the plaintiff has not been mentioned. On an
anatomy of pleadings and evidence on record, it negatived the plea of
adverse possession. There is no perversity or illegality in the findings
of the courts below.             The substantial question of law is answered
accordingly.
16.              A priori, the appeal fails and is dismissed. There shall be no
order as to costs.
                                                       …………………....……..
                                                        DR. A.K.RATH, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 27th November, 2017/Puspanjali


