                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                             W.P.( C) No.11458 of 2014
     In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
     Constitution of India.
                                      -------------
     Sri Subrat Das and another             ….                    Petitioners
                                        Versus
     State of Orissa and others               ….               Opposite parties
                  For Petitioners           --      Mr.Ashok Mohanty,
                                                    Sr. Advocate
                  For Opposite parties      --      Mr.R.K.Mohapatra,
                                                    Government Advocate
                                                    Mr.D.Panda, Advocate
                                                   (For OP. no.3)
     PRESENT:
                    THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
                                          AND
                  THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
     Date of Hearing 21.11..2014                : Date of Judgment:    21.11.2014
Dr.A.K.Rath, J.     The petitioners, styling as devotees of Lord Jagannath
     Mahaprabhu, have filed this Public Interest Litigation, raising the issue

                                      2
as to who are authorized to climb atop the Raths (Chariots) and touch the
deities during Car Festival.
2.           Shorn of unnecessary details, the case of the petitioners is
that they are Hindus by religion and devotees of Lord Jagannath
Mahaprabhu. A few unfortunate incidents occurred during the Car
Festivals of the previous years relating to desirability of devotees to climb
aboard the chariots and touch the deities. The matter was referred by the
Temple Managing Committee to HH Shankaracharya, Puri for his opinion.
On 6.11.2013, HH Shankaracharya submitted his opinion to the Temple
Administration that nobody other than the sevaks, who perform rituals or
seva puja of the deities over the chariots during Ratha Yatra, the HH
Shankaracharya and the Gajapati Maharaja are authorized to climb on to
the chariots and the devotees should have darshan from the Badadanda
without climbing on the chariots. The Temple Committee accepted the
opinion of HH Shankaracharya and wrote to the Government on
11.11.2013     for  implementation     of   the   recommendation      of   HH
Shankaracharya. Thereafter, the State Government convened a high level
meeting on 11.6.2014 in which decision was taken that no one except the
sevaks and others connected with seva puja would be allowed to climb
atop the holy chariots on the days of Ratha Yatra, Bahuda and Suna
Besha, but on the other days, the existing practice would continue.
Thereafter, a Writ Petition, being W.P.(C) (PIL) No.10457 of 2014, was filed

                                     3
before this Court seeking implementation of the decision of the Temple
Committee on the recommendation of HH Shankaracharya. The said writ
petition was disposed of on 20.6.2014. It is further stated that the
decision of the Managing Committee is final in respect of the matter as to
who is authorized to board the chariots or touch the deities during the
Car Festival, but then the question that remains are; whether HH
Shankaracharya is the sole and absolute authority to determine a matter
concerning the multitude of devotees, whether record of rights prescribe
HH Shankaracharya to opine about a matter which is not a ritual of the
Lord or the Temple but is a tradition or practice of darshan by the
devotees, whether HH Shankaracharya, Puri can without consultation
with other Shankaracharyas determine a matter concerning Hindus all
over the country, whether the Managing Committee has taken all aspects
including the opinion of devotees into consideration before accepting the
opinion of HH Shankaracharya regarding the persons, who are authorized
to climb atop the chariots and touch the deities and regarding the
arrangements of the temple administration to facilitate darshan of the
deities by the devotees. HH Shankarascharya has based his opinion as
per the prescriptions in the record of rights of the temple since record of
rights are the compendium of the rituals to be performed, the modalities,
duties and responsibilities of persons concerned with the temple and the
Lord etc. As per the record of rights, Gajapati Maharaja is to perform

                                      4
Chhhera Panhara on the chariots and authorize to board the chariots for
the said purpose. So far as HH Shankaracharya is concerned, the record
of rights do not prescribe any ritual to be performed by him on the
chariots during the Car Festival. Despite not being a person authorized to
board the chariots during the Car Festival, HH Shankaracharya has
included himself along with sevaks and the Gajapati Maharaja furnished
his opinion and the same was accepted by the Managing Committee.
3.           With this factual scenario, the petitioners have prayed, inter
alia, for a direction to the opposite parties not to allow any person not
authorized in the record of rights to board the chariots during the Car
Festival, for a direction to the opposite party no.3 not to board the
chariots since he is not authorized to do so as per his duties prescribed in
the record of rights. Ancillary prayer has also been made for a direction to
the State Government and the Temple Administration to make suitable
alternative arrangements for darshan of the deities when they are on the
chariots by the devotees.
4.           As would be evident from the averments made in the writ
petition, more particularly, paragraph 5.6, the petitioners raised various
issues, such as, whether HH Shankaracharya is the sole and absolute
authority to determine a matter concerning the multitude of devotees,
whether record of rights prescribe HH Shankaracharya to opine about a

                                       5
matter which is not a ritual of the Lord or the Temple but is a tradition or
practice of darshan by the devotees, whether HH Shankaracharya, Puri
can without consultation with other Shankaracharyas determine a matter
concerned Hindus all over the country, whether Managing Committee has
taken all aspects including the opinion of devotees into consideration
before accepting the opinion of HH Shankaracharya on the matter etc.,
but confine the issue regarding the persons who are authorized to climb
atop the chariots and touch the deities and arrangement of the temple
administration to facilitate darshan of the deities by the devotees.
5.           Heard Mr.Ashok Mohanty, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioners, Mr. R.K.Mohapatra, learned Government Advocate and
Mr.D.Panda, learned Advocate for opposite party no.3.
6.           Before we proceed further to decide the issue that has
cropped up, we find that Rule 8 of the Orissa High Court Public Interest
Litigation Rules, 2010 has not been complied with. The said Rule is
quoted hereunder:-
                    “Before filing a PIL, the petitioner must send a
             representation to the authorities concerned for taking
             remedial action, akin to what is postulated in Section 80
             CPC. Details of such representation and reply, if any, from
             the authority concerned along with copies thereof must be
             filed with the petition. However, in urgent cases where
             making of representation and waiting for response would
             cause irreparable injury or damage, petition can be filed
             straightway by giving prior notice of filing to the authorities
             concerned and/or their counsel, if any.”

                                        6
             Admittedly, the petitioners have not filed any representation
before the authorities concerned for taking remedial action. Thus none
compliance of the said Rule, which is a mandatory requirement, entails
dismissal of the writ petition filed in the form of Public Interest Litigation.
Further, on the pleaded facts, we do not find any cause of action for filing
of Public Interest Litigation.
7.           The issue, who will climb atop the Rathas during Car Festival,
is no more res-integra. In Bhabani Prasad Mishra Vrs. State of Odisha
and others, 2014 (II) OLR-95, the question that hinges for consideration
as to whether it was permissible for the devotees to climb atop the Rathas
(chariots) when the deities are installed thereon for having a darshan of
the deities or to touch the deities after the chariots reach Shri Gundicha
Temple and before the deities are taken therein.         The said issue was
referred by the Managing Committee for opinion of HH Shankaracharya,
Puri on the understanding that HH Shankaracharya, Puri was the final
advisor on the issue of rituals of the deities as per the statutorily
recognized record of rights. HH Shankaracharya, Puri, vide his opinion
dated 6.11.2013 opined that “none other than the Sevaks (who perform
rituals  or  seva-puja    over   the   chariots  during   Ratha   Yatra),    the
Shankarcharya and the Gajapati Maharaja are authorized to climb on to

                                       7
the chariots and the devotees should have darshan from the Badadanda
without climbing on to the chariots”. The said opinion was accepted by the
Managing Committee. A sub-committee was constituted to suggest the
modalities for implementation of the opinion which required co-ordination
with various stakeholders and law and order arrangements. It was also
required bringing about consensus with the sevayat community, some of
whom had opposed the said opinion. The Managing Committee also
referred the matter to the State Government to guide the Sri Jagannath
Temple Administration (SJTA) for implementation of the above decision of
Jagadguru Sri Shankaracharya. The petitioner represented to the State
Government seeking implementation of the decision, but since no
response was received, the writ petition had been filed.         The Division
Bench to which one of us (Dr.A.K.Rath, J) was a party held that the stand
of the Managing Committee to go by opinion of the HH Shankaracharya,
Puri has to prevail as far as rituals during the Car Festival are concerned.
8.           The next question that survives for our consideration is as to
whether the present writ petition is hit by the principles of res judicata.
9.           In Forward Construction Company and others, Vrs.
Prabhat Mandal (Regd.), Andheri and others, AIR 1986 Supreme Court
391, the apex Court considered the issue in the factual matrix that a plot
of land was reserved under the Development Plan for Bombay and the

                                          8
verified Andheri Town Planning Scheme, for a bus depot of the Bombay
Electricity Supply and Transport Undertaking (BEST). Best proposed to
build two buildings which would include the bus Depot. The carpet area
spared after meeting the needs of the depot was to be given on rent. A writ
petition was filed challenging the user of the plot for commercial purposes.
The same was dismissed by the High Court. In the said petition, certain
provisions of Development Control Rules for change of user of the plot to
commercial purpose was not in issue at all. Subsequently another writ
petition was filed for the same purpose challenging the validity of the
Rules. The apex Court held that provisions of Explanations IV and VI to
Section 11 C.P.C. would apply even in the case of Public Interest
Litigation. The Court considered the provision of Explanations IV and VI of
Section 11 CPC and observed that as Explanation VI deals with public
right or of a private right claimed in common for themselves and others,
all persons interested in such right shall, for the purposes of this section,
be deemed to claim under the persons so litigating. Thus, all other
persons were bound by the decision in the earlier case. In paragraph-20 of
the report, it is held as under:-
                     “So far as the first reason is concerned, the High
              Court in our opinion was not right in holding that the
              earlier judgment would not operate as res judicata as one
              of the grounds taken in the present petition was
              conspicuous by its absence in the earlier petition.
              Explanation IV to Section 11, C.P.C. provides that any
              matter which might and ought to have been made ground
              of defence or attack in such former suit shall be deemed

                                       9
          to have been a matter directly and substantially in issue
          in such suit. An adjudication is conclusive and final not
          only as to the actual matter determined but as to every
          other matter which the parties might and ought to have
          litigated and have had it decided as incidental to or
          essentially connected with the subject-matter of the
          litigation and every matter coming within the legitimate
          purview of the original action both in respect of the
          matters of claim or defence. The principle underlying
          Explanation IV is that where the parties have had an
          opportunity of controverting a matter that should be
          taken to be the same thing as if the matter had been
          actually controverted and decided. It is true that where a
          matter has been constructively in issue it cannot be said
          to have been actually heard and decided. It could only be
          deemed to have been heard and decided. The first reason,
          therefore, has absolutely no force.”
          It is further held that:-
                   “In view of Explanation Vi it cannot be disputed
          that Section 11 applies to public interest litigation as well
          but it must be proved that the previous litigation was the
          public interest litigation, not by way of a private
          grievance. It has to be a bone fide litigation in respect of a
          right which is common and is agitated in common with
          others”. (Para-21)
10.       The same view was echoed in State of Karnataka and
another Vrs. All India Manufacturers Organization and others, AIR
2006 Supreme Court 1846. In paragraph 34 of the report, it is held as
follows:-
                  “As a matter of fact, in a Public Interest Litigation,
          the petitioner is not agitating his individual rights but
          represents the public at large. As long as the litigation is
          bona fide, a judgment in a previous Public Interest
          Litigation would be a judgment in rem. It binds the public
          at large and bars any member of the public from coming
          forward before the Court and raising any connected issue
          or an issue, which had been raised/should have been

                                         10
               raised on an earlier occasion by way of a Public Interest
               Litigation.”
11.            On taking a holistic view of the matter, we are of the
consensus ad idem that the issue involved in the present writ petition has
already been set at rest in Bhabani Prasad Mishra (Supra), thus the present
writ petition is hit by the principle of res-judicata.
               The writ petition is dismissed.
                                                   …………………………………..
                                                         Dr. A.K.Rath, J.
                                                     ……………………………….
                                                         Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 21th November, 2014/CRB.

11

