                    HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                               S.A.No.274 of 1993
    From the judgment and decree dated 17.8.1993 and 28.8.1993
    respectively passed by Shri P.N.Pattnaik, learned District Judge,
    Sundargarh in Money Appeal No.1 of 1992 reversing the judgment
    and decree dated 29.2.1992 and 26.3.1992 respectively passed by
    the learned Munsif, Sundargarh in Money Suit No.25/20 of 1987-88.
                                   -------------
    Budhu Badhai                            ….               Appellant
                                     Versus
    Bishnu Patel                            ….               Respondent
                 For Appellant              --    Mr.Debasis Pattnaik
                                                  Advocate
                 For Respondents            --    None
                                JUDGMENT
    PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
                    Date of Hearing & Judgment:20.3.2018
Dr.A.K.RATH, J. Defendant is the appellant against a reversing
    judgment.
    2.           Plaintiff-respondent    instituted  the  money   suit for
    realization of Rs.3,500/- from the defendant. Case of the plaintiff
    was that defendant belongs to his village. The defendant approached
    him for a loan of Rs.3,500/-. On 30.9.1985, he advanced loan of
    Rs.3,500/-. The defendant executed an agreement to pay back the
    loan amount by the end of Falguna. He requested the defendant

                                      2
number of times to repay the same, but the defendant did not pay
any heed to it. He sent a notice through his lawyer to the defendant
demanding loan amount. There was no response. With this factual
scenario, the suit was instituted seeking the relief mentioned supra.
3.             The defendant entered contest and filed a written
statement denying the assertions made in the plaint. According to
him, he had not incurred any loan from the plaintiff. The document
in question was a fabricated one. The specific case of the defendant
is that plaintiff was a regular moneylender. He had no licence.
4.             On the inter se pleadings of the parties, learned trial
court framed seven issues. Parties led evidence. Learned trial court
dismissed the suit holding, inter alia, that the plaintiff is a
professional moneylender. He has no licence. Feeling aggrieved, the
plaintiff filed Money Appeal No.1 of 1992 before the learned District
Judge, Sundargarh. Learned appellate court came to hold that the
plaintiff is not a regular moneylender. The defendant took a loan of
Rs.3,500/- from the plaintiff, vide Ext.1. The defendant has taken a
plea from escaping the liability. Held so, it allowed the appeal and
directed the defendant to pay an amount of Rs.3,500/- to the
plaintiff with interest at the rate of 12% per annum and costs.
5.             The Second Appeal was admitted on the substantial
questions of law enumerated in A, B & C of ground no.vii of the
appeal memo. The same are :
               “(A) Whether on the basis of evidence on record that
                    the plaintiff used to keep gold and silver
                    ornaments on Mortgage and was lending money to
                    villagers, it can be held that he was a Money

                                   3
                   Lender in the regular course of business, when he
                   did not possess the required Licence ?
             (B)   Whether the suit is maintainable when the
                   plaintiff possessed no Licence and was lending
                   money to others keeping mortgaged articles ?
             (C)   Whether it can be proved that plaintiff had lend
                   Rs.3,500/- to the Defendant when the allegation
                   was that Ext.1 was a forged document ?”
6.           Heard Mr.Debasis Pattnaik, learned Advocate on behalf
of Mr.S.C.Mohanty, learned Advocate for the appellant. None appears
for the respondent.
7.           Mr.Pattnaik, learned Advocate for the appellant submits
that plaintiff was a regular moneylender. He had no licence. The
plaintiff used to advance loan to different persons. The defendant
had examined witnesses to substantiate his plea that the plaintiff
was a regular moneylender. Learned trial court dismissed the suit,
but then on untenable and unsupportable grounds. Learned
appellate court is not justified in reversing the judgment on the
ground of non-examination of persons to whom loan had been
advanced. There was no reason for the appellate court to discard the
testimony of the defendant.
8.           The defendant had examined three witnesses including
himself to substantiate the plea that the plaintiff was a regular
moneylender. On scanning of the evidence, learned appellate court
came to hold that D.W.1 in his evidence stated that the plaintiff used
to keep gold and silver ornaments on mortgage and advance loan to
the poor villagers. In cross-examination, he stated that he was not
present when the plaintiff advanced loan to different persons, but he

                                     4
was present when the plaintiff advanced a sum of Rs.1,500/- to the
defendant. D.W.2 stated that the plaintiff used to advance loan to
one Budhu and Kalia. Those persons had not been examined. D.W.3,
defendant, stated that the plaintiff was a moneylender. He advanced
loan to Chhai, Patel, Kalia Seth and Budhu Patel. There was no
document to show that loan had been advanced to those persons. It
further held that the defendant had taken a plea from escaping the
liability. These are essentially findings of fact. There is no perversity
or illegality in the same.
9.             The suit has been filed for realization of Rs.3,500/-. The
interest as awarded by the learned appellate court is exorbitant. This
Court is of the view that the decreetal amount shall carry interest at
the rate of 9% per annum from the date of disbursement of loan till
realization.    The    substantial  questions    of  law   are  answered
accordingly.
10.            Resultantly, the appeal is allowed in part. The suit is
decreed to the extent indicated above.
                                              …..………...………………..
                                                    Dr.A.K.Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 20th March, 2018/CRB

5

