                       HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                 S.A. No.37 of 1990
      From the judgment and decree dated 2.9.1989 and 20.9.1989
      respectively passed by Shri G.D. Sarangi, learned Sub-Judge,
      Bargarh in T.A. No.1 of 1986 confirming the judgment and decree
      dated 15.10.1985 and 19.10.1985 respectively passed by Sri S.S.
      Mishra, learned Munsif, Bargarh in T.S. No.79 of 1983.
                                        ----------
      Ghanashyam Meher                        ………..……            Appellant
                                       ---versus—
      State of Orissa and others              ………………             Respondents
             For Appellant       :  Mr. Budhiram Das, Advocate
             For Respondents :      Mr. P.C. Panda, Addl. Govt. Advocate
                                                    (For Res. No.1)
                                    JUDGMENT
      P R E S E N T:
                        THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K. RATH
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
       Date of Hearing : 17.03.2017         │ Date of Judgment: 29.03.2017
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. A.K. Rath, J.         Plaintiff no.2 is the appellant against a confirming
      judgment.
      02.           The case of the plaintiffs is that their house situate at
      the Basti site of village Remanda. The village came under the
      purview of consolidation operation. Pursuant to the notification
      issued under Sec.3 of the Orissa Consolidation of Holdings and
      Prevention of Fragmentation of Land Act (hereinafter referred to as
      ‘OCH & PFL Act’), the land register of the village has been prepared
      under the said Act without showing the fractions of the Basti plot

                                         2
over which the villagers have got their respective house, trees,
wells, etc. Being affected by the non-preparation of a detailed land
register in respect of their houses standing in the Basti site over
H.S. Plot No.3851 corresponding to consolidation plot no.5522, they
instituted T.S. No.106/147 of 1977-80 in the court of the learned
Munsif, Bargarh. The suit was abated. The land register published
under Sec.9 of the OCH & PFL Act is incomplete and irregular. The
Consolidation authorities have prepared the land register violating
the mandatory provisions of the OCH & PFL Act. With this factual
scenario, they filed the suit seeking for declaration that the entire
land register of village Remanda is incomplete and illegal and also
for   restraining    the    defendants        from     proceeding     with   the
consolidation operation till publication of a correct land register in
accordance with law.
03.          Pursuant to issuance of summons, the defendants
entered appearance and filed written statement denying the
assertions made in the plaint. The case of the defendants is that the
entire   Basti  site    of  village    Remanda        belongs   to   the   State
Government and the same has been shown in the village map along
with the bifurcating lanes. The plaintiffs having failed to raise any
objection under the provisions of the OCH & PFL Act in proper
forum, the suit is not maintainable.
04.          On the interse pleadings of the parties, learned trial
court struck the following issues:
                    “1. Whether the consolidation authority required by
                    law prepared land register in respect of Basti plot
                    and the plaintiff being affected from preparation of
                    the same ?
                    2. Has the jurisdiction to try the suit ?
                    3. Whether there is any cause of action ?
                    4. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief
                    claimed ?”

                                        3
05.          To substantiate the case, the plaintiffs had examined
two witnesses and on their behalf six documents had been
exhibited. Neither any witness was examined by the defendants nor
any document had been exhibited.
06.          Learned trial court came to hold that the land register
had been published under Sec.9(1) of the OCH & PFL Act. The same
could have been decided by the Consolidation authorities. The
plaintiffs have not filed any objection before the A.C.O or C.O. at
appropriate stage. If at all, they were aggrieved by the wrong
recording of the consolidation plots, they could have taken recourse
to the provisions of the OCH & PFL Act. It further held that the
plaintiffs have not filed the suit in the representative capacity under
Order 1 Rule 8 C.P.C. The plaintiffs have failed to establish by
cogent    evidence   that     the   Consolidation      authorities       have not
prepared the land register in respect of the Basti plot in accordance
with the provisions of the OCH & PFL Act and Rules framed
thereunder. Accordingly, the issue no.1 answered in negative
against the plaintiffs. With regard to the jurisdiction of the civil
court, learned trial court held that civil court has jurisdiction to try
the suit and answered issue no.2 in affirmative in favour of the
plaintiffs. Held so, learned trial court dismissed the suit.                  The
plaintiff no.2 unsuccessfully challenged the judgment and decree of
the learned trial court before the learned Sub-Judge, Bargarh in T.A.
No.1 of 1986, which was eventually dismissed.
07.          The second appeal was admitted by a Bench of this
Court on the following substantial questions of law.
                     “1. Whether in view of the finding of the lower
                     appellate court that Ext.6 is incomplete, is he
                     justified in saying that the said exhibit is not illegal
                     particularly when the same does not contain

                                         4
                      detailed particulars with regard to the right and
                      interest of the private individuals.”
                      2. Whether a suit for declaration that the land
                      register prepared by the consolidation authorities
                      as illegal and permanent injunction restraining the
                      consolidation authorities from proceeding with the
                      consolidation operation is maintainable, in view of
                      the bar contained in Section 51 of the Orissa
                      Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention of
                      Fragmentation Act, 1972 ?”
08.          Heard Mr. Budhiram Das, learned counsel on behalf of
Mr. N.C. Pati, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. P.C. Panda,
learned Additional Government Advocate, for the respondent no.1.
09.          Mr. Das, learned counsel for the appellant submitted
that the land register in the village was not prepared by the
Consolidation authorities in accordance with the provisions of the
OCH & PFL Act and Rules framed thereunder. In view of the same,
the plaintiffs have filed the suit in the civil court. The civil court has
jurisdiction to entertain the suit. To buttress his submission, he
placed reliance on the Full Bench decision of this Court in the case of
Gulzar Khan vs. Commissioner of Consolidation and others, 1993
(II) OLR-194.
10.          Per contra, Mr. Panda, learned Additional Government
Advocate for the respondent no.1 submitted that the jurisdiction of
the civil court is ousted. Any person aggrieved by the entry made in
the land register can file an objection under Sec.9 of the OCH & PFL
Act.
11.          Before adverting to the contentions raised by the
counsel for both parties, it will necessary to set out the provisions of
the OCH & PFL Act. Sub-sec.(4) of Sec.4 and Sec.51 of the OCH &
PFL Act are quoted hereunder.
             “(4) Every suit and proceedings for declaration of any
             right or interest in any land situate within the
             consolidation area in regard to which proceedings

                                            5
               could be or ought to be started under this Act, which is
               pending before any Civil Court, whether of the first
               instance or appeal reference or revision shall, on an
               order being passed in that behalf by the Court before
               which such suit or proceeding is pending stand abated.
               xxx                     xxx                         xxx
               51. Bar of jurisdiction of Civil Courts—Notwithstanding
               anything contained in any other law for the time being
               in force, but subject to the provisions contained in
               Clause (3) of Sec.4 and Sub-sec.(1) of Sec.7:
               (1) all questions relating to right, title, interest and
               liability in land lying in the consolidation area, except
               those coming within the jurisdiction of Revenue Courts
               or authorities under any local law for the time being in
               force, shall be decided under the provisions of this Act
               by the appropriate authority during the consolidation
               operations; and
               (2) no Civil Court shall entertain any suit or
               proceedings in respect of any matter which an officer
               or authority empowered under this Act is competent to
               decide.”
12.            The OCH & PFL Act is a special statue. The OCH & PFL
Act was enacted for consolidation of scattered holdings and re-
arrange the holdings including fragmented holdings among various
landowners to make them more compact and to provide against
future fragmentation of holdings. The consolidation operation starts
when a notification under Sec.3 is issued and the same is closed by
Sec.41 notification. During consolidation operation, the consolidation
authorities discharged various functions.
13.            A hierarchy of forum is provided for redressal of
grievance. When consolidation operation in an area starts, the suits
pending before the civil court stand abated. In view of the embargo
under sub-sec.(2) of Sec.51 of the OCH & PFL Act, the jurisdiction of
the civil court is ousted when the consolidation operation of the area
is in operation. All questions relating to right, title, interest and
liability in land lying in the consolidation area, except those coming
within the jurisdiction or Revenue Courts or authorities under any

                                         6
local law for the time being in force, shall be decided under the
provisions of the OCH & PFL Act by the appropriate authority during
the consolidation operations. No Civil Court shall entertain any suit
or proceeding in respect of any matter which an officer or authority
empowered under the OCH & PFL Act is competent to decide. The
civil court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the suit for a declaration
that the land register prepared under Sec.9 of the OCH & PFL Act is
incomplete and illegal. Furthermore, a statutory functionary cannot
be    prohibited   to   discharge      its   statutory     function.    Thus the
substantial questions of law enumerated above are answered
accordingly.
14.           Reliance placed on the Full Bench decision of this Court
in the case of Gulzar Khan (supra) is totally misplaced. In the said
case, question arose whether the power conferred by Sec.37 of the
OCH & PFL Act would be available for exercise after a notification
has been issued as contemplated by Sec.41(1) of the OCH & PFL Act
on the subject that consolidation operations have been closed in the
unit, the result of which is that the village or villages forming part of
the unit cease to be under consolidation operations. The Full Bench
of this Court summarised the following principles.
                      “36. We may conclude our views relating to Civil
                      Court’s jurisdiction by stating that the same would
                      be available after closure of consolidation
                      operations only in any one of the following
                      circumstances;
                           (i) The cause of action accruing after the
                      closure of the consolidation operations, a/a Suba
                      Singh.
                           (ii) If the consolidation authorities had taken
                      the decision without complying with the provisions
                      of the Act or had not acted in conformity with the
                      fundamental principle of judicial procedure (which
                      would take within its fold the case of violation of
                      natural justice), vide principle No.(ii) of Magulu.
                           (iii) Obtaining of order from the hand(s) of
                      consolidation authorities by playing fraud on the
                      party who seeks to approach the Civil Court, as per
                      Karbalai Begum’s case.”

                                             7
                       It was further held that the power under Sec.37 of the
OCH & PFL Act being unfettered shall be available only under
compelling circumstances. Despite closure of the consolidation
operation which would be result of the notification under Sec.41 of
the OCH & PFL Act, power under Sec.37 would be available; whether
in a particular case the same would be exercised shall have to be
decided by the Consolidation Commissioner depending upon the
facts and circumstances of that case. But in the instant case, suit
was instituted when consolidation operation was in progress.
15.                    In the wake of aforesaid, the appeal, sans merit,
deserves dismissal. Accordingly, the same is dismissed. No costs.
                                                    ……………………………….
                                                      Dr. A.K. Rath,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 29th March, 2017/Basanta


