                       HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                S.A. No.219 of 1990
      From the judgment and decree dated 27.3.1990 and 11.4.1990
      respectively passed by Smt. M. Pattnaik, learned Addl. District
      Judge, Bhadrak in T.A. No.75/227 of 1986/87 reversing the
      judgment and decree dated 12.11.1986 and 20.11.1986
      respectively passed by Shri P.N. Sahu, learned Munsif, Bhadrak in
      O.S. No.136/85-I.
                                       ----------
      Prahallad Behera                        ………………             Appellant
                                            ---versus—
      State of Orissa and another             …………….…            Respondents
             For Appellant      :   Miss Soumya Mishra, Advocate
             For Respondents :      Mr. R.P. Mohapatra, A.G.A.
                                    JUDGMENT
      P R E S E N T:
                        THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K. RATH
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Date of Hearing : 10.11.2017 │ Date of Judgment:20.11.2017
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr. A.K. Rath, J.         This second appeal by the plaintiff is directed
      against the decision dated 27.3.1990 passed by the learned lower
      appellate court in T.A. No.75/227 of 1986/87 reversing the decision
      dated 12.11.1986 of the learned trial court in O.S. No.136/85-I.
      2.            Plaintiff-appellant instituted the suit for declaration that
      the order dated 5.4.1984 passed by the Tahasildar, Bhadrak,
      defendant no.2, in Case No.1 of 1976 under Sec.5(i) of the Orissa
      Estate Abolition Act (in short, ‘O.E.A. Act’) is void and without
      jurisdiction. It was pleaded that the suit land originally belonged to
      ex-landlord,    Habibur    Raheman.     The    ex-landlord    executed    an
      unregistered lease deed in his favour on 13.6.1943 and delivered

                                  2
possession. He paid rent to the ex-landlord. He reclaimed the suit
land, silted up tanks, grew paddy and other vegetables over the
vacate land. He had also constructed a farm house. He was in
possession of the land for 40 years and acquired occupancy right.
After vesting, rent was paid to the State. While the matter stood
thus, the consolidation operation in the area, where the land falls,
started in the year 1979. The consolidation authorities granted ROR
in his favour. At the instance of some persons, defendant no.2
initiated Case No.1 of 1976 under Sec.5(i) of the O.E.A. Act against
him. Case was not transferred to the consolidation authorities. In
the said proceeding, legal heirs of the landlord were not parties.
Without affording any opportunity to him, the defendant no.2 set
aside the lease and declared that right, title and interest of the
plaintiff stood extinguished. The said order is void, inoperative and
does not affect his title.
3.           The defendants resisted the claim of the plaintiff stating
that the nature of the land is communal. The suit land belonged to
Mattowali Malna Md. Habibur Raheman. The same was recorded
under Anabadi khata. The status of the land was Bajyapti Mandhya-
Satwadhikari.    The    land vested  in  the   State   free  from    all
encumbrances after coming into force of the O.E.A. Act. The plaintiff
appeared in Case No.1 of 1976. He failed to produce hatpatta. He
had not adduced any evidence. The lease deed was not in existence.
The alleged lease deed was a fabricated one. The rent receipts
granted by the ex-landlord were fabricated. The defendant no.2 was
the competent authority to initiate proceeding. In the said case, he
visited the spot and found that there are two tanks over the suit
schedule land. The villagers are using the tank. The villagers stated
that they have constructed a house as village library. He further

                                    3
found that the plaintiff was not in physical possession. The plaintiff
had not acquired any right, title and interest.
4.            Learned trial court struck nine issues. Plaintiff adduced
evidence, both oral and documentary. No evidence was adduced by
the defendants. Learned trial court came to hold that no notice was
issued to the plaintiff and the ex-landlord in Case No.1 of 1976. The
order sheet does not reveal that the defendant no.2 had verified the
ekpadia submitted by the ex-landlord. The order passed by the
defendant no.2 is void. Held so, it decreed the suit. Feeling
aggrieved, the defendants filed appeal before the learned District
Judge, Balasore, which was subsequently transferred to the court of
the learned Additional District Judge, Bhadrak and renumbered as
T.A. No.75/227 of 1986/87. Learned lower appellate court held that
the date of the unregistered lease deed, Ext.7, is shown as 13.6.43.
The plaintiff instituted the suit, when he was 55 years. He was 13
years old when the alleged lease deed was executed. On scanning of
the said document, it held that the portion showing the age of the
plaintiff had been torn away. No evidence was adduced by the
plaintiff with regard to the age at the time of execution of the lease
deed. The order passed by the defendant no.2, Ext.3, shows that
the plaintiff was absent. It revealed that the defendant no.2 made a
spot enquiry and found that the disputed land is communal in
nature. Plaintiff never possessed the same. The hatpatta issued by
the ex-intermediary had been created after 1.1.1946. It further held
that the proceeding initiated by the defendant no.2 was well within
the jurisdiction of defendant no.2 and the order was legal and valid.
Held so, it allowed the appeal.
5.            The second appeal was admitted on the following
substantial questions of law.

                                    4
             “(A) Whether the declaration in question could
             be adjudicated by Consolidation authorities or is
             to be adjudicated by the Civil Court ?
             (B) Whether the successor of the ex-landlord
             were necessary parties in O.E.A. proceeding ?”
6.           Heard Miss Soumya Mishra on behalf of Mr. S.N. Mishra,
learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. R.P. Mohapatra, learned
A.G.A. for the respondents.
7.           Miss Mishra, learned counsel for the appellant submitted
that the suit land originally belonged to ex-landlord. He granted an
unregistered lease deed in favour of the plaintiff. The plaintiff was in
possession of the same. The plaintiff paid rent to the ex-landlord.
The land vested in the State. He paid rent to the State. The
defendant no.2 had no jurisdiction to initiate proceeding under
Sec.5(i) of the O.E.A. Act, since the area came under the purview of
the consolidation operation. In the said case, opportunity was not
provided to the plaintiff. The ex-landlord was not a party. Thus the
order is nullity. The consolidation ROR has been issued in his favour.
She further contended that the proceeding before the O.E.A.
Collector abated. She relied on the decision of the apex Court in the
case of Gorakh Nath Dube vs. Hari Narain Singh and others, AIR
1973 SC 2451.
8.           Per contra, Mr. Mohapatra, learned A.G.A. for the
respondents submitted that the land originally belonged to ex-
landlord. The same vested in the State free from all encumbrances.
The O.E.A. Collector had jurisdiction to initiate proceeding under
Sec.5(i) of the O.E.A. Act. The Collector has jurisdiction to set aside
any settlement or lease made by the proprietor of an estate after
01.01.1946, if he is satisfied that the same had been made with the
object of defeating any of the provision of the Act for determining

                                    5
higher compensation thereunder. The lease was required to be
registered under Sec.17 of the Indian Registration Act, but the same
has not been done. He further contended that the plaintiff had not
brought to the notice of the consolidation authorities nor the O.E.A.
authority   relating  to  continuation   of  proceedings   before  the
respective forums. Under Sec.4(4) of the Orissa Consolidation of
Holdings and Prevention of Fragmentation of Land Act, 1972
(hereinafter referred to as “OCH & PFL Act”) abatement is not
automatic. A judicial order is necessary. He further contended that
under Sec.39 of the O.E.A. Act, civil court has jurisdiction to
entertain the suit. He relied on Full Bench decision of the Patna High
Court in the case of Ram Nath Mandal and others vs. Jojan Mandal
and others, AIR 1964 Patna 1 and the decision of this Court in the
case of Bishnu Mohan Mallik vs. Dhruba Naik, 1986 (II) OLR—566.
9.           Before adverting the contentions raised by the parties, it
is necessary to set out the provisions of Sec.5(i) and Sec.39 of the
O.E.A. Act.
             “5(i) Where the Collector is satisfied in respect of
             the settlement or lease of any land or mines or
             minerals comprised in such estate or the transfer of
             any kind of interests in any building used primarily
             as office or cutchery for the collection of rent of
             such estate or as rest houses for estate servants on
             duty or as golas for storing rent in kind or part
             thereof, made or created at any time after the 1st,
             day of January, 1946, that such settlement, lease
             or transfer was made with the object of defeating
             any provisions of this Act or obtaining higher
             compensation thereunder, he shall have power to
             make enquiries in respect of such settlement, lease
             or transfer and may, after giving reasonable notice
             to the parties concerned to appear and be heard,
             set aside any such settlement, lease or transfer,
             dispossess the person claiming under it and take
             possession of such property in the manner provided

                                     6
             in Clause (h) on such terms as may appear to him
             to be fair and equitable:
                    Provided that in case where the Collector
             decides not to set aside any such settlement, lease
             or transfer he shall refer the case to the Board of
             Revenue for confirmation of the settlement, lease
             or transfer and the orders passed by the Board of
             Revenue in this behalf shall be final:
                    [Provided further that the period of limitation
             for the realization by the State Government of dues
             in respect of such of the leases, settlements, or
             transfers as have been the subject-matter of an
             inquiry under this clause, shall, with respect to the
             period after the date of vesting, be three years
             from the date of the order setting aside or
             confirming the same, made by the Collector or by
             the Board of Revenue as the case may be, unless a
             longer period of limitation is applicable in respect of
             such dues under any other law for the time being in
             force in relation to such lease, settlement of
             transfer.]
             xxx                       xxx                      xxx
             39. Bar to jurisdiction of Civil Courts in certain
             matters –- No suit shall be brought in any Civil
             Court in respect of any entry in or omission from a
             Compensation Assessment roll or in respect of any
             order passed under Chapters II to VI or concerning
             any matter which is or has already been the
             subject to any application made or proceeding
             taken under the side Chapters.”
10.          The civil court has plenary jurisdiction. Seventy-five
years ago, the Privy Council in the case of Secretary of State vs.
Mask & Co., AIR 1940 PC 105 held that the exclusion of the
jurisdiction of the civil courts is not to be readily inferred, but that
such exclusion must either be explicitly expressed or clearly implied.
It is also well settled that even if the jurisdiction is so excluded, the
civil courts have jurisdiction to examine into cases where the
provisions of the Act have not been complied with, or the statutory

                                   7
tribunal has not acted in conformity with the fundamental principles
of judicial procedure.
11.          In Ram Nath Mandal and others (supra), the Full Bench
of Patna held that under Section 117 of the T.P. Act, a lease for
agricultural purposes is not necessary to be made by a written
instrument and it may be effected by an oral agreement in which
case the question of registration will not arise. However, if the
transaction is reduced to writing, then in the case of lease from year
to year or for any term exceeding a year or reserving a yearly rent,
registration would be required under Section 17 of the Registration
Act, and if unregistered the lease will be inadmissible in evidence
under Section 49 of the Registration Act and other evidence of its
terms will be precluded under Section 91 of the Evidence Act. In
that case, the claim of creating of tenancy on the basis of rent
receipts in pursuance of an oral agreement was negatived on the
ground that no such case had been put forward by the plaintiff in
the plaint.
12.          Admittedly, the suit land belonged to ex-landlord. On a
scanning of the unregistered lease deed, learned lower appellate
court came to hold that a portion of the same where the age was
mentioned is torn up. The same is a fabricated one. On a cursory
perusal of the said document, it is evident that the portion meant for
age was torn. The suit was instituted in the year 1985 when the
plaintiff was 55 years. He was born in the year 1930. The deed was
said to have been executed on 13.6.1943, i.e., when he was 13
years of age. It is highly inconceivable that a minor of 13 years old
could approach the ex-landlord to cultivate the land.
13.          Case No.1 of 1976 was initiated by the defendant no.2.
The impugned order revealed that opportunity of hearing was

                                     8
provided to the plaintiff. In the said case, the plaintiff appeared and
filed written statement also. The O.E.A. Collector visited the spot
and found that there were two tanks over the same. The villagers
were using the tank. The plaintiff remained absent in spite of the
notice.    The  nature    of the   land  is  communal.      The  alleged
unregistered lease deed was not produced before him. He passed a
reasoned order. The order does not suffer from any procedural
infirmity. The O.E.A. Collector was well within the jurisdiction to
initiate proceeding. As held by the Privy Council in the case of
Secretary of State (supra) that even if the jurisdiction is so
excluded, the civil courts have jurisdiction to examine into cases
where the provisions of the Act have not been complied with, or the
statutory tribunal has not acted in conformity with the fundamental
principles of judicial procedure. Both the courts held that there is no
procedural infirmity. Opportunity of hearing was provided to the
plaintiff.
14.          The decision in the case of Gorakh Nath Dube (supra) is
distinguishable on facts. The question arose before the apex Court
as to whether a suit for cancellation of a sale deed, which was
pending on the date of the notification under Section 4 of the U.P.
Consolidation of Holdings Act of 1954, abates under Section 5 (2) of
the Act. The apex Court held that the validity of sale deeds, gift
deeds, and wills could be gone into in proceedings before the
consolidation authorities, because such questions naturally and
necessarily arose and had to be           decided in the course of
adjudications on rights or interests in land which are the subject
matter of consolidation proceedings. It was further held that
distinction can be made between cases where a document is wholly
or partially invalid so that it can be disregarded by any court or

                                         9
authority and one where it has to be actually set aside before it can
cease to have legal effect.
15.                    In the wake of aforesaid, the appeal, sans merit,
deserves dismissal. Accordingly, the same is dismissed. The parties
will bear their own costs throughout.
                                                ……………………………….
                                                 Dr. A.K. Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 20th November, 2017/Basanta


