                           HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                 W.P.(C) No.10967 of 2016
        In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
        Constitution of India.
                                         -------------
        Anup Bhattacharya and others                         ….    Petitioners
                                            Versus
        State of Odisha and others                           ….    Opposite parties
                            For Petitioners    --      Mr.P.K.Samantray
                                                       Advocate
                            For Opp. Parties --        Mr.V.Narasingh,
                                                       Advocate
                                                       (For O.Ps.2 & 3)
                                                       Mr.P.K.Sahoo,
                                                       Advocate
                                                       (For O.P.5)
        PRESENT:
                         THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
        Date of hearing :08.02.2017           &          Date of Judgment:20.2.2017
Dr.A.K.Rath, J.      By this writ application the petitioners have challenged, inter
        alia, the notification dated 16.6.2016, vide Annexue-1, issued by the
        Member Secretary-cum-Controller of Examination, Odisha State Board of
        Pharmacy, opposite party no.3, cancelling the result of D.Pharma Part-I
        and Part-II Examination 2015(II) of Seemanta Institute of Pharmaceutical
        Sciences, Jharpokharia, Mayurbhanj.
        2.           Shorn of unnecessary details, the case of the petitioners is
        that they were students of Diploma in Pharmacy. They prosecuted

                                       2
studies in the Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jaleswar in the
district of Balasore. After completion of course, they appeared in the
examination centre, namely, Seemanta Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Jharpokharia, Mayurbhanj in the year 2015. The result of
D.Pharma Examination 2015(II) was published on 18.3.2016, but then
their results have been withheld. The Principal of the college sent an
application on 3.4.2016 to know the result of the examination. The
Member Secretary-cum-Controller of Examination, Odisha State Board of
Pharmacy, opposite party no.3 issued a notification cancelling the result
of D.Pharma Part-I and Part-II Examination 2015 (II) of Seemanta
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jharpokharia, Mayurbhanj due to
centre scratch as per the decision of the Government, vide Annexure-1.
The said notification is impugned in this writ application.
3.            Pursuant to issuance of notice, opposite parties 1 to 3 have
entered appearance and filed counter affidavit. The sum and substance
of the case of the opposite parties is that the examination in question i.e.,
D.Pharma Part-I and Part-II, 2015 Second Examination was conducted
throughout the State simultaneously in twelve different examination
centers including Seemanta Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Jharpokharia. The petitioners, students of Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Jaleswar along with the students of other institutions appeared
at Part-I and Part-II D.Pharma Examination in the said centre. Before
publication of the result of the examination, a complaint was received by
the Drugs Controller, Odisha. Thereafter the Drugs Controller, Odisha in
its letter dated 15.2.2016 instructed the Member Secretary, Odisha State
Board of Pharmacy, Bhubaneswar to conduct an enquiry into the
allegations. Accordingly, a committee under the Chairmanship of
Professor S.K.Behera, O.S.D. Office of the D.M.E.T., Odisha was
constituted to enquire into the veracity of the allegations. The enquiry
committee reviewed the CCTV footage and submitted a report. The report
of the enquiry committee was considered in the meeting held on

                                     3
22.4.2016 presided over by D.M.E.T., Odisha, Bhubaneswar. It was
unanimously resolved to constitute a sub-committee for micro analysis of
the CCTV footage. The report of micro analysis dated 28.4.2016 was
submitted to the D.M.E.T., Odisha. On perusal of the said report, it was
found that there was large scale malpractice. The D.M.E.T. by its letter
dated 7.5.2016 recommended for appropriate action. The Additional
Secretary to Government in the Department of Health and Family
Welfare in its letter dated 7.6.2016 directed the D.M.E.T. to take
immediate     follow  up  action   against   the  Seemanta     Institute  of
Pharmaceutical Sciences Centre, Jharpokharia, Mayurbhanj. A copy of
the said letter was sent to opposite party no.3 on 10.6.2016. In terms of
the said letter, the impugned notification, vide Annexure-1 dated
16.6.2016 was issued. The decision to cancel the examination was taken
after due enquiry and deliberation. The allegation of violation of
principles of nature justice is misconceived inasmuch as the Center
Superintendent and the Invigilators were examined by the enquiry
committee. They had denied the allegations regarding irregularities
notwithstanding video footage which clearly established their complicity.
There was large scale irregularity in the conduct of the examination.
Thus it was not possible to follow the principles of natural justice.
Further steps had already been initiated to handover the matter for
investigation to the Crime Branch. Opposite party no.3 visited the centre
only on 28.11.2015 during Part-II examination. There was no irregularity
on 28.11.2015. Because of adoption of dubious methods, the sanctity of
the examination process had been thrown to the wind and the entire
exercise of conducting an examination had become farcical. It is further
stated that in response to the notification, vide Annexure-1, re-
examination had been conducted. Petitioner nos.1 and 2 appeared and
failed in the said examination.
4.            Opposite party no.5 has also filed a counter affidavit stating
therein that he had no knowledge of irregularities or complaint during

                                     4
conduct of the examination. He, being the Centre Superintendent,
conducted the examination as per the guidelines and supervision of the
Board Authorities. The CCTV footage has been recorded during the
course of examination and the same has been submitted as per the rule
without any manipulation.
5.          Heard Mr.Samantray, learned Advocate for the petitioners,
Mr.V.Narasingh, learned Advocate for opposite parties 2 & 3 and
Mr.Sahoo, learned Advocate for opposite party no.5.
6.          Mr.Samantray,      learned  Advocate   for   the   petitioners
submitted that the petitioners had appeared in D.Pharma Examination
Part-I and Part-II, 2015 (II) at Seemanta Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Jharpokharia, Mayurbhanj. The examination was conducted in
a fair manner. There was no allegation before the competent authority or
the local police about the adoption of unfair practice by the students.
Neither the Centre Superintendent nor the Principal had submitted any
report to the Odisha State Board of Pharmacy. On 28.11.2015 opposite
party no.3 visited the centre. He had also not submitted any report with
regard to the alleged malpractice. No show cause notice was issued by
opposite parties 1 to 3 before cancellation of result and, as such, the
order is an infraction of principles of nature justice. To buttress his
submission, he relied on the decisions of this Court in the case of Board
of Secondary Education, Orissa, Cuttack Vrs. Gayatri Hota and others,
2001(I) OLR-398, Governing Body, Jambeswar Mahavidyalaya, Balasore
Vrs. Council of Higher Secondary Education, Orissa and another, 2005
(II) OLR-518 and Governing Body of Evening College, Angul Vrs. State of
Orissa and two others, 2010(I) OLR-335 and the decision of the Apex
Court in the case of Board of Higher School and Intermediate Education,
U.P. Allahabad Vrs. Ghansyam Das Gupta and others, AIR 1962 SC
1110.

                                      5
7.           Per contra, Mr.Narasingh, learned Advocate for the opposite
parties 2 and 3 submitted that the examination in question i.e.
D.Pharma Part-I and Part-II, 2015 was conducted throughout the State
simultaneously in twelve different centers as per the schedule including
Seemanta Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jharpokharia. Pursuant
to the complaint dated 2.2.2016 alleging gross malpractice, the Drugs
Controller, Odisha instructed opposite party no.3 to enquire into the
same and submit a report. After due enquiry, report was submitted. As
the future of large number of students was involved, it was resolved by
the Odisha State Board of Pharmacy to constitute a Sub-Committee for
micro analysis of CCTV footage. Opposite party no.2 on 7.5.2016
recommended for initiation of appropriate proceeding basing upon report
on review of CCTV footage. By letter dated 7.6.2016, the Additional
Secretary to Government in the Health and Family Welfare Department
directed the D.M.E.T. to take immediate action in cancelling the
examination by scratching the centre and to handover the matter to
Crime Branch. The matter is under investigation of Crime Branch. In
terms of the said communication, the impugned notification dated
16.6.2016 was issued. The decision to cancel the examination was taken
after due enquiry and deliberation keeping in view the adoption of unfair
means on a large scale. It is further stated that on a review of CCTV
footage, vide Annexure-E/3, it is evident that not only the students, but
also the invigilators were involved in the malpractice. On 18.11.2015,
19.11.2015 and 20.11.2015 copies had been supplied by the invigilators
to the students. On the other dates i.e., on 16.11.2015, 17.11.2015 and
21.11.2015 relating to Part-I, complicity of the invigilators is clearly
borne out. Dubious role of the invigilators also came to the fore during
the Part-II examinations on 23.11.2015 26.11.2015 and 27.11.2015. In
view of large scale malpractice, it was not possible to follow the principles
of natural justice. Six petitioners had appeared in D.Pharma Part-I
examination of 2016 (1) (Regular) and their results were likely to be

                                     6
published shortly. Though every endeavor was made to segregate the
tainted from non-tainted candidates, but due to interchanging of seat as
well as hall arrangements, it was well neigh impossible to separate the
untainted from tainted, for which the authorities were constrained to
cancel the whole examination to preserve the sanctity of the examination.
Adoption of unfair means on a large scale had been firmly established
from enquiry report as well as CCTV footage analysis. He placed reliance
on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of Nidhi Kaim Vrs. State of
Madhya Pradesh and others, (2016) 7 SCC 615.
8.            Before delving deep into the matter, it is apt to refer to the
decisions cited by the learned Advocates for the parties. In Ghansyam
Das Gupta (supra), the Apex Court held that if a statutory authority has
power to do any act which will prejudicially affect the subject, then,
although there are not two parties apart from the authority and the
contest is between the authority proposing to do the act and the subject
opposing it, the final determination of the authority will yet be a quasi-
judicial act provided the authority is required by the Statute to act
judicially.    In Governing Body, Jambeswar Mahavidyalaya, Balasore
(supra),    the  petitioner assailed  the  notification   dated  25.6.2004
cancelling the examination held in English Paper-II in second sitting of
Higher Secondary Examination, 2004 on 11.3.2004 on the ground that
there was no material before the examination committee.                 The
supervisor’s report does not disclose that the Higher Secondary
Examination (+2) held on 11.4.2004 in English Paper-II in the
petitioner’s centre was not conducted in accordance with the norms
prescribed and that the examinees in the centre were adopting mal
malpractice. This Court allowed the writ application. In Board of
Secondary Education, Orissa, Cuttack (supra), the Division Bench of this
Court had an occasion to deal with the cancellation of result of HSC
Examination-2002 of eleven students of a high school. The result of the
examination was cancelled on the ground that they resorted to

                                      7
malpractice. The candidates took a positive stand that they had not
resorted to any malpractice or unfairness in course of examination
inasmuch as no allegation of malpractice was reported by the
Invigilators, Centre Superintendent or Flying squad. No incriminating
material whatsoever was seized from them. Notice to show cause was
vague for which they could not give any proper reply. This Court held
that there was infraction of principles of natural justice and, accordingly,
quashed the notification. In Governing Body of Evening College, Angul
(supra), the petitioner assailed the cancellation of results of 41 regular
students who had appeared at +2 HSC Examiantion-2007. The Court on
perusal of the report of the Examination Committee found that the
committee before taking a decision to cancel the result of the students
had not applied its mind and allowed the application.
9.           A bare reading of the decisions, however, show that there is
a significant difference in the factual matrix in which the said cases
arose for consideration. The reliance upon the said decisions, therefore,
is of no assistance to the petitioners.
10.          In the case of Nidhi Kaim (supra), the Apex Court delved
deep into the matter and summarized the principles relating to usage of
unfair means on a large scale. The relevant paragraphs of the report are
quoted below:-
             “39.1        Where there are allegations that students
             resorted to “unfair means on a large scale” at an
             examination, this court would not insist upon
             registration of a formal complaint. Any reliable
             information suggesting the occurrence of such
             malpractice in the examination is sufficient to authorise
             the examining body to take action because examining
             bodies are “responsible for their standards and the
             conduct of examinations” and “the essence of the
             examination is that the worth of every person is
             appraised without any assistance from an outside
             source”.

                          8
39.2.        A lone circumstance could itself be
sufficient in a given case for the examining body to
record a conclusion that the students resorted to “unfair
means on a large-scale” in an examination. This Court
approved the conclusion of the Bihar School
Examination Board that the students had resorted to
unfair means on a large scale in one examination centre
and also approved the decision making process of the
Board on the basis of circumstantial evidence. The lone
circumstance that the success rate of the students who
appeared for the examination from the centre in
question is too high in comparison to other centres.
39.3.        In such cases, the examining body need not
hold “a detailed quasi-judicial inquiry with a right to its
alumni to plead and lead evidence etc.” and the
examining body’s “appreciation of the problem must be
respected.”
39.4         To insist on the observance of the principles
of natural justice, i.e. giving notice to each student and
holding enquiry before cancelling the examination in
such cases would ‘hold up the functioning’ of the
educational institutions which are responsible for
maintenance of the standards of education, and
“encourage indiscipline, if not, also perjury”.
39.5         Compliance with the rule of audi alteram
partem is not necessary not only in the cases of
employment of ‘unfair means on large scale’ but also
situations where there is a ‘leakage of papers’ or
‘destruction of some of the answer books’ etc.
39.6         This Court drew a distinction between
action against an individual student on the ground that
the student had resorted to unfair means in the
examination and the cancellation of the examination on
the whole (or with reference to a group of students)
because the process itself is vitiated.
       xxx                 xxx                     xxx
42.1         Normally, the rule of audi alteram partem
must be scrupulously followed in the cases of the
cancellation of the examinations of students on the
ground that they had resorted to unfair means (copying)
at the examinations.

                                       9
             42.2          But the abovementioned principle is not
             applicable to the cases where unfair means were
             adopted by a relatively large number of students and
             also to certain other situations where either the
             examination process is vitiated or for reasons beyond
             the control of both students and the examining body, it
             would be unfair or impracticable to continue the
             examination process to insist upon the compliance with
             audi alteram partem rule.
             42.3          The fact that unfair means were adopted by
             students at an examination could be established by
             circumstantial evidence.
             42.4          The scope of judicial review of the decision
             of an examining body is very limited. If there is some
             reasonable material before the body to come to the
             conclusion that unfair means were adopted by the
             students on a large scale, neither such conclusion nor
             the evidence forming the basis thereof could be
             subjected to scrutiny on the principles governing the
             assessment of evidence in a criminal court.”
11.          Be it noted that since there was cleavage of opinion as to
whether the appellants should be disentitled to retain the benefits of the
training in medical course which they secured by virtue of their being
beneficiaries of a tainted examination process conducted for the purpose
of admitting them for training in medical colleges, the matter was
referred to the Larger Bench. The Larger Bench held that it would not be
proper to legitimize the admission of students to the MBBS course, in
exercise of power of the Apex Court under Article 142 of the Constitution
of India. But then the principles enunciated in paragraphs 39 & 42 of the
report are still holding the field.
12.          The instant case may be examined on the anvil of the
decision in the case of Nidhi Kaim (supra). D.Pharma Part-I and Part-II
Examination, 2015 (ii) was held in Seemanta Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Jharpokharia from 16.11.2015 to 30.11.2015. The petitioners
appeared at the examination. On receipt of complaint, the Drugs

                                     10
Controller, Odisha sent a letter on 15.2.2016 to the Member Secretary,
Odisha State Board of Pharmacy to enquire into the matter and submit a
report. A committee under the Chairmanship of Professor S.K.Behera,
O.S.D. Office of the D.M.E.T., Odisha was constituted to ascertain the
veracity of the allegation. The committee submitted its report after
reviewing CCTV footage to D.M.E.T., Odisha. The report indicates that
some Invigilators were involved in assisting the students in malpractice
and when they were questioned on such visual clippings, theyremained
silent.  The   Centre   Superintendent/Dy.Centre      Superintendent  also
remained silent on such visual clippings. The committee found that
though all the students were not involved in malpractice, but some
invigilators were involved in assisting the students in malpractice. Both
the Center Superintendent and Dy. Center Superintendent had not
supervised the examination process. It recommended that entire mass of
students should not suffer for the circumstances created by some
students. The invigilators, who were involved, would not be allowed to be
a part of the examination process and the centre may be banned for a
consecutive period of five years. Thereafter a meeting was held on
22.4.2016 under the Chairmanship of Odisha State Board of Pharmacy,
wherein Heads of Department Pharmacology, Vimsar, Burla, Prof.
Pharmacology, S.C.B. Medical College, Cuttack, Principal, Gayathri
College   of  Pharmacy,    Sambalpur,     Principal,  Mayurbhanj  Medical
Academy,     Baripada   and  the   Member     Secretary-cum-Controller  of
Examination, Odisha State Board of Pharmacy were present. The
committee     unanimously    decided    to   constitute  a  sub-committee
consisting of four members for micro analysis of CCTV footage. The sub-
committee after examining the CCTV footage submitted the report, vide
Annexure-E/3. Thereafter, D.M.E.T., who is the Chairman of the Odisha
State Board of Pharmacy sent a letter on 7.5.2016 to the Principal
Secretary, Health and Family Welfare Department, Government of
Odisha requesting for taking appropriate action against the institution

                                     11
for promoting malpractice in an organized manner. On 7.6.2016, the
Additional    Secretary  to  Government,    Health  and   Family   Welfare
Department sent a letter to D.M.E.T., Odisha directing to cancel the
examination held from 16.11.2015 to 30.11.2015, scratch the centre and
ban it for a period of five years, handover the matter to Crime Branch,
Odisha, take immediate steps to conduct re-examination of candidate
and debar the invigilators involved in malpractice. While the matter stood
thus, the Member Secretary-cum-Controller of Examination, Odisha
State Board of Pharmacy cancelled the examination on 16.6.2016. The
report on review of CCTV footage (Part-I and II of D.Pharma examination)
held in Seemanta Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Jharpokharia
from 16.11.2015 to 30.11.2015, vide Annexure E/3, depicts a sordid
picture.    In fact on 16.11.2015 and 17.11.2015 in some halls the
invigilators used to supply copies to the students. The time of supply of
copies by the invigilators had also been recorded. On 19.11.2015, the
invigilators involved themselves in supplying copies to the students in all
halls. Apart from that the students resorted to malpractice in different
halls.
13.           The submission of Mr.Samantray, learned Advocate for the
petitioners that principles of natural justice have not been followed has
no legs to stand. The Apex Court in the case of Nidhi Kaim (supra) held
that normally, the rule of audi alteram partem must be scrupulously
followed in the cases of the cancellation of the examination of the
students on the ground that they had resorted to unfair means (copying)
at the examinations. But the abovementioned principle is not applicable
to the cases where unfair means were adopted by a relatively large
number of students and also to certain other situations where either the
examination process is vitiated or for reasons beyond the control of both
students and the examining body, it would be unfair or impracticable to
continue the examination process to insist upon the compliance with
audi alteram partem rule. The fact that unfair means were adopted by

                                      12
students at an examination could be established by circumstantial
evidence.
14.          The Apex Court in the case of the Chairman, Board of
Mining Examination and Chief Inspector of Mines and another, Vrs.
Ramjee, A.I.R.1977 SC 965 held thus:
                    “……………...Natural justice is no unruly horse, no
             lurking land mine, nor a judicial cure-all. If fairness is
             shown by the decision-maker to the man proceeded against,
             the form, features and the fundamentals of such essential
             processual propriety being conditioned by the facts and
             circumstances of each situation, no breach of natural justice
             can be complained of. Unnatural expansion of natural
             justice, without reference to the administrative realities and
             other factors of a given case, can be exasperating. We can
             neither be finical nor fanatical but should be flexible yet firm
             in this jurisdiction. No man shall be hit below the belt that is
             the conscience of the matter.”                 (emphasis laid)
15.          The Apex Court in the case Nidhi Kaim (supra) in no
uncertain terms held that the scope of judicial review of the decision of
an examining body is very limited. If there is some reasonable material
before the body to come to the conclusion that unfair means were
adopted by the students on a large scale, neither such conclusion nor
the evidence forming the basis thereof could be subjected to scrutiny on
the principles governing the assessment of evidence in a criminal court.
The matter has been handed over to Crime Branch. The Crime Branch is
investigating into the matter. Further some of the students have
appeared at the examination and their results have been declared.
16.          Malpractice is a malady.         Its tentacle spread over all
branches of education. Education is a preparation for the future. The
teachers whom the society adores as “Guru Bramha, Guru Bishnu and
Gurudev Maheswar” are the beacon light of knowledge. Can any one
perceive the idea that a teacher will actively engage in malpractice ? The

                                   13
unfortunate students, who have polluted the stream of examination,
have approached the portals of this Court. Writ is a discretionary as well
as equitable remedy. The petitioners have approached this Court with
unclean hands. They are not entitled to any equitable relief.
17.         As a sequel to the above conclusion, the writ application is
dismissed.
                                                    …………………………
                                                      Dr.A.K.Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 20th February, 2017/CRB

14

