                     HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                             CMP No.1325 of 2016
    In the matter of an application under Article 227 of the Constitution
    of India.
                                    -----------
    Dinesh Kumar Pathak and another             ….                 Petitioners
                                            Versus
    Smt. Sashi Sharma & others                  ….            Opposite parties
             For Petitioners        …    Mr. P.K. Rath, Advocate
             For Opp. Parties       …    Mr. Avijit Pal, Advocate
                                                        (For O.Ps.1 & 3)
                                         Mr. B. Baug, Advocate
                                                        (For O.Ps.4 to 6)
                                JUDGMENT
    PRESENT:
                 THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
    Date of hearing: 20.10.2016           :    Date of judgment: 31.10.2016
Dr. A.K.Rath, J        This petition challenges the order dated 4.8.2016
    passed by the learned 1st Addl. Civil Judge (Senior Division),
    Bhubaneswar in C.S No.428 of 2003. By the said order, learned trial
    court rejected the application of the defendant nos.1 and 2 under
    Section 151 CPC to stay the further proceedings of the suit till
    disposal of the probate proceeding.
    2.           Opposite party no.1 as plaintiff instituted the suit for
    partition impleading the petitioner as well as opposite parties 2 to 9
    as defendants. Petitioners are defendant nos.1 and 2. They filed an
    application under Section 151 CPC to stay the further proceedings of
    the suit till disposal of Test Case No.16 of 2011 pending before the

                                    2
learned District Judge, Khurda at Bhubaneswar. It is stated that the
Schedule-B property is the self-acquired property of late Birendra
Kumar Pathak. He had executed the registered Will on 20.7.1998 in
favour of defendants 1 and 2. Test Case No.16 of 2011 is pending
adjudication before the learned District Judge, Khurda. Schedule-B
property is not partiable. With this factual scenario, a petition was
filed to stay the further proceedings of the suit till disposal of Test
Case No.16 of 2011. Learned trial court held that apart from
Schedule-B property, there are other properties involved in the suit.
The same are not the subject-matter of probate proceeding. All the
issues involved in the suit cannot be decided in the probate
proceeding. The scope is limited. Held so, learned trial court rejected
the application.
3.          Heard Mr.Rath, learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr.
Pal, learned counsel for the opposite parties 1 to 3 and Mr. Baug,
learned counsel for the opposite parties 4 to 6.
4.          Mr. Rath, learned counsel for the petitioners, submitted
that the suit schedule-B property is the self-acquired property of late
Birendra Kumar Pathak. During life time, he executed the registered
Will on 20.7.1998 in favour of defendants 1 and 2. Thereafter, the
petitioners instituted Test Case No.16 of 2011 in the court of the
learned District Judge, Khurda for probate of the Will and the same
is sub judice. Schedule-B property is not partiable in view of the
execution of the Will. There is likelihood of conflict of decisions.
Since item no.1 of Schedule-B property is the subject-matter of
dispute in the probate proceeding, learned trial court has committed
a manifest illegality in rejecting the application filed under Section
151 CPC to stay the further proceedings of the suit. He cited
decisions in the case of Jagojoti Bose and another v. Baruruchi Bose
and others, AIR 1970 Orissa 28, Nirmala Devi v. Arun Kumar Gupta

                                    3
and others, (2005) 12 SCC 505 and Balbir Singh Wasu v. Lakhbir
Singh and others, (2005) 12 SCC 503.
5.          Per contra, Mr. Pal, learned counsel for the opposite
parties 1 to 3, supported the impugned order. He submitted that the
defendants 1 and 2 are fence sitters. The suit for partition was filed
in the year 2003. But then, the probate proceeding was instituted in
the year 2011. Though it is stated that the Will was executed on
20.7.1998 but the proceeding was initiated after lapse of 13 years.
The same is a suspicious circumstance. He further submitted that
all the properties are not the subject-matter of dispute in the probate
case.
6.          Mr. Baug, learned counsel for the opposite parties 4 to 6,
supported the impugned order. He cited the decisions of the apex
Court in the case of Maddineni Koteswara Rao v. Maddineni
Bhaskara Rao and another, (2009) 13 SCC 179 and Phoolchand and
another v. Gopal Lal, AIR 1967 SC 1470.
7.          Before proceeding further, it is apt to refer to the
decisions cited by the learned counsel for the respective parties.
8.          In Jagojoti Bose (supra), the disputed property belongs to
one Haricharan Bose. He had three sons. On 10.10.1946, he
executed a Will in respect of the disputed property in favour of
defendant nos.4 and 5. Thus he divested the plaintiff-another son
from inheritance under the Will. On 30.10.1958, the plaintiff
instituted a suit for partition claiming 1/3rd interest. Defendants 4
and 5 filed written statement claiming the entire property to
themselves on the strength of the Will. On 12.9.1960, defendants 4
and 5 filed an application for Probate of the Will in the court of the
learned District Judge, Cuttack. On 28.6.1961, a preliminary decree
for partition was passed in favour of the plaintiff. On 28.11.1962,
Probate of the Will was granted after contest by the plaintiff. On

                                    4
10.7.1964, the plaintiff filed an application for making final the
preliminary decree for partition. Defendants 4 and 5 filed an
objection to the same contending, inter alia, that the plaintiff had no
title in the disputed property after probate was granted. The
contention was negatived by the trial court. The same was
challenged before this Court. This Court held that by preliminary
decree the jural relationship amongst the parties inter se was finally
decided and it was declared that the plaintiff had a one third interest
in the disputed property. If the probate of the Will is allowed to vary
the rights, a conclusion must be reached to the effect that the
plaintiff is not entitled to the property. This would affect the very
basis of the preliminary decree and the rights carved out. The juristic
theory underlying the reason why this cannot be done is that
defendants 4 and 5 could have pressed into service the Probate if
they had been vigilant in time. They had taken the defence under the
Will in the written statement. Thus their claim on the strength of the
Will and the Probate subsequent to the preliminary decree is barred
by the principle of res judicata, actual and constructive. It was open
to the defendants 4 and 5 to get the partition suit stayed, proceed
with the Probate proceeding pending in the court of the District
Judge and, after obtaining the Probate, to set it up in defence in the
partition suit. This was the only course available to them. When they
failed to do so, they abandoned their right based on the Probate. By
the time the Probate was granted, the rights of the parties on the
basis of inheritance had already been worked out and the stage of
setting up the Probate in defence had passed off.      (Emphasis laid)
9.           In Nirmala Devi (supra), the question arose whether the
probate proceeding could be clubbed with the suit. The apex Court
held that in the probate proceedings on the question of proof of the
Will will have a direct impact on the suit. Only on this short ground

                                        5
and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the controversy
between the parties, the apex Court directed the learned District
Judge to make it convenient to dispose of the probate proceeding as
well as suit. The same view was reiterated in Balbir Singh Wasu
(supra).
10.         In Phoolchand and another v. Gopal Lal, AIR 1967 SC
1470, the apex Court held that there is nothing in the Code of Civil
Procedure which prohibits the passing of more than one preliminary
decree, if circumstances justify the same and that it may be
necessary to do so particularly in partition suits when after the
preliminary decree some parties die and shares of other parties are
thereby augmented. There is no quarrel over the proposition of law,
but the same is not the case here. The said case is distinguishable
on facts.
11.         The decision in the case of Maddineni Koteswara Rao
(supra), is of no assistance to the learned counsel for the opposite
parties 4 to 6. The said case is distinguishable on facts.
12.         It is trite that a little difference in facts or additional facts
may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of a decision.
13.         The sole question, inter alia, that hinges as to whether
the suit for partition shall remain stayed till disposal of the probate
proceeding.
14.         Admittedly, Schedule-B property is the subject-matter of
dispute in the partition suit as well as probate proceeding. The jural
relationship amongst the parties inter se is finally decided in the
preliminary decree. The decision in the probate proceeding on the
question of proof of ‘Will’ will have a direct impact on the suit. The
decision in the partition suit would also operate as res judicata in
the probate proceeding. In such contingency, when both the
proceedings are pending, the suit for partition shall remain stayed

                                    6
till disposal of probate proceeding. After obtaining the probate,
defendants 1 and 2 may set up in defence in the partition suit.
15.         In  view    of  the  analysis  made above,   the  further
proceedings in C.S No.428 of 2003 pending before the learned 1st
Addl. Civil Judge (Senior Division), Bhubaneswar shall remain
stayed till disposal of Test Case No.16 of 2011 pending before the
learned District Judge, Khurda at Bhubaneswar. Learned District
Judge shall conclude the hearing of Test Case No.16 of 2011 within
a period of six months from today.
            The petition is allowed. No costs.
                                                 ………………………..
                                                  DR. A.K.RATH, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
Dated 31st October, 2016/Pradeep.


