                      HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                             WP(C) No.12411 of 2008
     In the matter of an application under Article 227 of the Constitution
     of India.
                                      -----------
     Bellary Steels and Alloys Ltd.               ….                   Petitioner
                                              Versus
     O.C.L India Ltd.                             ….             Opposite party
              For Petitioner          …    Mr. P.K. Sahu, Advocate
              For Opp. Party          …    Mr. S.P. Sarangi, Advocate
     PRESENT:
                  THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
     Date of hearing: 16.03.2016            :    Date of judgment: 30.03.2016
Dr. A.K.Rath, J         The  sole   question     that, inter   alia,  arises  for
     consideration is as to whether further proceeding of M.S. No.35 of
     1999 of     the court of     learned     Civil  Judge (Senior Division),
     Sundargarh shall remain suspended till the scheme as directed by
     the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction is framed ?
     2.           Opposite   party   as   plaintiff   instituted  the   suit  for
     realisation of money for non-payment of cost of the materials
     supplied by it to the defendant-petitioner. Pursuant to issuance of
     summons, the defendant filed a comprehensive written statement
     denying the assertions made in the plaint. While the matter stood
     thus, the defendant filed an application under Section 151 CPC to
     stay further proceeding of the suit in view of the order passed by the

                                     2
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (hereinafter
referred to as “the BIFR”) and the Appellate Authority for Industrial
and Financial Reconstruction (hereinafter referred to as “the AAIFR”).
It is stated that the defendant-company filed a reference under
Section 15(1) of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)
Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as “the SICA”) before the BIFR,
which was registered as Case No.114/2004. By order dated
11.1.2007, the BIFR declared the defendant-company as sick
industrial company and appointed IDBI as operating agency with
certain directions for revival of the company. Being aggrieved by the
direction made in para 15(v) by which the BIFR has directed the
operating agency to issue advertisement for change of management
under Section 18 of SICA for revival of the company, defendant-
company preferred appeal before the AAIFR, which was registered as
Appeal No.88 of 2007. The AAIFR by order dated 8.1.2008 set aside
the said portion of the order dated 11.1.2007 passed by the BIFR and
directed the ARCIL to hold a joint meeting with all secured creditors
within eight weeks from the date of the order after circulating fully
tied up rehabilitation scheme to be submitted by the company with
ARCIL within four weeks. Thereafter, the company was directed to
file fully tied up rehabilitation scheme with BIFR within twelve weeks
from the date of the order. It is further stated that the company has
submitted the rehabilitation scheme to the ARCIL and the ARCIL is
on the verge of submitting its report. The plaintiff filed an objection to
the same. It is apt to state here that SASF and ARCIL held more than
82% of the company’s secured debts. By order dated 22.7.2008,
learned trial court rejected the petition. With this factual scenario,
the instant petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India has
been filed to lacinate the said order.

                                    3
3.          Heard Mr. P.K. Sahu on behalf of Mr. P.K. Rath, learned
counsel for the petitioner and Mr. S.P.Sarangi, learned counsel for
the opposite party.
4.          Mr. Sahu, learned counsel for the petitioner, submitted
that since the matter is pending before the BIFR, the further
proceeding of the suit shall remain suspended under Section 22 of
the SICA. In view of the same, the impugned order of the learned trial
court is bad in law.
5.          Per contra, Mr. Sarangi, learned counsel for the opposite
party, submitted that by order dated 8.1.2008, the AAIFR in Appeal
No.88 of 2007 set aside a portion of the order dated 11.1.2007
passed by the BIFR and directed the ARCIL to hold a joint meeting
with all the secured creditors within eight weeks from the date of the
order after circulating fully tied up rehabilitation scheme to be
submitted by the company with ARCIL within four weeks. The
company was directed to file fully tied up rehabilitation scheme with
BIFR within twelve weeks from the date of the order. It is not known
whether the company has filed fully tied up rehabilitation scheme
with BIFR. Furthermore, the petition lacks the details. In view of the
same, learned trial court is justified in rejecting the application. He
cited the decision of the apex Court in the case of Raheja Universal
Limited v. NRC Limited and others, (2012) 4 SCC 148.
6.          Section 22(1) of the SICA, which is the hub of the issue, is
quoted hereunder:
            “22. Suspension of legal proceedings, contracts, etc.-
            (1) Where in respect of an industrial company, an
            inquiry under section 16 is pending or any scheme
            referred to under section 17 is under preparation or
            consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under
            implementation or where an appeal under section 25
            relating to an industrial company is pending, then,
            notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies

                                       4
            Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or any other law or the
            memorandum and articles of association of the
            industrial company or any other instrument having
            effect under the said Act or other law, no proceedings
            for the winding up of the industrial company or for
            execution, distress or the like against any of the
            properties of the industrial company or for the
            appointment of a receiver in respect thereof [and no suit
            for the recovery of money or for the enforcement of any
            security against the industrial company or of any
            guarantee in respect of any loans or advance granted to
            the industrial company] shall lie or be proceeded with
            further, except with the consent of the Board or, as the
            case may be, the Appellate Authority.”
7.          Interpreting Section 22 of SICA, the apex Court in M/s.
Madras Petrochem Ltd. and another v. BIFR and others, AIR 2016 SC
898 in paragraph-48 held thus:
            “…..It is clear, therefore, that the expression “where a
            reference is pending” would necessarily include the
            inquiry stage before the Board under Section 16 of the
            Act. If this be the case, then the reference can be said to
            be pending not only when an inquiry is instituted, but
            also after preparation and sanction of a scheme right till
            the stage the scheme has worked out successfully or till
            the BIFR gives its opinion to wind up the company.”
8.          On the anvil of the decision cited supra, the case of the
petitioner may be examined. The defendant-company filed a reference
under Section 15(1) of the SICA before BIFR basing on the audited
balance sheet dated 30.11.2003. By order dated 11.1.2007, the BIFR
declared the defendant-company as sick industrial company in terms
of Section 3(1)(o) of SICA and appointed IDBI as operating agency to
formulate    rehabilitation    scheme.     Aggrieved    by   the   directions
contained in para 15(v), by which the BIFR has directed the operating
agency to issue advertisement for change of management under
Section 18 of SICA for revival of the company, the defendant-
company filed an appeal being Appeal No.88 of 2007 before the
AAIFR. The AAIFR set aside the said paragraph on 8.1.2008 and

                                     5
directed the ARCIL to hold a joint meeting with all the secured
creditors within eight weeks from the date of the order after
circulating fully tied up rehabilitation scheme to be submitted by the
company with ARCIL within four weeks. The defendant-company was
directed to file fully tied up rehabilitation scheme with BIFR within
twelve weeks from the date of the order.
9.          There is no dispute that the rehabilitation scheme of the
defendant-company is either under preparation or consideration. In
view of the authoritative pronouncement of the apex Court in the
case of M/s. Madras Petrochem Ltd. that the reference can be said to
be pending not only when an inquiry is instituted, but also after
preparation and sanction of a scheme right till the stage the scheme
has worked out successfully or till the BIFR gives its opinion to wind
up the company, a conclusion is irresistible that the reference is still
pending before the BIFR. That being the position, the suit cannot be
proceeded against the defendant-company except with the consent of
the BIFR.
10.         In Raheja Universal Limited (supra), the question arose
the scope and ambit of Section 22 of the SICA and its overriding
application over the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882
with particular reference to Section 53-A and Section 54 of the latter
Act. The judgment was delivered in different context. The same has
no direct bearing to the facts of the present case.
11.         On taking a holistic view of the matter, this Court is of the
opinion that the view taken by the learned trial court is perfunctory
and flawed. If the order dated 22.7.2008 is allowed to stand, the
same will cause miscarriage of justice. In view of the same, the order
dated 22.7.2008 passed by the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division),
Sundargarh in M.S. No.35 of 1999 is quashed. It is open to the

                                     6
plaintiff to approach the BIFR and take consent to proceed with the
suit.
             The petition is allowed. No costs.
                                                ………………………..
                                                  DR. A.K.RATH, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 30th March, 2016/Pradeep.


