                 HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                               S.A.No.106 of 2000
    From the judgment and decree dated 23.12.1999 and
    11.1.2000 respectively passed by Mr.M.Papanna, learned Additional
    District Judge, Sambalpur in T.A.No.46/2 of 93-97 confirming the
    judgment and decree dated 31.7.1993 and 16.8.1993 passed by the
    learned Subordinate Judge, Kuchinda in T.S.No.4 of 1992.
                                   -------------
    Ganesh Prasad Dubey (dead) through
    his L.Rs. and others                    ….               Appellants
                                     Versus
    Premlata Dei @ Pani and others          ….               Respondents
                        For Appellants      --    Mr.Sanjeev Udgata
                                                  Mr.Satyabrata Udgata
                                                  Advocates
                        For Respondents --        Mr.J.R.Dash,
                                                  Advocate
                                JUDGMENT
    PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE A.K.RATH
    Date of Hearing :21.3.2018         &       Date of Judgment:30.3.2018
Dr.A.K.RATH, J.       This is a defendants’ appeal against confirming
    judgment.
    2.          Plaintiffs-respondents 1 and 2 instituted the suit for
    declaration of title, confirmation of possession or in the alternative
    recovery of possession, in the event they are dispossessed during

                                   2
pendency of the suit and permanent injunction. The case of the
plaintiffs was that one Chaina Jena wife of Chintamani Jena was the
absolute owner of the suit land. She died leaving behind her
daughters, Chandri and Dukhi. After death of the parents, the
daughters succeeded to the suit property. Chandri and Dukhi were
in possession of the suit property. Chandri died issueless in the year
1982. Thereafter, Dukhi became the absolute owner. Dukhi died in
the year 1989. After her death, her sons and daughter, plaintiffs 1
and 2 and defendants 4 and 5 succeeded to the property. On
6.3.1991 defendants 1 to 3 claimed that Chandri had gifted
Schedule-B property to them. Chandri became feeble and weak
because of her old age. Before her death, she was in coma. Chandri
had not executed any gift deed at any point of time. The alleged gift
deeds are inoperative and void. The suit property had not been
partitioned between Chandri and Dukhi. With this factual scenario,
they instituted the suit seeking the reliefs mentioned supra.
3.           Defendants 1 to 3 filed written statement denying the
assertions made in the plaint. According to them, plaintiffs 1 and 2
and proforma defendants 4 and 5 are not the daughters of Dukhi. It
was pleaded that the suit property described in Lot no.1 of Schedule-
A was the self-acquired property of Chandri. Lot nos.2 & 3 were self-
acquired properties of Chintamani. After death of Chintamani, both
Chandri and Dukhi became owners of Lot nos.2 & 3 of Schedule-A
property. After death of Dukhi, Chandri became the owner of the
properties. On 5.8.1982, Chandri executed a registered gift deed in
respect of Lot nos.1 & 2 of Schedule-A property in favour of
defendant no.1. She had also executed a gift deed of plot no.1548 in
favour of defendant no.2 and delivered possession. It was further

                                    3
pleaded that plaintiff no.1 was the maid servant of Chandri and
Dukhi. She was residing in their house. The plaintiffs as well as
proforma defendants had no semblance of right, title and interest
over the suit property.
4.              Stemming on the pleadings of the parties, learned trial
court framed five issues. Parties led evidence, oral and documentary,
to substantiate their case. Learned trial court came to hold that the
gift deed nos. 443/82 and 444/82 are inoperative and void. The
plaintiffs and proforma defendants 4 and 5 have right, title, interest
and possession over the suit land. The defendants 1 to 3 have no
right,   title,   interest and  possession  over  the    suit property.
Defendants 1 to 3 are trespassers over Schedule-B property. Held so,
it decreed the suit. The unsuccessful defendants appealed before the
learned     District   Judge,  Sambalpur,  which    was   subsequently
transferred to the court of the learned Additional District Judge,
Samablpur and renumbered as Title Appeal No.46/2 of 93-97.
During pendency of the appeal, an application under Order 41 Rule
27 CPC was filed to admit the certified copy of the gift deed no.444 of
1982 as evidence. It was stated that an advocate was engaged by the
defendants. During trial, he was gained over by the plaintiffs. He had
not filed any application to declare D.W.3 hostile and cross-examine
him. The said advocate acted against the interest of the defendants.
He had not advised the defendants to examine the attesting witness
and scribe of the gift deeds. The same amounts to professional
misconduct. The learned appellate court came to hold that appeal
was filed in the year 1993. The application for additional evidence
was filed four years after filing of the appeal. The Court is not
competent to decide the question of misconduct of the counsel. There

                                    4
was no justifiable ground to admit the document as additional
evidence. The application had been filed to patch up lacuna.
Thereafter, it scanned the evidence on record, pleadings, concurred
with the findings of the learned trial court and dismissed the appeal.
It is apt to state here that during pendency of this appeal, appellants
1 & 3 died, whereafter their legal heirs have been substituted.
5.            The Second Appeal was admitted on the following
substantial questions of law :
              “i)   Whether the appellate court can allow additional
                    evidence to pronounce judgment or for any other
                    substantial cause ?
              ii)   Whether the appellate court is correct in rejecting
                    the application under Order 41 Rule 27 of the
                    Code of Civil Procedure Code without any reason
                    while the appellants have suffered due to the
                    laches on the part of their counsel ?”
6.            Heard Mr.Sanjeev Udgata, learned Advocate along with
Mr.Satyabrata Udgata, learned Advocate for the appellants and
Mr.J.R.Dash, learned Advocate for the respondents.
7.            Mr.Udgata,    learned   Advocate     for  the   appellants
submitted that the advocate of defendants had not conducted the
suit properly. D.W.3 was hostile, but then he had not filed the
application to declare the witness hostile. The registered gift deed is a
relevant document and can be admitted as additional evidence. The
appellate court is within its jurisdiction to entertain the material
documents sought to be taken as additional evidence. The appellate
court can allow the evidence to pronounce the judgment or any other
substantial cause. For the latches of the lawyer, the party should not

                                    5
suffer. He placed reliance on the decisions of the apex Court in
Union of India v. K.V.Lakshman and others, AIR 2016 SC 3139 and
this Court in Sankar Pradhan v. Premananda Pradhan (dead) and
others, 2016(I) ILR-CUT-1151.
8.            Per   contra, Mr.Dash,     learned   Advocate    for the
respondents submitted that the defendants have made unnecessary
allegations against their counsel. No petition was filed in the trial
court to disengage him. Rather the counsel conducted the case on
their behalf. Three numbers of witnesses including the attesting
witness had been examined by defendants 1 and 2. D.W.3 did not
support the case of defendants 1 and 2. Further eleven documents
including gift deed no.443/82 had been exhibited. After lapse of four
years in filing of the appeal, application for additional evidence was
filed to patch up lacuna. Provisions of Order 41, Rule 27 C.P.C. are
not designed to help parties to patch up weak points. He relied on a
decision of the apex Court in the case of N.Kamalam (Dead) and
another v. Ayyasamy and another, (2001) 7 SCC 503.
9.            In K.Venkataramiah v. A.Seetharma Reddy and others,
AIR 1963 SC 1526, Order 41, Rule 27 C.P.C. was the subject-matter
of interpretation before the apex Court. The Constitution Bench of
the apex Court held that section 107 of the Code of Civil Procedure
empowers the appellate court "to take additional evidence or to
require such evidence to be taken," "subject to such conditions and
limitations as may be prescribed." Rule 27 of Or. 41 of the Code of
Civil Procedure prescribe the conditions and limitations in the
matter. The rule first lays down that the parties to an appeal shall
not be entitled to produce additional evidence, whether oral or

                                    6
documentary, in the appellate court. It then proceeds to lay down
two classes of cases where the appellate court may allow additional
evidence to be produced. One class is where the Court appealed from
has refused to admit evidence which ought to have been admitted.
The other class is where the appellate court requires such additional
evidence for itself-either to enable it to pronounce judgment or for
any other substantial cause. The second class of the rule requires
that when additional evidence is allowed to be produced by an
appellate court the court shall record the reason for its admission. It
was further held that the appellate court has the power to allow
additional evidence not only if it requires such evidence "to enable it
to pronounce judgment" but also for "'any other substantial cause."
There may well be cases where even though the court finds that it is
able to pronounce judgment on the state of the record as it is, and
so, it cannot strictly say that it requires additional evidence "'to
enable it to pronounce judgment," it still considers that in the
interest of justice something which remains obscure should be filled
up so that it can pronounce its judgment in a more satisfactory
manner. Such a case will be one for allowing additional evidence "for
any other substantial cause" under R.27 (1) (b) of the Code.
10.          Another Constitution Bench of the apex Court in the
case of Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Lala Pancham
and others, AIR 1965 SC 1008 held that under Rule 27, the High
Court has the power to allow a document to be produced and a
witness to be examined. But the requirement of the High Court must
be limited to those cases where it found it necessary to obtain such
evidence for enabling it to pronounce judgment. The provision does
not entitle the High Court to let in fresh evidence at the appellate

                                    7
stage where even without such evidence it can pronounce judgment
in a case. It does not entitle the appellate court to let in fresh
evidence only for the purpose of pronouncing judgment in a
particular way. In other words, it is only for removing a lacuna in the
evidence that the appellate court is empowered to admit additional
evidence. The power under clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 27
cannot be exercised for adding to the evidence already on record
except upon one of the ground specified in the provision. If the
documents on record are relevant on the issue, the court could well
proceed to consider them and decide the issue. It further held that
the appellate cannot order a fresh trial. Such a course is not
permissible under Order 41, Rule 27 C.P.C., when it has not
proceeded under Order 41 Rule 25 or remanded the case under
Order 41 Rule 23.
11.         In N.Kamalam (dead) (supra), the apex Court held that
the provisions of Order 41 Rule 27 have not been engrafted in the
Code so as to patch up the weak points in the case and to fill up the
omission in the court of appeal-it does not authorize any lacunae or
gaps in evidence to be filled up.
12.         Reverting to the facts of the case and keeping in view the
enunciation of law laid down by the apex Court in the decisions cited
supra, this Court finds that three witnesses had been examined on
behalf of defendants 1 and 2. The gift deed no.443 of 1982 was not
proved. There is no material on record that gift deed no.444 of 1982
was handed over to the counsel for the defendants. Attributing
misconduct on the part of the counsel per se is not a ground to
admit the additional evidence. Four years after filing of the appeal,

                                     8
an application for additional evidence was filed. The provisions
contained in Order 41 Rule 27 C.P.C. are not intended to patch up
lacuna. The substantial questions of law are accordingly.
13.          K.V.Lakshman (supra) and Sankar Pradhan (supra) are
distinguishable on facts. In K.V.Lakshman (supra), an application for
additional evidence was filed. The same was not opposed by the
respondents. Since the application contained necessary averment as
to why additional evidence was necessary to decide real controversy
involved in appeal, the apex Court allowed the same. In Sankar
Pradhan (supra), this Court placed reliance on the oft quoted
decision of the Privy Council in the case of Persotim Thakur v. Lal
Mohar Thakur and others, AIR 1931 P.C.143 and held that the
legitimate occasion for the exercise of this discretion is not whenever
before the appeal is heard a party applies to adduce fresh evidence,
but “when on examining the evidence as it stands some inherent
lacuna or defect becomes apparent”.
14.          A priori, the appeal fails and is dismissed. No costs.
                                              ..…………...………………..
                                                   Dr.A.K.Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 30th March,2018/CRB

9

