  *       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                 Crl. Appeal No.661/2014
                               Judgment reserved on : 8th November, 2016
                                      Date of decision : 15th November, 2016
 PRAVEEN                                                       ..... Appellant
                          Through:    Mr. K. Singhal, Adv.
                               versus
 STATE                                                         ..... Respondent
                          Through:    Ms. Aasha Tiwari, Addl.P.P. for the State
  CORAM:
 HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
 HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ANU MALHOTRA
                                 JUDGMENT
 ANU MALHOTRA, J.
 1.       This judgment shall dispose of an appeal instituted on 27.05.2014 by
 the appellant/convict Praveen whereby he has assailed the impugned
 judgment dated 25.04.2014 of the then learned ASJ-04 North District,
 Rohini Courts, whereby the appellant was convicted for the commission of
 an offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code
 (hereinafter referred to as “IPC”), 1860, in relation to the allegations
 levelled against him as averred in FIR No. 114/12, Police Station (P.S.)
 Alipur. Vide the consequential order on sentence dated 29.04.2014, also
 assailed hereby, the appellant was sentenced to life imprisonment along with
 fine of Rs. 2000/- for the commission of the offence punishable under
 Section 302 IPC and in default of payment of that fine to undergo simple
    Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                        Page 1 of 21

imprisonment for two months with directions that the benefit of Section 428
of the Cr.P.C. 1973 would be given to the appellant. The proceedings of the
date 29.04.2014 before the learned trial Court indicate that the fine of Rs.
2000/- has been deposited.
2.       Notice of the appeal was issued to the State. The trial court record
was requisitioned and has been received and perused. Arguments were
addressed by Mr.K.Singhal, learned counsel for the appellant and by the
learned Additional Public Prosecutor Ms. Aashaa Tiwari for the State.
                 CONTENTION OF THE APPELLANT
3.       On behalf of the appellant it was contended that the charge of
allegations framed against the appellant on 18.10.2012 to the effect that on
08.04.2012 at about 3:25 p.m.at the Soni Fruit Juice Corner at Village Palla,
Delhi-110056 within the jurisdiction of P.S. Alipur he had committed the
murder of Saleem (since deceased) by inflicting injuries on his head with a
Pharsa and had committed an offence punishable under Section 302 IPC,
had not even been remotely established through the entire evidence led by
the State. It was further contended on behalf of the appellant that the
testimonies of the alleged eye-witnesses PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4 were
concocted and that they could not be believed in as much as the presence of
PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4 at the spot was not established. Inter alia, it was
contended on behalf of the appellant that though it had been alleged by the
State that the recovery of the weapon of offence i.e. Pharsa Ex.P-1, which
was blood stained was effected from the appellant from his house pursuant
to the disclosure statement Ex.PW-1/K made by the appellant, the
testimonies of PW-13 and PW-14 and the complainant do not establish the
   Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                   Page 2 of 21

same. It was further submitted on behalf of the appellant that even if it be
remotely accepted that the accused i.e. the appellant/convict had inflicted
the Pharsa blows on the person of the deceased, he did so on provocation
and      that the act committed         by the accused/(i.e. the appellant
herein)convict/appellant was not a pre-meditated assault on Saleem and that
the ingredients of the alleged commission of the offence punishable under
Section 302 IPC, 1860 cannot be held to have been substantiated.
4.       It was thus submitted on behalf of the appellant/convict that the
allegations levelled against the accused/i.e. the appellant of having murdered
the deceased Saleem with intent or knowledge that his act of inflicting the
Pharsa blows on the person of Saleem was so imminently dangerous that it
would in all probability have caused his death or would have caused such
bodily injuries as were likely to cause death and for commission of which he
had no excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such injuries had not
been established.
                       CONTENTIONS OF THE STATE
5.       On behalf of the State, reliance was placed on the prosecution version
set forth charge-sheet under Section 173 of the Cr.P.C., 1973 that on receipt
of DD No. 26A on 08.04.2012 lodged at 3:30 PM at P.S. Alipur to the effect
that at the Palla Gaon bus stand, a man had been cut with a Pharsa and on
the registration of the said DD entry with the PCR, ASI Rishi
Pal was telephonically informed about the same who went to the spot
alongwith Ct. Yadram No. 2994 OD whereafter on receipt of this
information, Inspector Sunil Kumar Sharma, the Investigating Officer (IO)
of the case reached the Soni Fruit Juice Corner main bus stand Village Palla
alongwith HC. Ajay No. 372 OD and Ct. Dalraj No. 2634/ OD in a govt.
vehicle bearing No. DL-IC-J-5663 and reached the spot at about 3:30 PM
   Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                      Page 3 of 21

where they met ASI Rishi Pal and Ct. Yadram and that at the Soni Fruit
Juice Corner main bus stand there was lot of blood scattered and the injured
Saleem S/o Shaheed was learnt to have already gone to SRHC hospital and
thus Inspector Sunil Kumar Sharma left Ct. Yadram at spot for the
protection of the same and the IO along with his accompanying staff
reached the SRHC hospital where the injured was undergoing a minor
operation and at about 5:30 PM the injured expired during the course of
treatment as indicated in the MLC 579/2012 of Saleem S/o Shaheed r/o
village Palla, Alipur, Delhi which was obtained from the doctor.
6.       As per the prosecution version set forth in the chargesheet Shamshad
@ Soni met the IO and gave his statement to the effect that he along with his
family members used to reside at Akbarpur Mazra colony, Village Palla,
Delhi-110056 and that he was running a juice shop with his elder brother
Saleem and that the appellant/convict Praveen S/o of Ishwar aged 28 years
used to live with his family members in front of their shop and that the
appellant did not do any work and used to show his „dadagiri’ and that he
often came to their shop to drink juice but did not make the payment and
whenever the complainant and deceased asked for their money, he used to
threaten them with dire consequences and would often throw stones from his
house towards the shop and that they had tried to pursuade the accused to
resist from the same several times but he did not agree.
7.       As per the averments made in the statement Ex.PW-1/A of the
brother of the deceased Sh. Shamshad @ Soni which forms the part of the
FIR on that day i.e. 08.04.2012 at about 3:15 PM the appellant Praveen
came to the shop and drank juice and the complainant‟s brother Saleem
asked him for the money and then he left stating that if they asked for
money, he would teach them a lesson and then Praveen (i.e. the appellant
   Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                      Page 4 of 21

herein) went to his house and brought out an iron Pharsa in his hand and
assaulted the brother of the complainant named Saleem on his head and on
his face several times and stated that he would teach him a lesson for
demanding money and that Saleem the brother of the complainant was
bleeding profusely and fell down there itself and after that the appellant fled
with his Pharsa towards his house and the complainant along with Vinay,
the brother of the accused i.e. the appellant herein, took Saleem to the Raja
Harishchandra Hospital where during treatment his brother expired due to
the injuries inflicted by the appellant/accused with his Pharsa.
8.       It has further been contended through the charge-sheet that on the
basis of the statement made by the brother of the injured i.e. Ex. PW-1/A,
the IO made his endorsement on Ex. PW-13/A and sent the same to the P.S.
Alipur for registration of the FIR whereupon FIR No. 114/2012 under
Section 302 IPC was registered and thereafter the IO prepared the site plan
and collected the wall plaster and blood stained earth control and also
continued to trace the accused and thereafter it was learnt by the IO that the
accused Praveen Kumar S/o Ishwar Singh had been arrested at the Delhi
Haryana Border at ‘0’ point and that his personal search had been
conducted and his disclosure statement was recorded and during the course
of investigation the clothes worn by the accused were also seized.
9.       As per the prosecution version , at the pointing out of the accused, the
recovery of the weapon of offence was effected from the house of the
accused from the iron almirah in the West corner of the room of the house
situated in the Eastern direction which was also seized by the IO and that
during the course of investigation the statements of the complainant and
other witnesses were recorded.
   Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                       Page 5 of 21

10.       It was further contended by the State that the death of the deceased
was caused due to Coma shock consequent upon multiple chop wounds and
that all the injuries were ante-mortem and fresh in duration and had been
caused by a heavy sharp edged weapon and that the injuries were sufficient
to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.
11.      It has further been submitted on behalf of the State that during the
course of the post-mortem examination conducted that the blood gauge was
lifted and the clothes of the deceased were also handed over to the IO.
Though the charge-sheet submitted initially it had been submitted that the
exhibits were sent to FSL, Rohini for examination and the subsequent
charge-sheet would be filed on the receipt of the FSL result. The FSL result
is indicated to have been submitted on 04.10.2012 before the learned trial
court as Ex.PW-13/H, through which result of analysis it is indicated that
blood was detected on Ex.PW-1, 2, 3,4, 6, 8a, 8b, 9, 10a and 10b. The said
FSL report dated 13.08.2012 which is admissible per se under Section 293
of the Cr.P.C. 1973 indicates that blood was detected on the clothes sealed
with the seal of „SKS‟ and on the T-shirt and Jeans and on the cloth piece
described as blood guage and on the shirt and on the lower and the report of
the biology division dated 13.08.2012 of the FSL, Rohini further indicates
that the T-shirt, the blood-stained gauge cloth piece, the shirt and the lower,
all were found to bear         „B‟ group blood stains on them as per the
examination conducted through serological techniques. On behalf of the
State it was thus submitted that the averments made through the charge-
sheet and the FSL result submitted, brought forth the commission of the
offence in question by the appellant/convict beyond a reasonable doubt
through the testimonies of prosecution witnesses examined.
   Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                     Page 6 of 21

12.     We have examined the material facts borne out through the Trial
Court record, which all bring forth as under:-
                        PREVIOUS CONDUCT
13.     PW-1 examined by the State Sh.Shamshad @ Soni brother of the
deceased has categorically testified to the effect that the appellant who was
unemployed used to reside in front of their juice shop named Sony Fruit
Juice Corner situated at the main bus stand at Village Palla Delhi-1100036
and used to threaten the respondents by „dadagiri.’ It is also brought forth
through the evidence that the appellant sometimes used to throw stones and
used to drink juice at their shop and whenever the complainant and his
brother demanded money the accused/(i.e. the appellant herein) used to
threaten them with their life. The testimony of this witness establishes the
version of the prosecution set forth in the FIR and charge-sheet that on
08.04.2012 the accused came to their shop for taking juice and after
drinking juice when his brother Saleem demanded money the accused i.e.
appellant herein has stated that he would teach his brother Saleem a lesson
and demanded money from him.
                PRESENCE OF DECEASED AT SPOT
14.     The unchallenged testimony of PW-3 Deepak Chauhan @ Sonu,
produced by the State, establishing that he had given his shop at the Main
Bus Stand, Village Palla, on rent to Saleem and Shamshad @ Soni who
were running a Juice shop there and also testified to the fact that Saleem had
been murdered in the year prior to his testimony recorded on 22.04.2013 and
that now his brother Shamshad @ Soni was running the said shop.
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                      Page 7 of 21

            EYEWITNESS ACCOUNT OF THE INCIDENT
15.     Shamshad @ Soni PW-1 has testified that the accused/appellant
after threatening his brother had gone to his house and brought a Pharsa and
inflicted three to four injuries on the head and face of his brother and then
ran to his house and from his house he ran away and that his brother was
bleeding profusely and he, PW-1 and Vinay the elder brother of the accused
removed the injured to the Raja Harish Chander Hospital and that his
brother Saleem expired at about 5:30 PM. PW-1 further identified his
signatures on Ex.PW-1/A, the statement recorded by the police and testified
to the effect that from the hospital alongwith the police he came to the
village Palla where the police prepared the site plan, collected the wall
plaster vide seizure memo Ex.PW-1/B, control wall plaster vide seizure
memo Ex.PW-1/C, seized hair vide seizure memo Ex.PW-1/D, earth
control vide Ex.PW-1/E and blood was lifted with the help of cotton vide
Ex.PW-1/F and so was the blood stained floor piece vide Ex.PW-1/G all of
which seizure memos bore his signatures at point A thereon and testified to
the effect that all these exhibits at that time were sealed with the seal of
„SKS‟.
16.     Inter alia, the complainant Sh. Shamshad @ Soni brother of the
deceased identified the accused/ i.e. the appellant herein, Praveen, who was
apprehended at the Palla zero point and was arrested vide memo Ex. PW-
1/H and his personal search was conducted vide memo Ex.PW-1/J and that
the accused/ i.e the appellant herein made a disclosure statement Ex.PW-
1/K which bore his signatures and that the accused voluntarily led the police
party in the presence of PW-1 to his house and got recovered the blood
stained iron pharsa from underneath an iron almirah and the sketch of the
pharsa was prepared and he further testified to the same having been seized
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                     Page 8 of 21

and having been put into a pullanda and sealed with the seal of „SKS‟ and
seized vide a seizure memo Ex.PW-1/M which bore his signatures. PW-1
further testified to the site plan of the place of recovery having been made
and testified to the clothes of the accused/i.e. the appellant herein Praveen
Kumar consisting of blood stained T-shirt and Pant having been taken into
possession after putting them in the pullanda vide seizure memo Ex.PW-
1/M1 which bore his signature and stated that the accused/i.e. appellant
herein pointed out to the place of the incident i.e. the juice shop vide memo
Ex.PW-1/M2. Inter alia, PW-1 testified to having joined the proceedings
and testified to having identified the dead body of his brother vide
identification statement Ex.PW-1/N which bore his signature and testified
that the dead body was sent for post-mortem was being handed over vide
receipt Ex.PW-1/O which bore his signatures. This witness during further
examination identified the pharsa Ex.P-1 and also identified the bunch of
hair and blood gauze piece, the plastic dibbi containing cemented material
i.e brown stains , a plastic container containing cemented material i.e. earth
control, a plastic container containing cemented material having brown
stains i.e. plaster of wall, a plastic container containing plaster cemented
material i.e. control wall plaster, and a parcel sealed with the seal of FSL
which was produced and the same was opened and from which one Jeans
and a T-shirt were taken out with blood stains which the witness identified
as being that the accused/(i.e. the appellant herein) and the Shirt and lower
with blood stains as being the clothes of deceased and all those articles were
exhibited as Ex.P2 to Ex.P9 respectively.
17.      The defence could not dislodge the testimony of this witness PW-1
through cross-examination in relation to his presence at the hospital. Inter
alia, the witness had testified to the effect that though they had not reported
   Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                      Page 9 of 21

the matter to the police when the accused, i.e., the appellant, used to mete
out threats to them or when he used to throw stones at their shop, had
explained that they had not done so being the neighbours but had made a
complaint to the mother of the accused previously who had given the
accused/the appellant herein, 2-3 slaps, but that the complainant and his
brother had not complained about the accused/appellant to the
police/neighbours regarding drinking of juice by accused/ the appellant, at
the shop without making payment of money and stated that they made the
complaint to the parents and stated that they had not made any complaint to
the police regarding his conduct prior to the incident. This witness also
categorically denied that the accused had not made any disclosure statement.
The witness also categorically denied that he had testified falsely because
the deceased was his brother and denied that he had got the FIR lodged only
on a mere suspicion and due to frequent quarrels with the accused/i.e. the
appellant herein.
ARREST OF APPELANT & RECOVERY OF WEAPON OF OFFENCE
AND IDENTIFICATION THEREOF
18.     The evidence of PW-1 Shamshad@ Soni finds corroboration in the
testimonies of PW-2 Sh. Lokesh Kumar and PW-4 Sh. Jai Karan. These
two public witnesses have also testified that they had come to the Village
Palla near the Sonu/Soni Fruit Juice Corner when the accused, the appellant
Praveen, came at about 3/3:30 PM to the juice shop and quarrelled with the
shop owner and went to his house and came back with a pharsa and gave
several blows to the Soni Juicewala i.e. the brother of PW-1 and fled away
from the spot. Both PW-2 and PW-4 identified the daav/pharsa in parcel
no. 1 i.e. Ex.P-1 sealed with the court seal as being the same with which the
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                     Page 10 of 21

brother of the complainant has been assaulted and had thereafter succumbed
to his injuries.
19.     Though the testimonies of PW-2 Sh. Lokesh Kumar and PW-4 Sh.
Jai Karan were assailed on behalf of accused/appellant submitting that
they were allegedly chance witnesses who came to the spot on the day of
question i.e. 08.04.2012 as they came to attend a Tehravi ritual, there is no
reason to disbelieve them.       The testimony of Lokesh Kumar/PW-2 is
categorical to the effect that the accused/i.e. the appellant herein came to the
juice shop and started quarrelling with the shopkeeper and thereafter
returned with a pharsa and gave three blows to the juice shopkeeper and
further stated that he gave several blows on the right side of his face, second
on the upper portion of the neck and third on the lower portion of the neck.
The witness PW-2 had further stated that the accused/the appellant after
giving the blows had tried to run away but he had been caught by his parents
who started beating him but he managed to run away. PW-2 further stated
that he had seen the entire incident from a distance of 15 meters and by the
time he reached there the accused had escaped and that he later learnt that
the injured had expired. This witness on further examination identified the
pharsa used by the accused and also testified to the photographs Ex.PW-
2/P1 to PW-2/P9 being of the place of the incident.
20.      It was further contended on behalf of the State that the testimony of
PW-13 Inspector Sunil Kumar, the Investigating Officer of the Case, and
PW-14 SI Mukesh Kumar, who was part of the investigation team,
corroborated the prosecution version in relation to investigation conducted
in toto which brings forth the arrest of the accused at the ‘0’ Point at the
Delhi-Haryana Border within the jurisdiction of Police Station Alipur at the
pointing out of the complainant Shamshad on 8.4.2012, the date of the
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                       Page 11 of 21

incident itself, which is also the date of demise of the injured/deceased at
about 5:30 p.m. after assault on him at about 3:25 p.m. and whose testimony
brings forth the recovery of the weapon of offence, the Pharsa, Ex.P-1, from
underneath the almirah from his house pursuant to the disclosure statement
made by the accused, the appellant herein, Ex.PW-1/K and to the seizure of
the clothes of the accused, the appellant herein, bearing blood and the
weapon of the offence, the Pharsa, being also blood stained and who also
testified to the seizure of the blood stained clothes of the deceased removed
by the doctor at the time of examination of the deceased vide seizure memo
Ex.PW-13/C.
21.     We find that the testimony of SI Mukesh Kumar corroborates the
testimony of the Investigating Officer, who, during cross-examination also
categorically denied that the accused/the appellant herein, was made to sign
blank papers and denied that the accused/ the appellant herein, had not made
any disclosure statement and denied that he had given false evidence against
him and that he corroborated the prosecution version set forth in the charge
sheet.
22.     We also note that the appellant herein, under Section 313 Cr.P.C. ,
1973 has nowhere categorically denied the offence alleged against him and
rather the statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., 1973 of the accused, the
appellant herein, dated 28.03.2014 merely either states that the accused/i.e.
the appellant herein is not aware of the offence alleged or that the same is a
matter of record and the accused, the appellant herein, also claims that he
has been falsely implicated in the instant case by the brother of the deceased
and that the witnesses examined were all interested witnesses. No evidence
in defence was sought to be led by the accused, the appellant herein.
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                      Page 12 of 21

23.     On being cross-examined on behalf of the accused, the witness
reiterated that the accused had given the pharsa blows to the brother of the
deceased and he further categorically denied that he made no call to the
police or that he was not present at the spot and denied that he had thus he
had not gone to the hospital.
24.     This witness has also testified during cross-examination that he had
called the PCR at about 3: 30 p.m. but the PCR did not reach within five to
seven minutes and then he called the local police and that the PCR reached
after the local police came to the spot.
25.     The witness PW-4 Jai Karan, who was also produced as an eye-
witness, identified the accused/(i.e. the appellant herein), as being present
who had come to the juice shop and quarrelled with the Soni Juice Wala
and thereafter had gone to his house and brought a daav/Pharsa and gave
several blows to the Soni Juice Wala and fled away from the spot and
stated that the injured Soni Juice Wala was shifted to the hospital by his
brother and other persons and testified to having learnt thereafter of the
demise of the injured. He further stated that he was calling the injured as
Sony as he was running a Juice Corner and affirmed in reply to a question
put by the State that the name of the deceased was Saleem s/o Shaheed
Khan and Shamshad @ Soni was the brother of the deceased Saleem S/o
Shaheed Khan. This witness identified the iron Pharsa Ex.P-1 as being the
weapon of offence in question.
26.     On being cross-examined by the counsel for the accused (the
appellant herein), the witness denied that he was not present at the spot or
that he had not accompanied the injured or that he had not informed the
police or that he had identified the accused, the appellant herein, falsely.
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                      Page 13 of 21

UNCHALLENGED EVIDENCE OF STEPS IN INVESTIGATION
27.     The testimony of PW5 Ct. Kamlesh Yadav, who testified to the
effect that on 8.4.2012 he was posted at CPCR-Hqrs at channel No.110, and
that on receipt of a call in respect of an incident, i.e, Ek Aadmi Ko Pharsa
Se Kaat Diya, at Main Bus Stand, Palla Village, he had filled the PCR form
and dispatched the form, remained unchallenged on behalf of the accused/
the appellant herein;
         Likewise, the testimony of PW6 HC Jagpal Singh who testified
            to his having registered the FIR on receipt of the rukka brought by
            ASI Rishipal sent by Inspector Sunil Kumar, SHO, PS Alipur Ex.
            PW6/A and to the certification under Section 65-B of the Indian
            Evidence Act , 1872 Ex.PW-6/B and his endorsement on the
            rukka;
         the testimony of PW7 ASI Rishipal of his having reached the
            Palla Village Bus Stand on receipt of DD No.26-A Ex.PW-7/A
            along with Ct. Yaad Ram and who testified to having learnt that
            the injured had been shifted to the hospital and his having
            accompanied Inspector Sunil Kumar Sharma to the SRHC
            Hospital and the rukka had been handed over by the Investigating
            Officer to him and reached the Police Station for registration of the
            FIR and of his having shifted the dead body of Saleem with Ct.
            Yaad Ram to the Mortuary;
         the testimony of PW8 SI Mahesh Kumar, who testified to his
            having taken rough notes and measurements at the spot where the
            Pharsa was recovered and to his having prepared the scaled site
            plan Ex.PW-8/A;
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                       Page 14 of 21

         the testimony of PW9 HC Desh Pal Singh, who testified to his
            having visited at the MHC(M), PS Alipur and             deposited the
            exhibits in the Malkhana sent by the Inspector Sunil Kumar on the
            said date and to his having made entries in the Register No.19,
            copies of which were Ex.PW-9/A (Colly) and to his having sent
            the exhibits to FSL, Rohini vide RC no.59/21/12 and to his having
            recorded DD No.26-A Ex.PW-7/A;
         Likewise, the testimony of PW-11 Ct. Satyender- who testified to
            his having collected the exhibits from the MHC(M) vide RC
            No.59/21/12 and deposited the same at FSL Rohini and having
            returned the same to the MHC(M) on the date 20.4.2012 and to the
            effect that the exhibits not having tampered with as long as they
            remained in his custody,-- have all not been challenged by way of
            cross-examination.
MEDICAL EVIDENCE OF INJURIES SUSTAINED BY                                    THE
DECEASED
28.     The unchallenged testimony of PW12-Dr.Manjul, the then Medical
Officer at SRHC Hospital on 8.4.2012 who testified to her having examined
the patient Saleem with alleged history of physical assault at 4 p.m. and
testified to having prepared the MLC Ex.PW-12/A bearing his signatures at
points A,B and C, which            MLC Ex.PW-12/A indicates the following
injuries:-
            i) “Superficial incised wound on anterior thoracic wall
                 approximately 10x 0.5 cm;
            ii) CLW approx 15cm x 4cm x 4 cm extending from right facio
                 facio-maxillary region, involving right eye, medial orbital wall
                 up to fronto parietal region with fracture of skull bones,
                 exposing brain and sinuses;
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                        Page 15 of 21

            iii) CLW of approx 12 cm x 4 cm extending from left facio
                 maxillary region, with fracture of skull exposing brain
                 extending upto franto parietal region and;
            iv) CLW of approx 10 cm x 2 cm x 2cm over occipital region trans-
                 versely exposing brain parenchyma and fracture of skull”,--
                 on the person of the deceased.
         which report also indicates that the injuries were dangerous caused
            by a sharp and heavy object.
                                    MEDICAL EVIDENCE
29.     The testimony of          PW-10 - Dr. Bhim Singh, M.D. Forensic
Medicine, In-charge Mortuary BJRM Hospital, whose testimony remained
unchallenged- who testified to his having conducted the post-mortem on the
body of the deceased, aged 32 years, male, sent by Inspector Sunil Kumar
with alleged history of assault on 8.4.2012 and expired at 5:35 p.m. and who
testified that on the examination conducted, he found the following external
injuries:-
                      “Chop wound 19 cm X 1cm x 4 cm extending from
                        right facio-maxillary region, involving right eye,
                        medial orbital wall up to franto parietal region
                        with fracture of skull bones, exposing brain and
                        sinuses;
                      Chop wound 18 cm X 2 Cm x 4 cm extending from
                        left facio maxillary region, extending upto fronto
                        parietal region with fracture of skull exposing
                        brain;
                      Chop wound 18 cm x 2 cm x bone deep, left side of
                        the face extending up to parieto-temporal region
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                        Page 16 of 21

                        exposing brain;
                      Chop wound 12 cm x 2 cm into bone deep left
                        occipital region trans-versely placed exposing
                        brain;
                      Chop wound 11 cm x 2 cm x bone deep sitated 2
                        cm. Below injury No.4 ;
                      Incised wound 10cm x 0.5cm x 0.5 cm right side of
                        chest obliquely placed and;
                      On internal examination HEAD- shows cut below.
                        All the injuries with depressed communicating
                        fractures on skull with cut injuries in the brain
                        matter.
                      All the other organs were pale. Stomach was
                        empty”,
and who testified that in his opinion the death was due to coma and shock
consequent upon multiple chop wounds; and that all injuries were caused by
a heavy sharp edged weapon, and that the injuries were sufficient to cause
death and time since death about 18 hours and who testified to his having
handed over the dead body along with the blood sample in gauge piece in
sealed condition to the police and to the postmortem report Ex.PW-10/A
bearing his signatures and to his having also given his opinion Ex.PW-10/B,
on examining the iron Pharsa with blood stains to the effect that the injuries
mentioned in post-mortem report No.295/12 Ex.10/A being possible by the
said examined weapon, identified as being Ex.P-1, corroborate and establish
the prosecution version brought forth also through the MLC Ex.PW-12/A in
relation to assault on the deceased by the appellant with the Pharsa Ex.P1
which resulted into injuries leading to the death of the deceased.
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                       Page 17 of 21

                             FORENSIC EVIDENCE
30.     Ex.PW-13/J (result of biological division), the FSL result which is per
se admissible in evidence in terms of Section 293 Cr.P.C. 1973 establishes
that the exhibits sent to the FSL i.e. „8a‟ and „8b‟ i.e. T-Shirt and Jeans Pant
respectively worn by the appellant and Shirt i.e. exhibits „10a‟ and lower
„10b‟ of the deceased, all were found to bear blood of „B‟ group and
Ex.PW-13/H dated 13.08.2012 also categorically indicate that blood was
detected on PW-1, 2, 3,4, 6, 8a, 8b, 9, 10a and 10b, and all establish the
factum of blood of the same group as of the deceased found on the clothes
of the appellant. The testimony of PW-13 Inspector Sunil Kumar, the IO of
the case also categorically corroborates the identity of the exhibits collected
during investigation and sent to the FSL for examination and the FSL result
also corroborates the factum of guilt of the appellant.
                             CONCLUSION
31.      On a consideration of the entire available record and the evidence led
by the prosecution, the averments made in the charge sheet, the FSL report
on the record and the contentions made on behalf of the either side qua the
appeal and taking into account the impugned judgment of the learned Trial
Court, it is brought forth that the entire available record establishes the guilt
of the accused/ the appellant herein, Parveen in relation to the commission
of the murder of the deceased Saleem on the date 8.4.2012 by his having
assaulted the said Saleem with a Pharsa three/four times on his face and on
his head which resulted into injuries as detailed in the Postmortem report
Ex.PW-10/A already detailed herein above, with the said weapon of offence
ExP-1, having known, that the weapon of offence utilized for infliction of
the injuries was sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause the death
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                       Page 18 of 21

of the deceased         detailed in the post-mortem report, coupled with the
presence of the same category of ‘B’ blood grouping on the clothes of the
accused/ the appellant herein, and the clothes of the deceased and on the
blood stained pharsa, coupled with the factum that despite the submission
made on behalf of the accused/the appellant herein, that even if it be
believed that injuries caused on the injured since deceased were inflicted by
the accused, the same were not premeditated and were unintentional and
were on provocation due to quarrel between the parties, there is no
explanation whatsoever by the accused/the appellant herein, in relation to
the number of dangerous injuries, i.e., six dangerous injuries inflicted on
vital parts of the body of the injured/deceased by the accused/ the appellant
herein, that is, on the right facio maxillary region, involving right eye,
medial orbital wall upto fronto parietal region with fracture of skull bones
exposing brain and sinuses; injuries of left facio maxillary region, extending
upto fronto parietal region with fracture of skull exposing brain, chop
wound, left side of the face extending up to parieto-temporal region
exposing brain, chop wound bone deep left occipital region transversely
placed exposing brain; chop wound into bone deep situated below injury
No.4 , incised wound right side of chest obliquely placed, with injuries on
the head with depressed communicating fractures on skull with cut injuries
in the brain, which all bring forth that the infliction of the injuries on the
vital parts of the face and head and also the chest of the injured by the
accused, the appellant herein, were deliberate and intentional with intention
to cause such injuries.         The appellant also had clear knowledge that
infliction of such injury with a daav/Pharsa Ex.P-1, recovered from the
house of the accused/(i.e. the appellant herein) pursuant to his disclosure
statement, were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death of
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                     Page 19 of 21

the deceased.
32.     Thus, it is apparent that there is no infirmity whatsoever in the
impugned judgment dated 25.4.2014 of the learned ASJ-04 (North) in
relation to the accused/i.e. the appellant herein having been held guilty qua
charge of allegations framed against the accused/ the appellant herein,
Parveen Singh, in relation to the allegations qua FIR No.114/2012 registered
at Police Station Alipur.
33.     In the facts and circumstances of the case, the conviction of the
accused, the appellant herein, thus for the commission of the murder of the
deceased Saleem vide the impugned judgment dated 25.4.2014 in relation
to FIR No.114/2012 has to be upheld and in the facts and circumstances of
the case in terms of Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860, there is no
ground for variation of the impugned order on sentence dated 29.4.2014 of
the learned ASJ-04 (North) whereby the appellant was sentenced to
imprisonment for life along with a fine of Rs.2000/- for the commission of
the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and in
default to undergo simple imprisonment for two months qua which the fine
is indicated to have already been deposited, with the benefit of Section 428
CrPC, 1973 being given to the convict, the appellant herein. The impugned
order on sentence dated 29.4.2014 is also in the circumstances of the case,
thus, sustained.
                        RESULT
34.     The appeal against the judgment dated 25.4.2014 and the impugned
order on sentence dated 29.4.2014 in relation to FIR No.114/2012 registered
at Police Station Alipur for the commission of the offence punishable under
Section 302 IPC is hereby dismissed and the appellant is directed to undergo
the sentence imposed vide the order on sentence 29.4.2014 by the learned
  Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                    Page 20 of 21

      ASJ-04 (North) with the period of detention already undergone by the
      appellant being set off under Section 428 of Cr.P.C, 1973.
      35.     A copy of this judgment be supplied to the appellant and be also sent
      to the Jail Superintendent (Tihar) for compliance. The Trial Court Record
      be returned forthwith.
                                                            ANU MALHOTRA, J
                                                               GITA MITTAL, J
NOVEMBER 15 , 2016
mr/sv
        Crl. App.No. 661/2014                                    Page 21 of 21


