                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                        Case No:        Arb.A. 5/2013
                    Sunil Kumar Sethia and others             ……      Appellants
                                       -Versus-
                    Devendra Kumar Sethia and others          ..... Respondents
                                    :: BEFORE ::
            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
                For the Appellants             :      Mr. DK Mishra
                                                              Sr. Advocate
                                                      Mr. OP Bhati
                                                              Advocate
                For the Respondents            :      Mr. GN Sahewalla
                                                              Sr. Advocate
                                                      Mr. B Senapati
                                                              Advocate
                Date of Hearing                :      28.03.2017
                Date of delivery of
                Judgment and Order             :      09.06.2017
                     JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
        Heard Mr. DK Mishra, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. OP Bhati, the
learned counsel for the appellants and Mr. GN Sahewalla, learned senior counsel
assisted by Mr. B Senapati, learned counsel for the respondents.
                                                                          Page 1 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

2.      This is an appeal filed under Section 37(1)(b) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 challenging the judgment dated 30.11.2012 passed in
Misc. (ARB) Case No. 501/2003 by the learned Additional District Judge No. 1,
Kamrup at Guwahati rejecting the application filed under Section 34 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’) by the
present appellants.
3.      The appellants are the respondents/ counter claimants in Arbitration Case
No. 2/2002 before the arbitral Tribunal of the sole arbitrator, Justice R.K.
Manisana Singh, retired Chief Justice of the Gauhati High Court and the present
respondents are the claimants in the said arbitration proceeding.
4.      The facts of the case in brief are that the present parties to the appeal
are partners of the partnership firm, namely, M/s Rajkamal & Co. having its
registration under the provisions of the Indian Partnership Acts, 1932. The said
firm carrying on business was reconstituted w.e.f. 01.01.1996 and the partners
are governed by the terms stipulated in the partnership deed dated 01.01.1996.
During the subsistence of the said partnership business, the respondents No. 1
and 3 raised the dispute as to the management of the business of Hotel
Rajmahal, a unit of the firm.
5.      In order to resolve such dispute, 10 (ten) partners out of 17 numbers of
total partners issued notice on 23.05.2001 to the other partners to propose
names of Arbitrators by invoking Clause 11 of the partnership deed which is
reproduced hereinbelow:-
               “11) ARBITRATION:
                                                                         Page 2 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

                 That all the disputes relating to this Partnership business between the
              partners or their representatives, if cannot be settled mutually, the same
              shall be referred to Arbitration and entire proceeding thereof shall be
              governed as per provisions of the Arbitration Act.”
6.       As alleged, there was no response from the rest of the partners
(appellants herein) in appointing their respective arbitrators following which
Arbitration petition No. 22/2001 was filed by the respondents herein before this
court under Section 11(5) of the Act and vide order dated 28.02.2002 passed by
the then Chief Justice of this Court, Justice R.K. Manisana Singh, retired Chief
Justice was appointed as the sole Arbitrator to enter into the disputed claims and
counter claims. While passing the said order it was observed that the dispute was
a family dispute arising out of partnership between the family members.
7.       It is pertinent to mention here that Shri Kamal Chand Jain (Sethia), the
father of the appellants/ counter claimants No. 1 and 2 and the ‘Karta’ of the
appellant/ counter claimant No. 3, Sri Badarmal Sethia, the father of claimant/
respondent No. 1 and the ‘Karta’ of the claimant/ respondent No. 4 and Sri
Narendra Kumar Sethia, the claimant/ respondent No. 3 are three brothers.
Dispute arose amongst the said three brothers. The said claimant/ respondent
No. 3 (Narendra Kumar Sethia) and the ‘Karta’ of the claimant/ respondent No. 4
(Badarmal Sethia) wrote two letters dated 22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999
respectively referring the family dispute amongst the said three brothers in order
to fix their separate shares in the assets of the family properties and for separate
allotment of the shares to the Arbitrators, namely, Sri Jethmal Sethia, Sri
Parasmal Lunawat and Sri Dharamchand Betala. The said two letters reflect the
dispute amongst the said three brothers. It is also apparent from the letters
                                                                              Page 3 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

dated 22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999 that before initiation of the arbitral
proceeding, certain pre-conditions were imposed by the said writers of the
letters. However, no such documentary piece of evidence is on record to show
participation in the said arbitral proceeding or consent of Sri Kamal Chand Jain.
8.      The respondents filed their joint claim petition before the learned sole
Arbitrator for the following reliefs:-
             “(i)  To appoint an independent Chartered Accountant to scrutinise, verify
                   and render an independent account relating to Rajkamal and Co. from
                   1.4.98 to till date and
             (ii)  To rectify the capital contributions of the claimant by suitably
                   correcting the accounts illegally debited as indicated in the petition
                   including the amount of Rs. 52,25,000/- debited from the account of
                   Narendra Kumar Sethia.
             (iii) To apportion the shares of profits after rendering of account by
                   Chartered Accountant.
             (iv)  To run the day to day functions of the hotel by working partners and
                   restrain others from creating any hindrance in their functioning.
             (v)   To pass appropriate order not to allow Sunil Kumar Sethia or any
                   other partners from running the liquor business from the Hotel
                   Premises”.
9.      In the claim petition, the respondents/ claimants alleged that the
appellants/ counter claimants started to indulge interfering in day to day affairs
and management in running the business of Hotel Rajmahal against the will /
desire of the respondents / claimants. On 27.04.1998, the appellant/ counter
claimant No. 2 wrote a letter to the Station Manager (Sahara India Airlines, City
Office, Guwahati) informing that the respondent/ claimant No. 1 is no longer
assigned with the day to day management of Hotel Rajmahal and in future all
hotel related matters would be conducted either by himself or the appellant/
                                                                               Page 4 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

counter claimant No. 1. Similarly, by way of another letter dated 28.04.1998, the
appellant/ counter claimant No. 2 asked the Finance Manager, Indian Airlines to
directly deal with him or with appellant/ counter claimant No. 1 for any matter
relating to hotel management. On 13.07.1998 and 12.08.1998, the appellants/
counter claimants No. 1 and 2 physically obstructed and interfered with the
claimants/ respondents No. 1 and 3 in the management of the Hotel Rajmahal
etc.
10.      It was alleged further that after removing the old Chartered Accountant, a
new Chartered Accountant was appointed who in collusion with the appellants/
counter claimants had been submitting returns before the Income Tax Authorities
causing wrong entries decreasing capital of the claimants/ respondents. The
appellants/ counter claimants have taken recourse to rampant manipulation and
falsification of accounts to misappropriate and to convert the properties of the
firm into individual properties etc. Accordingly, the claimants/ respondents
prayed for the reliefs as aforesaid. It is pertinent to mention here that nowhere
in the claim petition there is any whisper with regard to signing of cheques and
other financial documents jointly by the working partners prior to the alleged
dispute or it was the practice followed as such by the working partners.
11.      The appellants/ counter claimants filed statement of defence/ counter
claim denying the allegations and specifically pleaded that the claimants/
respondents No. 1 and 3 never entered into the management of Hotel Rajmahal
and as such the question of ouster does not arise at all. It is further pleaded that
the working partners named in the partnership deed looked after their own
business though included in the Deed. The fact of falsification of accounts and
                                                                          Page 5 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

submission of wrong income tax returns were also denied. The appellants/
counter claimants prayed for following reliefs:-
             “(A)  rejection of the claim of the claimants;
             (B)   a direction to the claimants to produce all the books of account and
                   other relevant documents in relation to M/s Rajmahal Travel ‘N’ Tours,
                   M/S Pragati Finance Co., a unit of the firm, M/S Pragati Finance Co.,
                   Guwahati, a proprietorship concern owned by Sri Narendra Kumar
                   Sethia, M/s R.K. Finance Co., Guwahati, M/S R.K. Finance Co., Surat,
                   M/S Pragatri Finance Co., Surat, M/S Naresh Auto Finance Co.,
                   Guwahati, M/S Naresh Auto Finance Co., Surat, M/S Naresh Motor
                   Finance Co., M/S Narendra Kumar Sethia & Sons, M/S Narendra
                   Kumar Sethia, M/S North East Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., M/S Manglam
                   Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., M/S Door Chester, M/S. Catering Med and M/S
                   Hotel Rajmahal (catering business carried on by the claimant No. 1 as
                   its proprietor), on production thereof and on proper scrutiny as to the
                   correction or otherwise, the profits of the same may kindly be
                   awarded proportionately to the opposite parties;
             (C)   an award directing the claimants and specifically the claimants No. 1
                   and 3 to close down the businesses carried on by them competing the
                   firm;
             (D)   an award directing the retirement of the claimants from the firm on
                   taking away their respective shares as determined by this Hon’ble
                   Tribunal for acting prejudicially to the interest of the firm;
             (E)   costs of the proceedings may be awarded to the opposite parties; and
             (F)   award any other appropriate relief or reliefs to the opposite parties to
                   which they are entitled under law and equity”.
12.     The appellants/ counter claimants after filing the statement of defence/
counter claim, filed an application under Section 16(2) of the Act questioning the
jurisdiction of the sole arbitrator to enter into reference of the dispute on the
ground that the dispute so referred had already been under the seisin of another
arbitral Tribunal comprising 3 (three) Arbitrators which was initiated by the
                                                                                  Page 6 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

respondents/ claimants. The said petition was duly contested by the
respondents/ claimants by filing the written objection. The learned sole Arbitrator
after hearing the parties vide order dated 22.12.2002 passed in Misc. Case No.
3/2002, dismissed the said petition under Section 16(2) of the Act.
13.     The respondents/ claimants along with their statement of claim, also filed
an application under Section 17 of the Act for the following interim reliefs:-
              “(i) allowing N.K. Sethia and D.K. Sethia to effectively participate in the
                    day to day activities and the affairs of the firm and directing all
                    working partners to jointly sign all vouchers, cheques, accounts,
                    expenditure accounts, booking account and all statutory returns and
                    documents to be filed by the firm before the concerned authority and
              (ii) directing the Opposite Parties to forthwith deposit all documents of
                    the firm in their possession such as cheque books, cash books,
                    ledgers, original documents pertaining to land of Hotel Rajmahal,
                    Municipal Tax Receipts and other valuable documents in the Head
                    Office of the firm, and/ or
              (iii) pass such further or other order(s) as your Honour may deem fit
                    proper in the facts and circumstances of the case.”
        The said petition was registered as Misc. Application No. 2/2002 in
Arbitration Case No. 2/2002.
14.     The appellants/ counter claimants filed their joint written objection
against the said petition under Section 17 of the Act. The claimant/ respondents
vide another petition prayed for striking of the relief No. (i) sought for in the said
petition under Section 17 of the Act. During the pendency of the said Misc.
Application No. 2/2002, the respondents/ claimants filed an application before
sole arbitral Tribunal for passing an interim award which was registered as Misc.
Application No. 1/2003. The prayer for the interim award is reproduced
hereinbelow:-
                                                                              Page 7 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

                 “(i)       Allowing N.K. Sethia and D.K. Sethia to effectively participate in
             the day to day activities and the affairs of the firm and directing all the
             working partners to jointly sign all vouchers, cheques, accounts, expenditure
             accounts booking account and all statutory returns and documents to be
             filed by the firm before the concerned authority, and/or pass such further or
             other order(s) as Your Honour may deem fit and proper in the facts and
             circumstances of the case.”
15.     In the said petition for passing interim award, it was pleaded that the
appellants/ counter claimants had ousted the working partners Narendra Kumar
Sethia (respondent No. 3) and Devendra Kumar Sethia (respondent No. 1) from
day to day management of the affairs of the firm though they are working
partners with Sunil Kumar Sethia (appellant No. 1).
16.     The appellants/ counter claimants filed their written objection against the
said application for interim award raising amongst other pleas, that the interim
award cannot be passed in absence of framing the necessary issues, production
of documents, other evidence, recording of statements on oath, cross
examination of the witnesses.
17.     The learned sole Arbitrator after hearing the parties, vide award dated
22.06.2003 in Misc. Application No. 1/2003 allowed the interim award to the
following extent which is reproduced hereinbelow:-
             “10.3. In the result, the application praying for interim award is allowed.
                      Accordingly, it is directed that –
             i.       Devendra Kumar Sethia (Claimant No. 1) and Narendra Kumar Sethia
                      (Claimant No. 3) be allowed to effectively participate in the day to day
                      activities and affairs of the firm M/S Rajkamal & Co.; AND
             ii.      All the three working partners, namely, Devendra Kumar (Claimant
                      No. 1), Narendra Kumar (Claimant No. 3) and Sunil Kumar
                      (Respondent No. 2) to jointly sign all vouchers, cheques, expenditure
                                                                                   Page 8 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

                  accounts booking account and all statutory returns and documents to
                  be filed by the firm before the concerned authority.”
18.     The present appellants/ counter claimants filed a petition under Section
34 of the Act before the learned Additional District Judge No. 1, Kamrup at
Guwahati both in respect of interim award dated 22.06.2003 passed in Misc.
Case No. 1/2003 and the order dated 22.12.2002 passed in Misc. Case No.
3/2002 (rejection of petition under Section 16(2) of the Act) both arising out of
Arbitration Case No. 2/2002. The said application was registered as Misc. (ARB)
Case No. 501/2003.
19.     The learned Additional District Judge No. 1, Kamrup at Guwahati vide
judgment dated 30.11.2012 dismissed the petition holding that the grounds
taken by the appellants/ counter claimants do not fulfil the requirements of sub-
section (2) of Section 34 of the Act. Being aggrieved, the appellants/ counter
claimants have preferred this appeal challenging the judgment dated 30.11.2012
passed by the learned Additional District Judge No. 1, Kamrup at Guwahati.
20.     Considering the submissions of the learned counsels appearing for the
parties to this appeal, this court accordingly at first takes up the order dated
22.12.2002 passed in Misc. Case No. 3/2002 by the learned sole Arbitrator with
regard to the point of jurisdiction of the Tribunal which was upheld by the
learned Additional District Judge No. 1, Kamrup at Guwahati.
     20.1.     Perused the petition under Section 16(2) of the Act filed by the
     appellants/ counter claimants. It is specifically pleaded that the learned
     Tribunal had no jurisdiction to arbitrate the dispute as raised by the
     respondents / claimants on the ground that the same dispute was raised by
                                                                           Page 9 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     the respondents/ claimants, prior to submission to the sole arbitral Tribunal.
     The present respondent No. 3 (claimant No. 3) and the ‘Karta’ of respondent
     No. 4 (claimant No. 4) for themselves and on behalf of other claimants/
     respondents referred the same family dispute to the arbitral Tribunal
     consisting of three arbitrators, namely, Sri Jethmal Sethia, Sri Parasmal
     Lunawat and Sri Dharamchand Betala vide appointment letters dated
     22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999. The Sethia Group emerged consisting of the
     family business similar to the business carried out by the constituent
     partners in the partnership deed dated 01.01.1996. Referring the familial
     relationship it was pleaded that Sri Badarmal Sethia, the ‘Karta’ of the
     respondent No. 4 and Sri Narendra Kumar Sethia, the respondent No. 3 were
     competent to refer the dispute terming the same as family disputes to the
     aforesaid arbitrators and the same arbitral proceeding having not terminated
     within the meaning of Section 32 of the Act, the learned Tribunal of the sole
     Arbitrator had no jurisdiction to enter into the reference.
     20.2.      The respondents/ claimants on their part through the written
     objection specifically denied the pleadings of the appellants/ counter
     claimants. Their specific case is that the dispute referred to the sole
     arbitrator evolves out of the partnership business which cannot be termed to
     be a family dispute. The learned sole Arbitrator on the basis of the said
     pleadings and other documents decided the point of jurisdiction against the
     appellants/ counter claimants.
     20.3       The learned sole Arbitrator while disposing of the petition held
     that under the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 though a partner is an agent of
                                                                       Page 10 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     the firm but, under Section 19 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932, no
     implied authority is granted to a partner for referring disputes to arbitration
     in the absence of any usage or custom of trade to the contrary. It was also
     held that under Section 7(3) of the Act, arbitration agreement must be in
     writing and Section 7(4) of the Act provides that the same would be
     sufficient if the writing is signed by the parties, exchange of letters etc. or an
     exchange of statement of claims and defence in which existence of the
     agreement is alleged by one party and not denied by the other. An
     arbitration award can be set aside under Section 34(2)(v) of the Act if the
     composition of the arbitral Tribunal or the arbitral proceeding was not in
     accordance with the agreement of the parties. The said section stipulates
     that there must be an agreement regarding composition of arbitral Tribunal
     and also procedure for appointment of Arbitrators and if there is no
     agreement, the appointment of arbitral Tribunal should not be in conflict
     with the provisions of the Part-I of the Act. Section 10 of the Act stipulates
     that the parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators provided
     such number shall not be an even number. Failing the determination of the
     number of the arbitrators, the arbitral Tribunal shall consist of a sole
     Arbitrator. Section 11(2) of the Act stipulates that the parties are free to
     agree on a procedure for appointment of an Arbitrator or Arbitrators. The
     learned sole Arbitrator bringing references of the aforesaid provisions, came
     to the conclusion that the existence of an appointment procedure agreed
     upon by the parties for appointment of Arbitrator or Arbitrators is essential.
                                                                           Page 11 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     20.4.      The learned sole Arbitrator referring the letters dated 22.11.1999
     and 29.11.1999 came to the finding that there was no uniformity in number
     of Arbitrators. Similarly, the notice dated 23.05.2001 issued by the
     respondents/ claimants herein consists of names of 10 (ten) arbitrators.
     Accordingly, it was held that there was no agreed procedure for appointment
     of arbitrator or arbitrators amongst the members of the family. It was also
     held that there was no mention of the partnership business in the letters
     dated 22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999 nor was there any mention of the names
     of all the partners. As such, the learned sole Arbitrator held that the parties
     failed to agree on a procedure for appointment of arbitrator and determine
     the number of arbitrators. So on request being made, this court appointed
     him as the sole arbitrator to enter into reference of the dispute and the
     learned sole Arbitral Tribunal has the jurisdiction to enter into the reference.
     20.5.      Mr. Mishra, the learned senior counsel, submits at the very outset
     of his argument that the nature of the order passed by this court in Arb.
     petition No. 22/2001 dated 28.02.2002 appointing arbitrator, initially held to
     be an administrative order as reported in the case of K onkan R ailw ay
     Corporation Ltd. & ors. Vs. M ehul Construction Co. reported in (2000)
     7 SCC 201 . However, the aforesaid judgment along with one passed in
     K onkan R ailw ay Corpn. Ltd. & Anr. Vs. R ani Construction Pvt. Ltd.
     reported in (2000) 8 SCC 159 were overruled by the Hon’ble Apex Court in
     the case of SBP & Co. Vs. Patel Engg. Ltd. reported in (2005) 8 SCC
     618 which was decided on 26.01.2005 by the 7 (seven) judges bench of the
     Hon’ble Apex Court wherein it was held in paragraph 47(i) that the power
                                                                          Page 12 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     exercised by the Chief Justice of India under Section 11(6) of the Act is not
     an administrative power but is a judicial power. It was also held that
     appointments of arbitrators or arbitral Tribunal thus far made, are to be
     treated as valid, all objections being left to be decided under Section 16 of
     the Act.
     20.6.      It is further submitted that as the finding of the Hon’ble Chief
     Justice of this Court while appointing the sole Arbitrator was in respect to a
     family dispute arising out of partnership between the family members, so the
     sole arbitrator had no jurisdiction to enter into the family dispute which had
     already been under the seisin of another Tribunal consisting of 3 (three)
     arbitrators. Such question of subsequent appointment of the sole arbitrator
     and its jurisdiction to enter into reference can very well be entertained in a
     petition under Section 16(2) of the Act. So, Mr. Mishra submits that the
     learned sole Arbitrator has no jurisdiction to enter into the reference.
     20.7.      Mr. Sahewalla, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
     respondents, submits that no arbitral Tribunal consisting of 3 (three)
     arbitrators was ever formed in order to take seisin of the disputes referred in
     letters dated 22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999. As apparent from the letters, there
     were certain pre-conditions to be followed before the arbitrators enter into
     the reference. Those pre-conditions were never fulfilled. Further it was the
     mandate of the writer of the said two letters that the arbitration process
     ought to be started immediately and completed within a period of 30 days or
     any other date so extended. The appellants failed to bring any such material
     in order to show that there exists an arbitral Tribunal on the date of
                                                                          Page 13 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     appointment of the present sole arbitrator by this court and that too, with
     similar dispute being referred to the sole arbitrator.
     20.8.      It is the contention of Mr. Sahewalla that the earlier reference was
     with respect to the fixation of the shares of the three brothers over the
     family assets and not for resolving any dispute of the partnership business
     submitted by the writer of the letters dated 22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999 as
     the partners of the aforesaid firm. There is specific bar in the Indian
     Partnership Act, 1932 whereby a partner cannot refer a dispute to the
     arbitrator on the implied authority. Mr. Sahewalla further submits that even
     if assuming that the arbitral Tribunal was formed earlier than the sole
     arbitral Tribunal, there is no iota of evidence on record to show that Mr.
     Kamal Chand Jain, one of the brothers had submitted to the jurisdiction of
     the said earlier Tribunal.
     20.9.      Mr. Sahewalla submits that the dispute referred to the sole
     arbitrator appointed by the Hon’ble Chief Justice of this court, is distinct and
     different to the one agreed to refer by the two brothers through the said
     letters. The dispute before the sole arbitrator is referred by 10 (ten) partners
     and all the partners are before the sole arbitral Tribunal and any award
     passed would be binding on each of the partners. On the other hand, any
     award if passed by the earlier Tribunal of three arbitrators, the same would
     not bind any of the partners. The observation made by the Hon’ble Chief
     Justice of this court while appointing the sole arbitrator is a casual
     observation and nothing to do in deciding the petition under Section 16(2) of
     the Act.
                                                                          Page 14 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     20.10.     Mr. Mishra in response to the submissions of Mr. Sahewalla,
     referring to the pre-conditions mentioned in the aforesaid letters, submits
     that the clause ‘a’ of the said pre-condition itself refers to the statement of
     accounts of all firms/ companies of the family including the protection sought
     for retired partners. So, the dispute referred to the sole arbitrator cannot be
     differentiated from the one in seisin of the earlier Tribunal. Moreover, there
     is no specific denial that no arbitral proceeding/ Tribunal was formed as per
     the letters referred hereinabove.
     20.11.     With regard to the necessity of an agreement as held by the
     learned sole Arbitrator for referring the dispute to arbitration, Mr. Mishra
     submits that there is no such requirement of an agreement in writing. In
     support of such submission, Mr. Mishra relies P.Anand Gajapathi Raju
     and others v. P.V.G. Raju (dead) and others reported in (2000) 4 SCC
     539 and also referred the case of Vadya Harishankar Laxm iram
     R ajyaguru vs. Pratapray Harishankar R ajyaguru reported in (1988) 3
     SCC 21 . So, Mr. Mishra submits that from the said two letters dated
     22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999 it can be inferred that there was an implied
     consent of the present parties to refer the family dispute to the 3 (three)
     arbitrators / Tribunal which includes the partnership business.
     20.12.     It is also submitted by Mr. Mishra that the parties cannot be
     allowed to approbate and reprobate. He submits that the respondents filed
     Title Suit No. 171/1998 in the civil court, thereafter referred the same
     dispute in the said title suit to the three arbitral Tribunal and thereafter again
     moved petition for appointment of the sole arbitrator for the same dispute
                                                                           Page 15 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     which cannot be allowed under the law so far the doctrine of election is
     concerned. In support of his submission, Mr. Mishra relies Joint Action
     Com m ittee of Air Line Pilots’ Association of India (ALPAI) and
     others vs. Director General of Civil Aviation and others reported in
     (2011) 5 SCC 435 .
     20.13.      Mr. Mishra finally submits that the learned court below failed to
     consider those relevant materials and the submissions made before it and
     passed the impugned judgment upholding the finding of the learned sole
     Arbitrator which is wrong and liable to be set aside.
     20.14.      Perused the impugned judgment and also considered the
     submissions of both the learned counsel. The learned sole Arbitrator in order
     to differentiate the disputes, had looked into the manner in which the earlier
     dispute was referred to the 3 (three) arbitrators and compared the same
     with the one in which 10 (ten) partners have made a request to the Hon’ble
     Chief Justice of this court to appoint an arbitrator and to refer the dispute
     arising out of the partnership business arraying the other 7 (seven) partners.
     After such scrutiny, the learned sole arbitrator came to the conclusion that
     there was no agreement for reference of the disputes between the parties
     nor were there any determined number of arbitrators agreed to by the
     parties both for referring any family dispute and any dispute arising out of
     partnership business. As the 10 (ten) partners had made the request to the
     Hon’ble Chief Justice of this Court to appoint an arbitrator invoking Clause II
     of the Partnership deed, so the appointment and/ or composition of sole
     arbitral Tribunal is valid and the said Tribunal had the jurisdiction to decide
                                                                         Page 16 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     the dispute so referred arising out of the partnership business. It is in that
     aspect of the matter, that the learned sole arbitrator had held that existence
     of an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties for appointing
     arbitrator or arbitrators is essential. The number of arbitrators referred in the
     said two letters dated 22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999 varies and as such the
     learned sole arbitrator intended to mean that such reference cannot be
     considered to be a valid one as under Section 10 of the Act parties are free
     to determine the number of arbitrators. There was no arbitration agreement
     to refer family dispute which the learned arbitrator held by inferring as to
     number of arbitrators mentioned in the said letters.
     20.15.     The learned sole arbitrator in order to strengthen the reasoning
     also took shelter under the provision of Section 19 of the Indian Partnership
     Act, 1932. Because if the earlier dispute referred to three arbitrators be
     presumed to be arising out of the partnership business, same ought to have
     been referred by all the partners of the said business. There is no whisper in
     the petition that as per practice / custom under any usage the three brothers
     were authorised to refer dispute to the Arbitrator arising out of the
     partnership business.
     20.16.     The ratio laid down in (2000) 4 SCC 539 (supra) and (1988) 3
     SCC 21 (supra) is totally in different context. In (1988) 3 SCC 21 (supra),
     an award was already passed under the Arbitration Act, 1940 which was an
     outcome of intervention of the arbitrator between the dispute of the father
     and son. The award was signed by both the father and son and thereafter
     the son applied to the court for passing a judgment on the basis of the
                                                                          Page 17 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     award as required under the provisions of Arbitration Act, 1940. The father
     failed to raise objection and the civil court made a decree on the basis of the
     award. In such backdrop, a challenge was made to the award by the father
     on the plea that there was no written agreement signed by both the parties
     to refer the dispute to arbitration. The Hon’ble Apex Court held that signing
     of the award by both the father and son infers that both of them had agreed
     to refer the dispute to arbitration.
     20.17.      The ratio of the decision reported in (2008) 4 SCC 543 also is in
     other context inasmuch as during the pendency of the appeal the parties
     therein entered into an arbitration agreement. But in the present case in
     hand an arbitration agreement exists in the partnership deed and there was
     no agreement for reference of the family dispute. The learned sole arbitrator
     accordingly held that there was no agreement for referring the family
     dispute as there was no agreement of numbers of arbitrators because from
     the letter of the two respondents it shows a variance of number of
     arbitrators. So it was opined that in order to conclude that the reference
     made by the High Court was proper and the arbitrator has jurisdiction to
     decide the dispute so referred.
     20.18.      The submission of Mr. Mishra with regard to the observation of
     Hon’ble Chief Justice of this court while appointing the sole arbitrator about
     the nature of the dispute, the same cannot be considered to be a finding of
     a judicial nature rather the same is a casual observation and the same
     cannot help in examining the jurisdiction of the learned sole arbitrator with
     respect to the dispute and its nature. More so, on the face of the partnership
                                                                        Page 18 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     deed stipulating the arbitration clause, even if it is assumed to have the
     force of judicial finding, then also it refers to the partnership business which
     is governed by the partnership deed and the partners therein are family
     members. The learned sole arbitrator had considered the submissions of the
     appellants including contents of the letters dated 22.11.1999 and 29.11.1999
     and came to the finding that no mention had been made about the
     partnership business and also came to a finding that prima facie the dispute
     in the present case differs from the one mentioned in the said two letters.
     20.19.      The submission with respect to the doctrine of law of election that
     the respondents went to the civil court, the Tribunal formed by 3 (three)
     arbitrators and the sole arbitral Tribunal with respect to the same dispute
     and as such the present Tribunal ought not to have assumed the jurisdiction
     to the dispute so referred also cannot be considered. The submission of the
     appellants that the respondents through their own acts have lost from
     asserting the right by invoking the arbitration clause in partnership deed is
     also not tenable.
     20.20.       With regard to the said submission, this court at first holds that
     Section 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 is not applicable to
     proceedings of other nature instituted under any other statute inasmuch as
     Section 10 is referable to a suit instituted in a civil court. So, mere pendency
     of the title suit in the civil court cannot be a bar in preferring the arbitration
     proceeding.
     20.21.       The Hon’ble Apex Court in (2011) 5 SCC 435 (supra) accepted
     that the Doctrine of Election is based on the rule of estoppel wherein the
                                                                           Page 19 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     principle is that one cannot approbate and reprobate which is inherent in it.
     It is also held that a person is precluded by his action or conduct or silence
     when it is his duty to speak from asserting a right which he would have had
     otherwise.
     20.22.      From the perusal of the objection filed by the respondents against
     the petition under Section 16(2) of the Act, it is seen that without denying
     the existence of the earlier Tribunal with 3 (three) arbitrators, it is pleaded
     that the dispute referred to the said Tribunal of three arbitrators is different
     from the one referred to the present sole arbitrator. By way of such
     pleading, the onus of the respondents is discharged, inasmuch as, it is the
     case of the appellants that the dispute referred to the sole arbitral Tribunal is
     the same as the one already referred to the earlier Tribunal of 3 (three)
     arbitrators. In fact, the appellants had failed even to discharge the initial
     burden that the said arbitral Tribunal is still in seisin of the dispute so
     referred to the learned sole arbitrator. As submitted by Mr. Sahewalla, the
     appellants failed to bring any iota of evidence in order to show that Mr.
     Kamalchand Jain, one of the brothers, had submitted to the jurisdiction of
     the said Tribunal consisting of 3 (three) arbitrators. In order to bring the
     application of the ratio laid down in (2011) 5 SCC 435 (supra), the burden
     lies upon the appellants at least to show that the said earlier Tribunal of 3
     (three) arbitrators is still in existence, at least, at the time of referring the
     dispute to the learned sole Arbitrator and the said dispute is similar to the
     one referred to the learned sole Arbitrator. The pendency of the civil suit has
     nothing to do in application of the said principles of Doctrine of Election.
                                                                          Page 20 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     Accordingly, the submissions made by Mr. Mishra cannot be accepted and
     the findings of the learned court below are upheld so far the point of
     jurisdiction is concerned.
21.      The award dated 22.06.2003 passed in Misc. Case No. 1/2003 by the
learned sole Arbitrator which was upheld by the learned Additional District Judge
No. 1, Kamrup at Guwahati is taken up for discussion and its findings.
     21.1.       Mr. Mishra, the learned senior counsel, while assailing the interim
     award, submitted that in case of interim award the principles of granting the
     mandatory injunction as interim measures applies. The evidence on record
     must establish the facts pleaded and an award in absence of evidence is an
     award patently illegal and arbitrary. The interim award was passed on the
     basis of presumption and impermissible inferences. The letters dated
     27.04.1998 and 28.04.1998 referred hereinabove never indicates that Sri
     Devendra Kumar Sethia and Narendra Kumar Sethia were in the
     management of Hotel Rajmahal. It was specifically denied in the written
     objection to that effect. However, the learned Arbitrator wrongly exercised
     this jurisdiction in passing the award.
     21.2.       It is further submitted that there is no evidence on record that the
     respondents/ claimants No. 1 and 3 were looking after the management of
     the Hotel Rajmahal prior to their alleged ouster. No cogent evidence
     producing vouchers, invoices or any other documents relevant to prove such
     facts are on record. The interim award ought not to have been passed as the
     same amounts to passing of the final award. The fact of physical obstruction
     to the respondents/ claimants No. 1 and 3 in entering the office premises
                                                                         Page 21 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     within the Hotel, rampant manipulation and falsification of accounts to
     misappropriate and to convert the properties of the firm etc. were not
     proved by the respondents/ claimants and as such awarding the interim
     award is patently illegal.
     21.3.      Mr. Mishra, the learned senior counsel, further submits that the
     learned sole Arbitrator exceeded his jurisdiction in making the impugned
     award as the partnership deed does not contain any stipulation as to signing
     of all vouchers, cheques, accounts, all returns and documents by all working
     partners and so, the award runs counter to the expressed terms and
     conditions of the partnership deed. So, the finding of the learned Additional
     District Judge No. 1, Kamrup at Guwahati that the grounds taken in the
     application under Section 34 of the Act do not fulfil the requirements of sub-
     section (2) of Section 34 of the Act is perverse. It is also argued that the
     interim award dated 22.06.2003 is absolutely against the public policy of
     India and in support relied M cDerm ott International Inc. Vs. Burn
     Standard Co. Ltd. and others reported in (2006) 11 SCC 181 .
     21.4.      Mr. Sahewalla, the learned senior counsel, submits that the finding
     of the learned Arbitrator does not suffer from any infirmities nor the findings,
     under no stretch of imagination could be construed to be opposed to the
     substantive laws and/ or opposed to the public policy or patently illegal. It is
     submitted that the award dated 26.03.2003 cannot be permitted to be
     construed as an interim injunction or interim mandatory injunction. Referring
     to Section 2(1)(c) and Section 31(6) of the Act, Mr. Sahewalla submits that
     the arbitral Tribunal may, at any time during the arbitral proceedings, make
                                                                         Page 22 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     an interim award on any matter with respect to which it may make a final
     award. Relying the case law, Centrotrade M inerals and M etals Inc. Vs.
     Hindustan Copper Ltd. reported in (2006) 11 SCC 245 , the learned
     senior counsel submits that four types of award could be passed under the
     Act i.e., interim award, additional award, settlement or agreed award and
     final award. Relying further on the case law of (2006) 11 SCC 181 (supra),
     the learned senior counsel submits that it was held by the Hon’ble Apex
     Court that ad-interim award in terms of the said provisions is not one in
     respect of which final award can be made but it will be final award on the
     matters covered thereby but made at an interim stage.
     21.5.       Opposing the submission that the respondents/ claimants No. 1
     and 3 are looking after separate business but not in management of the
     Hotel, Mr. Sahewalla submits Clause 6(B) of partnership deed specifically
     mentions that the respondents/ claimants No. 1 and 3 are appointed as the
     working partners along with the appellant/ counter claimant No. 2 who shall
     look after the day to day business affairs of the firm and its business. In the
     said clause it has not been stipulated that they will look after separate
     business. The submission that the appellant/ counter claimant No. 1, Sri
     Sunil Kumar Sethia is looking after the management of the Hotel Rajmahal
     as a policy taken to that effect, cannot be considered inasmuch as no such
     policy and/or resolution of the partners to that effect had been produced.
     Out of 17 (seventeen) partners, 10 (ten) partners have denied such policy
     and the same cannot stand in opposition which the learned sole Arbitrator
     rightly ignored. The denial that the respondents/ claimants No. 1 and 3 were
                                                                        Page 23 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     ever managing the Hotel itself is a contrary stand taken by the appellants on
     the face of the stipulation of the partnership deed. No extrinsic evidence
     would dispel the unambiguous terms of the partnership deed. In view of
     absence of evidence of any policy/ mutual consent of all the partners in
     modifying the terms of the partnership as regard working partners, the
     letters referred hereinabove by the appellant/ counter claimant No. 1 to the
     two airlines stating that the two working partners were no longer associated
     in the day to day management and affairs of the hotel clearly testifies that
     the claimants/ respondents No. 1 and 3 were, in fact, participating as
     working partners.
     21.6.       Mr. Sahewalla submits that the contention of the appellants/
     counter claimants that in absence of framing of necessary issues, production
     of documents and other evidence, cross examination of witnesses etc., no
     interim award can be given, is not at all relevant inasmuch as in view of the
     findings of the learned sole Arbitrator in paragraphs No. 6.4.7, 6.4.8, 6.4.9,
     there is no necessity of further arguing to that point. The findings therein,
     under no circumstances, can be construed to be opposed to the substantive
     law and/ or opposed to public policy or patently illegal and as such there is
     no illegality in the judgment passed by the learned court below.
     21.7.       Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels. The Act
     defines in Section 2(c) “the arbitral award” which includes an “interim
     award”. As held in (2006) 11 SCC 245 (supra), under the Act, there are
     four types of awards which can be passed, such as interim award, additional
     award, settlement or agreed award and final award. In (2006) 11 SCC 181
                                                                       Page 24 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     (supra), it was held that Section 2(c) of the Act includes an interim award.
     Sub-section (6) of Section 31 of the Act contemplates an interim award and
     the said interim award in terms of the said Section 31(6) is not one in
     respect of which a final award can be made but it may be a final award on
     the matters covered thereby and made at an interim stage.
     21.8.       The interim award sought by the respondents/ claimants had
     already been referred hereinabove. The learned sole Arbitrator took note of
     the pleadings of the respondents/ claimants that after ouster of the two
     working partners, the appellants/ counter claimants had taken recourse to
     rampant manipulation and falsification of accounts to misappropriate and to
     convert the properties of the firm into individual properties which the
     appellants had denied specifically. The learned sole Arbitrator while
     discussing with regard to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to pass the interim
     award within the purview of the Act, scrutinised the award prayed for by the
     respondents and came to the conclusion as follows:-
                 “The first part of the interim award prayed for, namely, allowing
             Sri N.K. Sethia and Sri D.K. Sethia to effectively participate in the day
             to day activities in the firm and the claim (iv) made in the statement
             of claim i.e. “to run the day to day functions of the hotel by working
             partners and restrain others from creating any hindrance in their
             function are substantially the same in context. But the second part of
             the interim award prayed for direction to sign cheques, vouchers etc.
             jointly by the working partners is not found in the relief claimed in
             the statement of claim, although it is stated in this regard at the end
             of paragraph 11 of the statement of claim. The claim (iv) referred to
             above and the first part of the interim arbitral award prayed for by
                                                                          Page 25 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

             the claimants are similar, or in any event, they are substantially the
             same, and therefore, Section 31(6) is attractive, although it may be a
             different question as to whether or not, the prayer for interim arbitral
             award should be granted. As regards, the second part of the interim
             award asked for, whether that part of the relief can or cannot be
             granted shall have to be considered having regard to the general
             or other relief or other reliefs, as m ay be just, can be given
             w ithout asking for, as if it had been asked for.”
     21.9.       The learned sole Arbitrator scrutinised the prayer for interim
     award on the submission of the learned counsel for the appellants with
     regard to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal in passing the same. Against the
     said submission, the learned Arbitrator accepted the same to the extent of
     the second part of the interim award meaning thereby that the said relief of
     interim award was beyond the scope of Section 31(6) of the Act as the
     respondents/ claimants also never prayed for in their claim petition.
     21.10.      After hearing the parties to the proceeding, without taking any
     extrinsic evidence on record and on the basis of the pleadings, the learned
     sole Arbitrator held in paragraph 8.12 of the impugned award as follows:-
                 “Proceeding further to the two letters of Sunil Kumar Sethia
             (respondent No. 2) to the Airlines referred to above, Devendra Kumar
             Sethia (claimant No. 1) was co-partner with Sunil Kumar Sethia
             (respondent No. 2) till April, 1988. This supports the plea of the
             claimants that the two working partners, namely, Devendra Kumar
             Sethia (claimant No. 1) and Narendra Kumar Sethia (claimant No. 3)
             were ousted from the management of the firm in July, 1998 and
             August, 1998, and it contradicts the statement that Sunil Kumar
             Sethia (respondent No. 2) with active support of Manoj Kumar Sethia
                                                                         Page 26 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

             (respondent No. 1) has been managing the firm of partnership
             business.”
     21.11.     The learned sole Arbitrator before coming to the said finding,
     arrived at the finding that the deed of partnership is a solemn agreement of
     the partners. It is also held that the partners, who are parties to the
     instrument have put into writing all that they considered necessary to give
     full expression to their meaning and intention. It is also held within the
     stipulation of the said partnership deed that the respondents/ claimants No.
     1 and 3 and the appellant/ counter claimant No. 2 are working partners of
     the firm. On the basis of the said stipulation, the learned sole Arbitrator
     disbelieved the pleadings of the appellants/ counter claimants and held that
     mere categorisation of the said claimants No. 1 and 3 does not mean that
     they were not in the management of Hotel Rajmahal. The fact that the
     learned sole Arbitrator had relied the stipulation of the partnership deed, is
     apparent from the findings in paragraph 8.7 of the award wherein it was
     held that any statement or evidence that Devendra Kumar Sethia (claimant
     No. 1) and Narendra Kumar Sethia (claimant No. 3) are not working partners
     of the firm shall amount to contradicting or varying the terms of partnership
     deed and such statement cannot be accepted or admitted as the same would
     defeat the very object of reducing to a written form. So, the pleadings that
     the respondents/ claimants No. 1 and 3 were not working partners, had not
     been accepted. Therefore, the learned Arbitrator had granted the award
     directing the appellants/ counter claimants to allow Devendra Kumar Sethia
     and Narendra Kumar Sethia both respondents/ claimants No. 1 and 3 to
                                                                       Page 27 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     effectively participate in the day to day activities and affairs of the firm, M/s
     Rajkamal & Co. The said finding is well within the stipulation of the
     partnership deed and the same is rightly arrived at by the learned Arbitrator.
     21.12.     Now, let us examine the second limb of the award which is
     reproduced hereinbelow:-
                “10.3(ii)        All the three working partners, namely, Devendra
                Kumar Sethia (claimant No. 1), Narendra Kumar Sethia (claimant
                No. 3) and Sunil Kumar Sethia (respondent No. 2) to jointly sign
                all vouchers, cheques, expenditure accounts, booking account and
                all statutory returns and documents to be filed by the firm before
                the concerned authority.”
     21.13.     The reasoning as to why the said award is granted by the learned
     Arbitrator is that it is necessary to ask for general or other relief/ reliefs, as
     may be just, can always be given, as if asked for. However, the said general
     or other reliefs should be in the nature of ancillary or incidental relief and not
     inconsistent with the case set up by the claimants. Therefore, the said
     general or other reliefs, if can be given in the final award without asking for
     it in the statement of claims, interim award may be given in respect of the
     relief keeping in view of provisions of Section 31(6) of the Act.
     21.14.     The learned sole Arbitrator also came to the finding which is
     reproduced hereinbelow:-
                “19.3. In the present case, the claimants have stated at the end of
                paragraph 11 of their statement of claim that it is necessary to
                direct all the working partners to jointly sign all vouchers, cheques,
                accounts, expenditure accounts, booking accounts and all the
                                                                           Page 28 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

                statutory returns and documents to be filed by the firm before the
                concerned authority.
                    The respondents have filed their statement of defence denying
                the above statement and have also contended that such an
                interim prayer cannot be granted. Therefore, the respondents are
                fully aware of the matter. This being the position, the second part
                of the interim relief as prayed for, can be granted if it is in the
                nature of ancillary relief.”
     21.15.      The learned Arbitrator taking note of the opposition of the
     appellants/ counter claimants, granted the second limb of the award holding
     the relief being an ancillary one to the main relief No. iv as sought for in the
     claim petition.
     21.16.      The partnership deed stipulates Clause (2)(c) defining ‘business’
     under the firm M/S Rajkamal & Co. Clause (2) (c) stipulates as follows:-
                        “2(c). That in view of the Government policies or other
                principles regulating distribution of contracts, agencies, permits,
                licenses, quotas, appointment of dealers/ brokers/ agents/
                distributors/ liason agents etc., the partners are entitled to secure
                the business in their individual name(s) or any other name(s) but
                all such business(es) if agreed am ong the parties hereto,
                shall be carried on under the term s of this deed.”
     21.17.      Thus the partners are at liberty to secure business in their
     individual names and such business(es), if agreed to by the partner in whose
     name the same is secured, shall be carried on under the terms of the deed.
     But within the stipulations of the partnership deed, no stipulation similar to
     the one prayed for in the second limb of the interim award is found. The
                                                                          Page 29 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     learned sole Arbitrator held that the said relief need not be asked for, as the
     same is ancillary in nature and not inconsistent with the case set up by the
     claimants. The learned sole Arbitrator is to decide the dispute within the
     bounds circumscribed by the partnership deed. That is a gospel truth.
     21.18.     The learned Arbitrator had defined the word ‘dispute’ in the award
     itself and in context of the reference made to the Tribunal which is
     reproduced hereinbelow:-
                “6.3.3. The word ‘dispute’ in the context denotes a claim which is
                asserted by one party and denied by the other, may be, the claim
                is a false or a true one. The claimants have asserted that two
                claimants, namely, Devendra Kumar Sethia (claimant No. 1) and
                Narendra Kumar Sethia (claimant No. 3) are working partners
                along with Sunil Kumar Sethia (respondent No. 2) whereas the
                respondents have denied that any of them is a working partner,
                and they have also said that only Sunil Kumar Sethia (respondent
                No. 2) has been managing the affairs of the firm and the hotel. It
                is therefore, a dispute amongst the partners as to whether or not,
                they are working partners in the conduct of business, be the
                claims, is a true or false one.”
                The learned Arbitrator taking note of the objection of the
     appellants/ counter claimants ought to have gone for the evidence as to the
     practice followed by the partners in managing the affairs of the partnership
     business prior to the accrual of the cause of action for the respondents/
     claimants to come to the Tribunal in view of Clause (2)(c) in the partnership
     deed. In addition to that, there is a clause empowering the partners to vary
     terms of the partnership deed expressly or impliedly. But there is no such
     piece of evidence on record.
                                                                        Page 30 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     21.19.      Keeping the said mindset, the learned sole Arbitrator, passed the
     award of the first limb within the ambit and scope of the partnership deed.
     However, in the context of the second limb of the award, it is apparent that
     the initial burden to show that even prior to the dispute between the parties,
     there exists a practice for signing of vouchers, cheques etc. by the three
     working partners jointly and after the dispute, the said practice had been
     stopped with the intent of the appellants/ counter claimants to reduce the
     capital of the firm etc. had not been discharged by the respondents. In
     addition to that, there is a clause in the partnership deed for variation of the
     terms of the partnership deed which may be expressly or impliedly by the
     acts of the partners. From the partnership deed it cannot be inferred that the
     parties to the deed had agreed to such a condition expressly so far the
     second limb of award is concerned inasmuch as the present appellants who
     are parties to the partnership deed had objected to granting of the second
     limb of prayer of the interim award.
     21.20.      In (2006) 11 SCC 181 (supra), the Hon’ble Apex Court held in
     paragraph 112 as follows:-
                    “112.        It is trite that the terms of the contract can be
                 express or implied. The conduct of the parties would also be a
                 relevant factor in the matter or construction of a contract. The
                 construction of the contract agreement is within the jurisdiction of
                 the arbitrators having regard to the wide nature, scope and ambit
                 of the arbitration agreement and they cannot be said to have
                 misdirected themselves in passing the award by taking into
                 consideration the conduct of the parties. It is also trite that
                 correspondences exchanged by the parties are required to be
                                                                         Page 31 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

                 taken into consideration for the purpose of construction of a
                 contract. Interpretation of a contract is a matter for the arbitrator
                 to determine, even if it gives rise to determination of a question of
                 law.”
     21.21.      The ratio of the said decision is that conduct of parties is to be
     looked into by the arbitrator and there is no bar in doing it. From the
     averment made in the claim petition it cannot be said that there was a
     practice followed of signing of all vouchers, cheques etc by the three
     partners as sought for in the interim award. Also it cannot be said even from
     the petition for interim award about existence of the said practice. The relief
     so prayed for as interim award was objected by the appellants/ counter
     claimants. So, from the claims/ counter claims of the parties it is clear that
     there was no practice followed as prayed for by the respondents/ claimants
     rather, it is the practice followed, authorised by the stipulations and agreed
     to by the parties in the partnership deed. So, the learned arbitrator ought to
     have passed the second limb of award as per the terms of the deed and/ or
     usage of the trade applicable in running the firm. The learned arbitrator
     definitely in bringing a harmonious relationship among the working partners
     as well as the partners, termed the second limb of the award as ancillary to
     the first limb of the award so granted. But there is no material to show any
     such practice followed earlier and the present appellants had deviated from
     the said practice for their personal gain. In such a situation, it cannot be
     held that the relief could have been granted, inasmuch as, the same
     amounts to violation of Section 28(3) of the Act and the second limb of the
     award also cannot be considered within the four corners of the partnership
                                                                          Page 32 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     deed. The same amounts to introduction of a new condition into the
     partnership deed thereby disturbing the state of equilibrium amongst the
     partners as apparent from the objections raised by some of the partners.
     The sole Arbitrator has no discretion to make a new contract for the parties
     nor can the discretion applied by the learned sole Arbitrator be taken to be a
     sound one.
     21.22.     In the case of Associate Builders vs. Delhi Developm ent
     Authority reported in (2015) 3 SCC 49 , it was held that “patent illegality”
     covers any contravention of Section 28(3) of the Act. It was also held that
     the said contravention must be understood with a caveat. An arbitral
     Tribunal must decide in accordance with the terms of the contract, but if an
     arbitrator construes a term in a reasonable manner, it would not mean that
     the award can be set aside on this ground. Construction of a term of a
     contract is primarily for an arbitrator to decide unless the arbitrator
     construes the contract in such a way that it could be said to be something
     that no fair minded or reasonable person could do. Thus the discretion is left
     with the arbitrator.
     21.23.     In the case of K um aon M andal Vikas Nigam Ltd. vs. Girja
     Shankar Pant reported in AIR 2001 SC 24, the Hon’ble Apex Court
     approved the meaning and exercise of ‘Discretion’ as enumerated by Lord
     Halsbury in Sharp vs. Wakefield (1891) AC 173, 179 which is reproduced
     hereinbelow:-
                “ ‘Discretion’ means when it is said that something is to be done
             within the authorities that something is to be done according to the
                                                                        Page 33 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

             rules of reason and justice, not according to private opinion: Rooke’s
             case (1598) 5 Co Rep 99 b 100 a : according to law, and not humour.
             It is to be, not ancillary, vague and fanciful, but legal and regular.
             And it must be exercised within the limit, to which an honest man
             competent to the discharge of his office ought to confine himself.”
                 The learned sole arbitrator has his bounds within the ambit and
     scope of the stipulations of the partnership deed which as per the finding of
     the learned arbitrator is ‘solemn’ in nature. In such a situation, introduction
     of the second limb of the award and that too, without any proof of the
     practice followed by the partners is purely a wrong application of his
     discretion keeping in view of the mindset of the sole Arbitral Tribunal.
     21.24.      In the present case in hand, the partnership deed itself shows that
     the business under the firm is a varied one. It is also agreed between the
     parties that in view of government policies or other principles of regulation,
     distribution etc., the partners are entitled to secure business in their
     individual or in other names and all such businesses shall be carried on
     under the terms of the partnership deed subject to the consent of the parties
     to the deed. In such a situation, the award directing the three working
     partners to jointly sign all vouchers, cheques, expenditure accounts, booking
     accounts and all statutory returns and the documents to be filed by the firm
     before the concerned authority is not reasonable, more so, when there is no
     material to show such usage in practice prior to the dispute. To that aspect,
     there is even no evidence either documentary or oral and the discretion
     applied is beyond the stipulation of the partnership deed. Holding the relief
     to be an ancillary the learned arbitrator cannot apply the discretion but same
                                                                         Page 34 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013

     must be a regular one. The said relief cannot be considered ancillary to the
     first limb of the award. So, the second limb of the award is well covered
     under the term ‘patent illegality’ and contravenes Section 28(3) of the Act.
     Thus, the second limb of the award is hit under Section 34(2) of the Act
     which the learned Additional District Judge No. 1 failed to consider.
     Accordingly, the interim award of the learned sole arbitrator directing the
     three     working    partners,     namely, Sri  Devendra    Kumar     Sethia
     (respondent/claimant No. 1), Sri Narendra Kumar Sethia (respondent/
     claimant No. 3) and Sri Sunil Kumar Sethia (appellant/ counter claimant No.
     2) to jointly sign all vouchers, cheques, expenditure accounts, booking
     accounts and all statutory returns and the documents to be filed by the firm
     before the concerned authority is set aside.
22.      This appeal is partially allowed.
         Send back the lower court records.
                                                                       JUDGE
BiswaS
                                                                     Page 35 of 35
Arb.A. 5/2013


