                                 1
                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
     (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                     ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                         PRINCIPAL SEAT
               Arbitration Appeal No. 22/ 2013
Assam Industrial Development Corporation & Ors
                                             ………. Appellants
                               -VERSUS -
Assam Paper Mill Private Limited & Ors
                                             …..….… Respondents
Advocate for the appellant:           Mr. S. Chamaria.
                                               ……. Advocate.
Advocate for the Respondents           Mr. B. Sarma,
                                          ………... Advocate.
                           -BEFOR E–
         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
              Date of hearing                : 03.08.2017
              Date of judgment & order       : 03.08.2017
                   JUDGMENT & ORDER (Oral)
       Heard Mr. S. Chamaria, learned counsel appearing for the
appellants and Mr. B. Sarma, learned counsel, appearing for the
respondents.

                                    2
2.     This Arbitration appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act of
1996”) is for setting aside the judgment and order dated 15.5.2013,
passed in Misc. Arbitration Case No. 460/2012 by the learned
Additional District Judge, No. 2, Kamrup, Guwahati.
3.     The present appellants vide letter No. AIDC/INC/IID-D/ Land/
7056-60 dated 22.7.2005 allotted land at IID project at Dalgaon,
Assam as per the application made by the respondent dated 6.5.2005.
On the basis of the said allotment, a lease agreement was entered
between the present appellants, as the lessor and the respondent
company, as the lessee. In the said lease agreement dated 21.2.2005,
it contains an arbitration clause which runs as follows:-
       “Every dispute, difference or question touching or arising out or
       in respect of this land Lease Agreement or the subject matter
       thereof shall be referred to the sole arbitration to Collector of
       the district wherein the leased plot is situated or any person
       appointed by him, the decision of such arbitration shall be final
       and binding on the parties.”
4.     Within the said land allotted, the present respondents started
the business of manufacturing of papers, craft papers, craft board etc.

                                    3
As per the lease agreement, the maintenance of the said shed
alongwith the land is to be carried out by the present appellants.
Owing to allegations leveled on the part of the respondents with regard
to deficiency in the maintenance of the lease hold property, a dispute
between the present parties arose. It is the contention of the appellant
that as per the clause stipulated in the said lease deed, owing to
default in payment of rent and other maintenance charges by the
respondent company, the said allotment was cancelled.
5.     Upon such cancellation, the dispute arose and apprehending
that the appellant Corporation would occupy the said allotted plot of
land, an application was filed under Section 9 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 before the court of the learned Additional District
No. 2, Kamrup at Guwahati by the respondents. By way of the said
petition, it was pleaded that the respondent Company is holding the
possession of the said plot of land after huge investment alongwith the
plant and machinery and under such a situation, if the respondent
Company is dispossessed, irreparable loss and injury would be
sustained to it. Hence, the respondent Company filed the said
application to restrain the present appellant Corporation from
dispossessing the respondent Company.

                                    4
6.      The present appellant Corporation resisted such prayer on the
part of the respondent Company. However, after hearing both the
parties, the learned court below was satisfied that the schedule land
needs to be protected and preserved till disposal of the arbitration
proceeding. Accordingly, the interim order dated 11.10.2012 in the said
Misc. Arbitration case No. 460/2012 was made absolute with respect to
the allotted land to the respondent Company vide judgment and order
dated 15.5.2013.
7.      Being aggrieved, the present appellant Corporation preferred
the present appeal thereby challenging the judgment and order passed
by the learned court below granting status-quo with respect to the
possession of the allotted land till completion of the arbitral
proceeding.
8.      Mr. Chamaria submits that the impugned judgment has its
inherent defect inasmuch as under Section 9 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, it has been specifically stipulated that once the
arbitral Tribunal has been constituted, the Court shall not entertain the
application under Sub-Section (1) of Section 9 unless court finds the
circumstances exist which may render remedy under Section 17
inefficacious.

                                      5
9]      It is also submitted that under Section 17 of the Act of 1996, the
power is given to the arbitral tribunal to grant interim measure during
continuation of the arbitral proceeding or at any time after making of
the arbitral award, before its execution.
10.     Bringing into reference to the said provision of the said Act,
1996, Mr. Chamaria submits that as of now arbitral tribunal has already
been constituted inasmuch as per the arbitral clause in the lease deed
i.e. Clause (H)(3), it is the Collector of the District wherein the plot of
land is situated or any person appointed, shall be the sole arbitrator. It
is also submitted that already parties to the present appeal had moved
the concerned authority for initiation of the arbitral proceeding. Under
such circumstances, further continuation of the impugned judgment
and order is not required. Moreover, it is further submitted that as
there is a specific bar for continuation of an order passed under
Section 9 after forming of the arbitral Tribunal, the present order
violates the provision of Section 9 and as such the same is liable to be
set aside.

                                      6
11.     Mr. Sarma, learned counsel for the respondent Company
submits that once the arbitral proceeding is started, order passed
under Section 9 is bound to lost its effectiveness.
12.     Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels. The
submission of Mr. Chamaria has its force and accordingly the judgment
and order passed in Misc. Arbitration Case No. 460/2012 thereby
directing the parties to maintain status quo till the completion of the
arbitral proceeding is liable to be set aside, which I accordingly do.
13.      However, the respondent Company is at liberty to move
necessary petition for such interim measure before the arbitral
Tribunal, if so advised. Accordingly, this appeal succeeds and the same
is disposed of. LCR if any be send back.
                                                              JUDGE
Eam/


