                                                                                          1
                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
    (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                               Arbitration Petition No. 9/2013
                  1. M/s Hills Trade Agencies
                  A registered partnership firm having its head office at 407, 4th Floor,
                  P.B. Complex, A.T. Road, Guwahati-781001, Assam,
                  Represented by its partner Shri Ranbir Singh Gandhi.
                  2. Shri Ranbir Singh Gandhi
                  S/o Late Shri Kartar Singh Gandhi, Aged: 62 years,
                  Resident of 407, PB Complex, A.T. Road,
                  Guwahati-781001.
                                                              - Petitioners
                                  -Versus-
                  Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council,
                  Diphu, Assam,
                  Represented by its Principal Secretary, Diphu.
                                                              - Respondent
                 For the petitioners           :      Mr. D. K. Mishra, Senior Advocate,
                                                      Mr. K. Goswami, Advocate,
                 For respondent                :      Mr. J. Chutia, SC, KAAC
                 Dates of hearing              :      17.07.2017 and 27.07.2017
                 Date of judgment and order :         27.07.2017
                                           BEFORE
                    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ARUP KUMAR GOSWAMI
                                   JUDGEMENT AND ORDER
                                           (ORAL)
        Heard Mr. D. K. Mishra, learned Senior counsel, assisted by Mr. K. Goswami,
learned counsel, appearing for the petitioners. Also heard Mr. J. Chutia along with Mr. R.
M. Das, learned Standing counsel, Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council, appearing for the
respondent.
2.      By this application under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 (for short, “1996 Act”), the petitioner has prayed for appointment of an Arbitrator
for resolution of disputes which had arisen between the petitioners and the Karbi Anglong
autonomous Council (for short, “Council”).
3.      An agreement dated 02.11.2011 was entered into by and between the Council,
represented by its Principal Secretary, and the petitioner No. 1, which is a registered
partnership firm. The petitioner No. 2 is a partner of petitioner No. 1. By the aforesaid
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013

                                                                                             2
agreement, the Council had agreed, amongst others, to fell, extract, cut and stack raw-
materials (bamboo) and to supply the same from the operating area to the petitioner No.
1, and the petitioner No. 1 had agreed to buy the raw-materials and to transport the
same from the operating areas to the factories to be set up under the provisions of the
agreement. In consideration of supply of raw-material to be utilized by the petitioner No.
1, the petitioner No. 1 was required to pay to the Council an amount of Rs. 310/- per
Metric tonne as royalty. The agreement was to be valid for a period of twenty years from
the date of operation of the new working plan of bamboo of Karbi Anglong District, which
is to be approved by the Ministry of Environment and Forest, Government of India. The
period for which bamboo working plain remains unapproved for any year, will be included
in the aforesaid period of twenty years and the petitioner No. 1 will not be entitled to
receive any supply of bamboo from the Council for the period during which the working
plan is not in force. The royalty was to be increased at the rate of 5% after the end of
each year during the tenure of the agreement.
4.      Clause 11 of the said agreement provides for dispute resolution and arbitration. It
will be appropriate to extract herein-below Clause 11.1 and 11.2 of the agreement for a
ready reference:
                 “11.1 In the event of any dispute, controversy or claim arising out of
        relating to this Agreement including without limitation, the breach, termination,
        performance, validity or invalidity or liabilities or application of this agreement or
        as to the rights, duties or liabilities of the parties hereunder (each, a “Dispute”),
        each party will appoint a representative to endeavour and amicably resolve such
        dispute. The representative shall be appointed within a period 30 (Thirty) days
        from the date of occurrence of the dispute. The parties shall endeavour to resolve
        such disputes through amicable discussions within 90 (Ninety) days from the date
        of appointment of the last of the representative or within such extended period as
        may be mutually agreed to between the parties to the dispute.
        11.2     Any dispute which is not settled pursuant to the internal dispute resolution
        procedure or in case any party is unsatisfied by the result of the internal dispute
        resolution as set forth above, such dispute shall be settled by final and binding
        arbitration through an Arbitral Tribunal to be appointed by the Hon’ble Gauhati
        High Court in accordance with the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation
        Act, 1996.”
5.      A perusal of Clause 11.1 would go to show that in the event of there being any
dispute, controversy or claim arising out of the agreement in question, each party is
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013

                                                                                            3
required to appoint a representative to endeavour and amicably resolve such dispute. The
representatives are to be appointed within a period of thirty days from the date of
occurrence of the dispute. The parties should endeavour to resolve such dispute through
amicable discussions within ninety days from the date of appointment of the last of the
representatives, or within such extended period as may be mutually agreed upon by the
parties. Clause 11.2 provides that any dispute which is not settled pursuant to the internal
dispute resolution mechanism or in case any party is not satisfied with the result of the
internal dispute resolution, such dispute shall be settled by arbitration through an Arbitral
Tribunal to be appointed by this Court in terms of the provisions of the 1996 Act.
6.      In view of emergence of certain disputes occasioned by the issuance of a
notification dated 03.07.2012, issued by the Principal Secretary of the Council terminating
the agreement dated 02.11.2011, the petitioner No. 1, by its letter dated 09.08.2012,
appointed a representative to amicably settle the dispute. Request was made to the
Council to appoint its representative in order to make an endeavour to settle the dispute
amicably in terms of the agreement. The Council having not appointed a representative,
thereby scuttling the offer for an amicable settlement of the dispute, the petitioner has
approached this court by filing this instant application.
7.      The Council had filed an affidavit on 28.02.2014 contending that the Principal
Secretary of the Council had entered into the agreement, in question, without approval of
the Executive Committee of the Council and, therefore, the Executive Committee, in its
meeting held on 03.07.2012, nullified the agreement dated 02.11.2011. It is also pleaded
that the agreement dated 02.11.2011 was not registered and, thus, it violated Section 17
of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 (for short, “Registration Act”). It is also pleaded that
the agreement was executed without there being any new working plan for operation of
bamboo and that an approved working plan is a condition precedent for felling of bamboo
and that as the agreement was cancelled by the Executive Committee of the Council, the
question of appointing an Arbitrator does not arise.
8.      An additional affidavit was filed by the Principal Secretary of the Council, wherein
a further plea is taken that the agreement dated 02.11.2011 was not only an unregistered
agreement but the same was also not stamped in accordance with provisions of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (for short, “Stamp Act”) and, thus, the same being an
inadmissible document, cannot be acted upon and, therefore, the arbitration clause
embodied in the agreement, necessarily, can also not be pressed into service.
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013

                                                                                               4
9.       Mr. D. K. Mishra, learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has
submitted that the pleas taken by the Council in the affidavit and the additional affidavit
to oppose this application for appointment of an Arbitrator are having no substance and
are devoid of any merit. Placing reliance on Section 16 of the 1996 Act, Mr. Mishra
submits that an arbitration clause, which forms part of the contract, shall be treated as an
agreement independent of the other terms of the agreement and that even if a decision is
taken by the Arbitral Tribunal that the contract is nullified, it shall not entail ipso jure the
validity of the arbitration clause. He submits that the reliance placed by the respondent on
Section 17 of the Registration Act is absolutely misconceived inasmuch as the agreement
dated 02.11.2011 is not a document which falls within the ambit of Section 17 of the
Registration Act requiring compulsory registration. He has emphasized that the document
in question is not a lease agreement. Placing reliance on Section 7 of the Indian Stamp
(Assam Amendment) Act, 2004 (for short, “Stamp (Assam) Act”), learned Senior counsel
has submitted that, in fact, the document was executed by paying excess Stamp Duty
inasmuch for the kind of agreement that was entered into in the present case, the Stamp
Duty payable was Rs. 10/- and yet the agreement was executed on Stamp paper of
Rs. 100/-. He has submitted that this Court ought to appoint an Arbitrator to adjudicate
the dispute between the parties leaving the question, as to whether the agreement dated
02.11.2011 is void on account of the plea taken that the Principal Secretary of the Council
was not authorized to enter into the aforesaid agreement, to be decided by the Arbitrator,
as determination of such question will require leading of evidence. In support of his
submissions, learned Senior counsel has placed reliance on the judgements of the
Supreme Court in the cases of SBP & Co. vs. Patel Engineering Ltd. and Another, reported
in (2005) 8 SCC 618, Today Homes and Infrastructure Private Limited vs. Ludhiana
Improvement Trust and Another, reported in (2014) 5 SCC 68, Reva Electric Car Company
Private Limited vs. Green Mobil, reported in (2012) 2 SCC 93 and Swiss Timings Limited
vs. Commonwealth Games 2010 Organizing Committee, reported in (2014) 6 SCC 677,
10.      Mr. J. Chutia, learned counsel appearing for the Council, abiding by the stand
taken in the affidavit and the additional affidavit, has submitted that with the nullifying of
the agreement dated 02.11.2011, the arbitration clause would become non-existent and,
therefore, the question of appointment of Arbitrator, on the strength of the said
agreement, does not arise. He has emphasized that the Principal Secretary of the Council
had no authority to enter into the agreement in question on his own and, therefore, the
Executive Committee of the Council had nullified the agreement. Placing reliance on
Clause 2.1 of the agreement dated 02.11.2011, under the heading “Land Allotment and
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013

                                                                                           5
Setting up of Factories”, he contends that the petitioner No. 1 was enjoined to set up
three bamboo splitting/chipping units in Karbi Anglong District to effectuate the
agreement and, for the said purpose, the petitioner No. 1 was required to apply to the
concerned authority of the Council for allocation of 50 to 100 Bighas of land for each
factory, at different sites and, therefore, in view of the said clause, the agreement
partakes the character of a lease document, which is required to be compulsorily
registered under Section 17 of the Registration Act and as the document was not
registered, the same is not an admissible document. Mr. Chutia has also placed reliance
on Item No. 23 of the Stamp Act.
11.     In support of his arguments, Mr. Chutia has relied upon paragraph 16 of the
judgement rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of SMS Tea Estates Private Limited
vs. Chandmari Tea Company Private Limited, reported in (2011) 14 SCC 66.
12.     I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and have
perused the materials on record.
13.     What is the nature of the power of Chief Justice of a High Court or his designate
under Section 11 of the Act of 1996 was considered by a Seven Judges’ Bench in SBP &
Co. (supra). The Supreme Court had held that while deciding such application, the Chief
Justice of a High Court or his designate has to decide his own jurisdiction to entertain the
request in the sense whether the party making the motion had approached the right High
Court, whether there is a valid arbitration agreement as defined in the Act of 1996, and
whether the person, who had made the request before him, is a party to such agreement.
It was also held by the Supreme Court that the Chief Justice or his designate can also
decide as to whether a claim is a dead one or whether a long-barred claim is sought to be
resurrected and whether the parties had concluded the transaction by recording
satisfaction of their mutual rights and obligations or by receiving the final payment
without objection.
14.     Bearing in mind the considerations that have to engage the attention of the Court,
let me deal with the contentions of the learned counsel for the parties.
15.     The first question that has arisen for consideration is whether, with the nullifying
of the agreement dated 02.11.2011 by the Executive Committee of the Council, the
arbitration clause, at Clause 11 thereof, survives, requiring the Court to consider this
application for appointment of an Arbitrator?
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013

                                                                                               6
16.     Section 16(1) of the Act of 1996 is relevant in the aforesaid context and,
therefore, it is considered appropriate to extract Section 16(1) for a better appreciation,
which is as follows:
                 “16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction.—(1) The
        arbitral tribunal may rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections
        with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration agreement, and for that
        purpose,—
                 (a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as
        an agreement independent of the other terms of the contract; and
                 (b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall
        not entail ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause.”
17.     By Section 16 (1) of the 1996 Act, the Legislature makes it clear that while
considering any objection with respect to the existence or validity of the arbitration
agreement, the arbitration clause which formed part of the contract, has to be treated as
an agreement independent of other terms of the contract. Section 16(1)(b) makes it clear
that even if the Arbitral Tribunal concludes that the contract is null and void, as a matter
of law, it will not bring about automatic invalidation of the arbitration clause.
18.     In Reva Electric Car Company Private Limited (supra), the Supreme Court had laid
down that Section 16(1) presumes the existence of a valid arbitration clause and
mandates the same to be treated as an agreement independent of the other terms of the
contract. The Supreme Court further held that by virtue of Section 16(1)(b), the
arbitration clause continues to be enforceable notwithstanding a declaration of the
contract being null and void. Accordingly, it was held that in view of the provisions
contained in Section 16(1) of the 1996 Act, an arbitration clause would not cease to exist
with the termination of the contract agreement.
19.     Same view was taken in Today Homes and Infrastructure Private Limited (supra),
wherein the Supreme Court observed that by virtue of section 16(1)(b) of the 1996 Act,
an arbitration clause continues to be enforceable notwithstanding a declaration that the
contract was null and void.
20.     In Swiss Timings Limited (supra), the Supreme Court had held that having
provided for resolution of disputes through arbitration, the parties cannot be permitted to
avoid arbitration, without satisfying the Court that it will be just and in the interest of the
parties not to proceed with the arbitration. It was further held that a conjoint reading of
Section 5 and 16 of the 1996 Act would demonstrate that all matters, including the issue
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013

                                                                                            7
as to whether the main contract was void/voidable, can be referred to arbitration as,
otherwise, it would be a handy tool available to the unscrupulous parties to avoid
arbitration by raising the bogey of the underlying contract being void. It was further held
that the Court ought to decline reference to arbitration only when the Court reaches a
conclusion that the contract is void on a meaningful reading of the contract document
itself without requiring any further proof.
21.      Therefore, the plea raised by Mr. Chutia that the arbitration clause ceases to exist
with the nullifying of the agreement dated 02.11.2011 by the Executive Committee of the
Council is without any merit and, as such, the same is rejected.
22.      So far as the plea taken with regard to the inadmissibility of the document on the
ground of the agreement being not a registered document is concerned, it is to be noted
that Registration Act does not require that all documents are to be compulsorily
registered. The documents which are required to be compulsorily registered are
mentioned in Section 17 of the Registration Act. Pressing into service Clause 2 of the
agreement in question, a faint attempt was made by Mr. Chutia to contend that as the
Council will have to allocate land to the petitioner No. 1 for the purpose of setting up
three bamboo splitting/chipping units, the agreement had taken the colour of a lease
agreement, which requires compulsory registration under Section 17 of the Registration
Act.
23.      The argument of Mr. Chutia is noted only to be rejected as Clause 2, in very
specific terms, refers to a future event, namely, that the petitioner No. 1 shall have to
apply for allocation of land in future. Therefore, the agreement cannot be construed to be
a lease agreement.
24.      Reliance placed by Mr. Chutia on Item No. 23 of the Stamp Act is also misplaced.
Item No. 23 deals with conveyance and stamp duty will vary depending on the value of
consideration for such conveyance. In the instant case, there is no conveyance of any
property with specific value and, therefore, I am inclined to agree with the submission of
Mr. Mishra that description of the instrument would be in terms of Item No. 5 of the
Stamp (Assam) Act. Item No. 5 is on the subject an agreement or a memorandum of
agreement. As the agreement in question is not a document, as indicated in clause (a),
(b), (c) or (d) of Item No. 5, clause (e), which is applicable for agreements, etc. not
covered under clause (a), (b), (c) and (d) thereof, will get attracted. In respect of such a
document, as per clause (e), the stamp duty payable is Rs. 10/-.
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013

                                                                                          8
25.     In SMS Tea Estates Private Limited (supra), the Supreme Court had held that an
arbitration agreement in not compulsorily registerable under the Registration Act and
having regard to the proviso to Section 49 of the Registration Act read with Section
16(1)(a) of the Act of 1996, it was further held that an arbitration clause in an
unregistered but compulsorily registerable document can be acted upon and enforced by
an Arbitral Tribunal for resolution of disputes. It was also held in the said case that a
Court cannot act upon a document which is not properly stamped and in case the Court
comes to a conclusion that the document is not properly stamped, it would be impounded
and dealt with in the manner specified in Section 38 of the Stamp Act.
26.     It has already been discussed that, in the instant case, it is found that the
document in question had been properly stamped.
27.     In view of the above discussions, I am of the considered opinion that this
application deserves to be allowed.
28.     Accordingly, Hon’ble Mr. Brojendra Prasad Katakey, a retired Judge of this Court,
with address at House No. 30, Kharghuli Road, 2nd Bye Lane (Left), Opposite Sitala
Enclave, Guwahati-781004, is appointed as the Arbitrator.
29.     The Court makes it clear that it will be open for the Council to raise the question
of validity of the agreement dated 01.11.2011 before the Arbitrator.
30.     Registry will forward a copy of this order to Hon’ble Mr. Justice Brojendra Prasad
Katakey (Retired).
31.     Arbitration petition stands allowed and disposed of.
                                                                   JUDGE
RK
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013

                                  9
Arbitration Petition N o. 9/ 2013


