*              HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                       CS (OS) No.392/2005
                          Date of decision : August 21, 2009
 LILLY ICOS LLC.                           ..... PLAINTIFF
                   Through : Mr. C.M.Lall Advocate with
                              Ms. Shikha Advocate.
                            Versus
 RICHIE LABORATORIES LTD.            ..... DEFENDANT
                   Through : Nemo.
%
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE ARUNA SURESH
     (1) Whether reporters of local paper may be
           allowed to see the judgment?
     (2) To be referred to the reporter or not?                Yes
     (3) Whether the judgment should be reported
            in the Digest ?                                   Yes
                       JUDGMENT
ARUNA SURESH, J.
1.     Plaintiff is a corporation organized and existing
       under the laws of the State of Indiana, USA with its
       principal place of business at Lilly Corporate Center,
       Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.    Plaintiff is a technical
       collaboration between Eli Lilly and Company, USA
       and ICOS Corporation and is the owner of trademark
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                     Page 1 of 14

       „CIALIS‟ in India as well as world-wide.             Their
       products are sold in Europe and North America by
       the plaintiff itself and the rest of the world through
       its member Lilly.
2.     In brief the case of the plaintiff is that in September,
       1998, Lilly and ICOS formed the plaintiff company
       for the purpose of developing, manufacturing,
       promoting and selling pharmaceutical preparations
       for the treatment of male erectile dysfunction. The
       active ingredient in those preparations is Tadalafil
       which has been patented in numerous countries
       worldwide by the plaintiff and its members. Plaintiff
       filed an application in the United States on June 17,
       1999 to register „CIALIS‟ trademark which is a
       fanciful and coined word that was created by the
       plaintiff having no descriptive meaning. The mark
       including its „….ALIS‟ ending is inherently distinctive
       both to the trade and the consuming public.             The
       trademark „CIALIS‟ was made public by the plaintiff
       in July, 2001. The tablet sold under the trade mark
       „CIALIS‟ was given a unique and unusual shape and
       colour as it was of a unique light yellow colour and
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                     Page 2 of 14

       is shaped in an unusual and distinctive almond
       shape. On the tablet is inscribed the plaintiff‟s trade
       mark C-20 in unique and distinctive script.           The
       plaintiff was issued exclusive marketing rights in
       relation to Tadalafil under patent laws in India. The
       drug is widely in circulation and is being used for
       treatment for erectile dysfunction under the trade
       mark „CIALIS‟ and the „Cialis Tablet Trade Dress‟
       around the world.        Plaintiff has also applied for
       registration of the trade mark „CIALIS‟ in India and
       the said application was advertised in the Trade
       Marks Journal No.1300 dated 1st August, 2003.
3.     From search on the internet, plaintiff learnt that
       defendant      is     advertising    on   its   website
       www.richielabs.com a Tadalafil tablet under the
       brand name TADARICH using a pill shape which is
       identical to the Cialis Tablet Trade Dress.           The
       defendant used the numerals 20 written in a
       stylized form in place of the trade mark „C-20‟ of the
       plaintiff. Plaintiff also found on the website that the
       defendant was using the brand name RICHCALIS
       which is deceptively and confusingly similar to
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                   Page 3 of 14

       plaintiff‟s trade mark „CIALIS‟ which is cleverly
       designed to represent that it is a richer form of
       „CIALIS‟ or is „CIALIS‟ by Richie Laboratories Ltd.
       (the defendant) with an intention to usurp the
       plaintiff‟s trade mark „CIALIS‟. The defendant has
       chosen the name in an effort to ride upon the
       goodwill and reputation of the plaintiff amongst the
       purchaser of the said medicine with the entire effort
       to represent to the members of the trade and public
       that its product is the plaintiff‟s product and
       accordingly to pass off its goods as and for the
       goods of the plaintiff. This has caused irreparable
       harm       and   injury  to  the   plaintiff   being     the
       manufacturer and merchant of high quality goods.
       This drug is schedule „H‟ goods to be sold only on
       medical prescriptions.          The use of the word
       „….ALIS‟ by the defendant have significantly injured
       the Plaintiff‟s interest, have caused or likely to
       cause       public   confusion   as   to     the   source,
       sponsorship or affiliation of its product and have
       damaged and threatened to further damage the
       plaintiff‟s significant and valuable goodwill in the
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                      Page 4 of 14

       „Cialis Tablet Trade Dress‟ and „CIALIS‟ mark       and
       have injured and threatened to further injure the
       Plaintiff‟s right to use its „CIALIS‟ mark and „Cialis
       Tablet Trade Dress‟ as the exclusive indicia or origin
       of    the   Plaintiff‟s erectile dysfunction   product
       containing      Tadalafil  and   have   diluted     and
       threatened to further diminish the distinctive quality
       of the well known „CIALIS‟ trade mark and the „Cialis
       Tablet Trade Dress‟.
4.      Plaintiff has invoked the jurisdiction of this court
       contending that the offending trade marks are
       being advertised by the defendant through their
       website which can be accessed in Delhi within the
       jurisdiction of this court and the defendant sells its
       products with the offending tablet shape all over
       the world, including India and in Delhi, upon orders
       being placed through their website. Hence, the suit
       for permanent injunction and also for rendition of
       accounts for the profits made by the defendant.
5.     Summons for settlement of issues as well as notice
       of the application under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 CPC
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                  Page 5 of 14

       for interim injunction were issued to the defendant
       but the defendant purportedly refused to accept the
       notice. Hence, vide order dated 22nd August, 2005 it
       was proceeded ex-parte.
6.     Plaintiff has filed affidavit of Douglas K. Norman, its
       constituted Attorney, in evidence.       Mr. Douglas in
       his affidavit has confirmed the averments made in
       the Plaint.         During the pendency of the case
       application of the plaintiff seeking registration of
       the trade mark „CIALIS‟ and „C-20‟ was allowed by
       the      concerned       department    and  registration
       certificate were accordingly issued in favour of the
       plaintiff.
7.     After     arguments      were   concluded, my   learned
       predecessor of this court reserved the case for final
       order. However the matter was again listed on 26th
       September, 2006 as the court was of the opinion
       that the jurisdiction of this court to entertain the
       present suit was doubtful. The court also found that
       the       plaintiff    has    claimed   damages      and
       compensation asserting that at the time of rendition
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                   Page 6 of 14

       of accounts they expect that they shall be entitled
       to an amount in excess of Rs. One crore. For the
       purpose     of   jurisdiction  the  suit   is  valued       at
       Rs.1,00,00,050/-, and for the purpose of court fees
       it is valued at Rs.20,00,210/- and a total court fees
       of Rs.22,073/- is affixed on the plaint which also
       needed consideration.
8.     Since the question of jurisdiction has arisen in this
       court I shall first consider whether this court has
       territorial jurisdiction to entertain the present suit.
       The relevant para in the plaint relating to the
       jurisdiction of this court reads as under:-
                    “44. The offending trade marks
                    are advertised by the Defendant
                    through their website, which
                    can be accessed in Delhi, within
                    the jurisdiction of this Hon‟ble
                    Court. The Defendant sells its
                    products with the offending
                    tablet shape all over the world,
                    including India and in Delhi,
                    upon     orders    being    placed
                    through their website. By virtue
                    of the aforesaid this Hon‟ble
                    Court      has    the    territorial
                    jurisdiction to try and entertain
                    the present suit.”
9.      Therefore, according to the plaintiff, since the
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                      Page 7 of 14

       offending trade marks were advertised by the
       Defendant through their website which can be
       accessed in Delhi, this court has the jurisdiction to
       entertain this suit.    It is also averred that the
       Defendant sells its product with the offending tablet
       shape in Delhi as well upon orders being placed
       through their website.
10.    The advertisement of the defendant has been
       exhibited in evidence as Ex.PW-1/1. Perusal of this
       document indicates that this is an information
       issued      in ‘Express   Pharma    Pulse   for     the
       Pharmaceutical Industry’ issued on 1st April, 2004
       regarding manufacturing of Tadarich (tadalafil, a
       generic name approved by USFDA) in Chennai.
       Rather this only imparts information regarding
       nature of drug and the purpose for which it can be
       used. This also provides information regarding the
       company itself but nothing beyond that. This
       information was not obtained by the plaintiff from
       the website of the defendant www.richielabs.com.
       This information has been collected from search
       engine www.google.com and was available on
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                 Page 8 of 14

       www.expresspharmapulse.com/20040401/corporate
       04.shtml. Infact the website of the defendant is not
       accessible in Delhi as it does not open in the
       internet on efforts being made.
11.    The mere fact that a website is accessible in a
       particular place may not itself be sufficient for the
       courts of that place to exercise personal jurisdiction
       over the owners of the website.        However, where
       the website is not merely passive but is interactive
       permitting the users not only to have access to the
       contents thereof but, also subscribe to the services
       provided by the owners/operators, may in certain
       circumstances create jurisdiction in the court of that
       place where the website is accessible.      Where the
       website is interactive, the level of interactivity
       becomes      relevant   and    in   cases  of    limited
       interactivity such interactivity may not be sufficient
       for a court to exercise jurisdiction.
12.    By virtue of Section 20 of the Civil Procedure Code,
       the plaintiff has a right to file the suit against the
       defendant at the place where the cause of action
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                   Page 9 of 14

       wholly or in part arises. Mere passive posting of a
       website does not give jurisdiction to the court within
       whose jurisdiction the plaintiff has filed the suit as it
       does not give rise to any cause of action for the
       plaintiff to file a suit within the jurisdiction of that
       court.      Plaintiff has to show something more to
       indicate as to what cause of action took place in
       substantial manner so as to invoke the jurisdiction
       of that particular court.
13.    In „India TV, Independent News Service Pvt.
       Ltd. vs. India Broadcast Live LLC & Ors. 145
       (2007) DLT 521’, this court observed:-
                     “45. …… there is no „long arm‟
                     statute as such which deals with
                     jurisdiction as regards non-
                     resident defendants. Thus, it
                     would have to be seen whether
                     the defendant‟s activities have
                     a sufficient connection with the
                     forum state (India); whether the
                     cause of action arises out of the
                     defendant‟s activities within the
                     forum and whether the exercise
                     of     jurisdiction  would     be
                     reasonable.
                     46. I am in agreement with the
                     proposition that the mere fact
                     that a website is accessible in a
                     particular place may not itself
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                    Page 10 of 14

                   be sufficient for the Courts of
                   that place to exercise personal
                   jurisdiction over the owners of
                   the website. However, where
                   the website is not merely
                   „passive‟ but is interactive
                   permitting the browsers to not
                   only access the contents thereof
                   but also subscribe to the
                   services     provided    by    the
                   owners/operators, the position
                   would be different…….. even
                   where a website is interactive,
                   the level of interactivity would
                   be     relevant    and     limited
                   interactivity may also not be
                   sufficient for a Court to exercise
                   jurisdiction……….”
14.    In ‘Cybersell Inc. vs. Cybersell Inc. & Ors.’
       (Case No.96-17087 D.C. NO.CV-96-0089-EHC)
       as referred to in the abovesaid judgment, the US
       Court of Appeals for the 9th Circuit observed that a
       three-part test is used to determine whether
       personal jurisdiction can be exercised by the District
       Court. Those three tests are:-
                   “(1) The non-resident defendant
                   must      do     some     act    or
                   consummate some transaction
                   with the forum or perform some
                   act by which he purposefully
                   avails himself of the privilege of
                   conducting activities in the
                   forum, thereby invoking the
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                   Page 11 of 14

                    benefits and protections,
                    (2) The claim must be one
                    which arises out of or results
                    from the defendant‟s forum-
                    related activities, and
                    (3) exercise       of   jurisdiction
                    must be reasonable.”
15.    In       the     present      case,       the      website
       www.expresspharmapulse.com             containing        the
       information of the defendant company and also
       information regarding the drug Tadarich is passive
       in nature. It has no section for subscription to its
       services and the options which could be exercised
       by subscriber. This information in no manner can
       be said to be inviting any subscription from anyone
       including the consumers.
16.    It is pertinent to mention here that the defendant
       company       has   dis-continued    with    its   product
       „Tadarich‟ and instead they are manufacturing drug
       Tadalafil in the brand name of Tadasip which does
       not include the alleged trade mark „CIALIS‟ owned
       by the plaintiff.
17.    The plaintiff has not adduced any evidence on
       record to indicate that the defendant has been
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                      Page 12 of 14

       marketing its product „Tadarich‟ in Delhi so as to
       invoke the jurisdiction of this court.
18.    As discussed above, the website proved on the
       record does not indicate that the defendant invited
       any subscription from anyone including Delhi for
       supply of their product.
19.    Therefore,     it   is   concluded  that   the   website
       containing     the     information  of  the   defendant
       company and its product „Tadarich‟ in no manner
       can be said to be interactive permitting the users,
       not only access to the contents thereof but, also
       subscribe     to    the    services  provided   by     the
       defendant.        Even if it is taken that a limited
       interactivity is there in the information, this by itself
       is not sufficient for this court to exercise its
       jurisdiction.
20.    In ‘Kusum Ingots and Alloys Limited vs. Union
       of India and Anr., 2004 (6) SCC 254’, it was
       observed that if a small part of the cause of action
       arises within the territorial jurisdiction of the High
       Court, the same by itself may not be considered to
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                    Page 13 of 14

       be a determinative factor compelling the High Court
       to decide the matter on merits. It was further
       observed that in appropriate cases, the Court may
       refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction by
       invoking the doctrine of forum conveniens.
21.    In this case not even a small part of cause of action
       has arisen in Delhi. Hence, I hold that this court has
       no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the present
       suit.
22.    The plaint is hereby ordered to be returned back to
       the plaintiff along with the original documents to be
       presented      before   the   competent     court      of
       jurisdiction.
                                          ARUNA SURESH
                                               (JUDGE)
AUGUST 21, 2009
vk
CS(OS) No.392/2005                                  Page 14 of 14


