                              HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                      MACA No. 104 of 2010
             From a judgment dated 18.07.2009 passed by Smt. V. Jayashree, 1st
             MACT-Cum-District Judge, Dhenkanal in M.A.C. Case No. 140 of 2002.
                                              --------
             National Insurance Company Ltd.                         …Appellant
                                                -Versus-
             Babita Barik and others                                 …Respondents
                   For Appellant           :      Mr. Goutam Mishra
                   For Respondents         :      M/s. P.K.Mishra & P. Mishra
                                                        (for Rs-1 to 6)
                                                   Mr. U. Sahoo-2 (R- 7)
                                             ----------
      P R E S E N T:
                      THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.N.MAHAPATRA
                                  Date of Judgment: 22.07.2011
B.N. MAHAPATRA, J.       The Insurance Company has preferred this appeal against
             the Judgment dated 18.07.2009 passed by the 1st. Motor Accident Claims
             Tribunal, Dhenkanal in M.A.C. Case No. 140 of 2002.
             2.          The claimants’ case in a nut shell before the Tribunal is that
             on 31.10.2001 at about 10 P.M. while deceased-Ajaya Barik was going
             towards     Dhenkanal     on    his     scooter    bearing    Registration
             No.DL/35/J/1773, at Dhumabati Deity’s temple located by the side of
             NH 42, a truck bearing Registration No.OAX 5859 being driven in a rash
             and negligent manner by its driver dashed against the scooter of the
             deceased from his back side. As a result of such accident, the deceased
             sustained serious injuries on his body and died at the spot. At the time

                                      2
of death, the deceased was 29 years old and was getting a sum of
Rs.6,000/- (rupees six thousand) per month towards his salary.
            Before the Tribunal, opposite party No1-owner of the vehicle
did not contest the case for which he was set ex parte. Opposite party
No.2-Insurance Company, in its written statement inter alia stated that
due to negligence of the deceased, the accident took place and the driver
of the offending truck had no valid and effective Driving Licence at the
time of such accident and therefore, the Insurer is not liable to indemnify
the owner of the vehicle.
3.          On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the Tribunal has
framed the following four issues:
            (i)    Whether due to the rash and negligent driving of
                   the driver of the Truck, bearing Registration
                   No.OAX 5859, the accident took place and in
                   that accident, deceased Ajaya Barik succumbed
                   to the injuries?
            (ii)   Whether the petitioners are entitled to get any
                   compensation? If so, what would be the extent?
            (iii)  Whether all the opposite parties or any one of
                   them is/are liable to pay compensation?
            (iv)   To what relief, the petitioners are entitled?
4.          The claimants have examined one witness and produced
fifteen documents which are marked as Exts.1 to 15.

                                    3
             The Insurance Company has examined one Gyanranjan Das
as a witness and produced the report of the Investigator, which is
marked as Ext.A.
5.           Taking    both   oral  and   documentary      evidence    into
consideration, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the documents
filed and proved by the petitioners clearly supports their case and the
driver of the offending vehicle is solely responsible for the accident
resulting in death of the deceased.
             Considering the age of the deceased, the Tribunal has
applied multiplier 18. On the basis of the salary certificate (Ext.10), the
Tribunal has determined the amount of compensation at Rs.6,42,240/-.
The Tribunal further awarded Rs.2,000/- towards funeral expenses,
Rs.2,500/- towards loss of estate and Rs.5,000/- towards loss of
consortium and directed the Insurance Company to pay a sum of
Rs.6,51,740/- along with interest @7% per annum from the date of filing
of the claim application.
6.           Mr. Goutam Mishra, learned counsel appearing for the
Insurance Company submitted that the impugned award is illegal and
arbitrary. Placing reliance upon the judgment of the apex Court in the
case of State of Haryana vs. Jasbir Kaur, (2003) 7 SCC 484, Mr.Mishra
submitted that the award of compensation should not be a bonanza.
There was no proper eyewitness in the present case and in absence of
such evidence, application filed under Section 166 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 was liable to be dismissed. In support of his contention,

                                     4
Mr.Mishra relied upon a decision of Delhi High Court in the case of The
New India Assurance Company Ltd. Vs. Smt. Bhupinder Kaur and Ors., II
(2007) ACC 405. In view of the decision of the Apex Court in the case of
The Oriental Insurance Co. Vs. Meena Variyal, 2007 (5) JT 65, the
Tribunal should have asked the claimants to produce the best possible
evidence, which has not been done by the said Tribunal. Since the driver
was not impleaded as a party, the claim petition was not maintainable
before the Tribunal. Neither the police officer nor the MVI was examined.
Therefore, the police paper/G.R. records should not have been taken into
account by the Tribunal for the purpose of determination of the
compensation. In support of his contention, Mr.Mishra relied upon a
decision of this Court in the case of National Insurance Company Ltd. vs.
Malati Sethi, 106 (2008) CLT 488. Placing reliance on a decision of this
Court in the case of Banwarilal Agarwalla vs. Jeevan Kumar Badu, 94
(2002) CLT 588,     it was contended by Mr. Mishra that the Tribunal
should not have relied upon the charge sheet filed in the present case.
7.           Mr. Mishra, further submitted that the award of interest
@7% per annum is high and excessive. Since the accident took place in
the year 2001, the interest should have been 6% per annum.
8.           Mr.P.Mishra, learned counsel appearing for respondent
Nos.1 to 3 submitted that in view of the admission of the appellant-
Insurance Company in its written statement filed before the learned
Tribunal that the driver of the offending vehicle had no valid driving

                                      5
licence and accident occurred due to contributory negligence of the
driver of the offending vehicle and the deceased, it is not permitted to
take a contrary stand before this Court. The fact of occurrence of the
accident has been admitted by both the Insurance Company and the
owner of the vehicle in their written statements filed before the Tribunal.
Appellant No.1, the wife of the deceased examined herself as P.W. 1 and
stated about the fact of the accident and relied on various documents to
support her contention which were marked as Exts. 1 to 15 as public
documents. On the other hand, opposite party no.2, the insurance
company has not adduced any evidence to establish its plea of
contributory negligence. Therefore, Mr. Mishra, learned counsel for the
respondents contended that there is no infirmity in the order of the
Tribunal. In support of his contention, he relied upon the decisions of the
Supreme Court in the case of Pushpabai Parshottam Udeshi and another
v. M/s. Ranjit Ginning and Pressing Co. Pvt. Ltd. and another, AIR 1977
SC 1735 and Bimla Devi and others. V. Himachal Road Transport
Corporation and others, 2009 (2) T.A.C. 693 SC. It was further contended
that since the documents produced before the learned Tribunal were
admitted without objection and marked as Exts. 1 to 15, the appellant is
not permitted to raise any objection at a later stage. In support of his
contention, he relied upon the decision in R.E.V. Venkatachala Gounder
v. Arulmigu Viswesaraswami and V.P. Temple and another, AIR 2003
SCW 5316. The provision of Motor Vehicles Act being a benevolent social
legislation enacted with a view to giving relief to the victims of a vehicular

                                       6
accident, the claimant is not required to prove its case beyond all
reasonable doubts. The claim can be decided on the basis of strong
reasonable probability and preponderance of evidence.          It is further
contended that there is no illegality committed by the learned Tribunal
while assessing the compensation, rather the compensation awarded is
liable to be enhanced as the future prospects of the deceased who died at
the age of     29 years and doing a stable work, was not taken into
consideration by the learned Tribunal. In support of his contention,
Mr.P. Mishra relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case
of Sarala Verma v. Delhi Transport Corporation, 2009 (2) T.A.C. SC 677.
9.            On the     rival  contentions   the  questions that   fall for
consideration by this Court are as follows:
       (i) Whether the Tribunal is justified to hold that the offending
              vehicle bearing Regn. No. OAX-5859 is involved in the
              accident and the accident occurred due to negligence of
              the driver of the offending vehicle in absence of
              eyewitness and without impleading the driver of the
              alleged offending vehicle as a party and also without
              examining the police officials or the M.V.I.?
       (ii)   Whether the amount of compensation awarded by the
              Tribunal is just and proper?
10.           To deal with the first question, it is necessary to know the
stand taken by the appellant-Insurance Company before the Tribunal.
Mr. G. Mishra, learned counsel for the appellant fairly submitted that
before the Tribunal the appellant-Insurance Company has not raised any

                                      7
objection for not impleading the driver as a party. No stand has been
taken in the written statement regarding maintainability of the claim
petition for non-impletion of driver as a party. On the contrary,
paragraph 7 of the written statement filed by opposite party no.2-
Insurance Company reveals that opposite party No.2 has taken a stand
that the driver of the offending vehicle had no valid driving licence while
driving the vehicle at the time of the accident. Further, in paragraph 8, it
is stated that the alleged accident might have caused due to contributory
negligence of the owner of the offending truck and the deceased. Thus, it
is found that the appellant is taking a plea before this Court which runs
contrary to its own admission made in the written statement. Since in
the written statement filed before the Tribunal, the Insurance Company
took a stand that the driver of the offending vehicle had no valid driving
licence at the time of accident and there was contributory negligence on
the part of the owner and the deceased, he is not permitted to take
contrary plea that the alleged vehicle was not involved in the accident
and the driver was not negligent. Driving of the offending vehicle and
negligence on the part of the driver are admitted and accepted in the
written statement filed before the Tribunal. Otherwise, there would not
have been question of contributory negligence. Since involvement of the
alleged vehicle and negligence of the driver is not in dispute, the driver is
not a necessary party to be impleaded.
 11.             For the above reasons, the report of the investigator that
the vehicle was not involved in the accident is also not acceptable and

                                    8
more    so   when   the  Insurance   Company     has   not  produced  the
Investigating Officer before the Tribunal for examination. No other
evidence was also adduced by the Insurance Company either before the
Tribunal or this Court in support of its contention. It may be noted that
in its written statement, opposite party no.1-owner of the offending
vehicle admitted that an accident occurred vis-à-vis the vehicle belonged
to him on the date, time and place as mentioned in the claim petition. It
is further found from the L.C.R. that the petitioner No.1 examined herself
as P.W.1 and in her statement, inter alia, stated that on the relevant
date, i.e., on 31.10.2001 at about 10 P.M. while her husband was
proceeding on NH 42 on a Scooter towards Dhenkanal side keeping to
his left, at Dhumabati Deity’s temple the offending truck came in high
speed being driven rashly and negligently by its driver and dashed
against her husband, as a result, he was thrown out of the scooter and
died at the spot. She further stated that the accident occurred due to
rash and negligent driving by the driver of the offending truck and there
was no fault of her husband. She also filed certified copies of F.I.R.,
chargesheet, seizure list, Zimanama, inquest report, dead body challan,
P.M. Report, 161 statement, and true copy of the last pay certificate of
her deceased-husband issued by the Deputy Commandant, OSAP 1st Bn.
Charbatia in support of her claim and those documents were admitted
without objection and marked as Exts.1 to 15. In cross-examination,
nothing contrary was elucidated from the mouth of P.W.1.

                                      9
12.         At this juncture, it would be profitable to refer the judgment
of the apex Court in the present context. In the case of Bimla Devi and
others (supra) the Supreme Court held as follows:
            “In a situation of this nature, the Tribunal has rightly
              taken a holistic view of the matter. It was necessary to
              be borne in mind that strict proof of an accident
              caused by a particular bus in a particular manner may
              not be possible to be done by the claimants. The
              claimants were merely to establish their case on the
              touchstone of preponderance of probability. The
              standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt could not
              have been applied. For the said purpose, the High
              Court should have taken into consideration the
              respective stories set forth by both the parties.”
13.         In the case of Pushpabai Parshottam Udeshi (supra) the apex
Court held as under:
              “The normal rule is that it is for the plaintiff to prove
              negligence but as in some cases considerable hardship
              is caused to the plaintiff as the true cause of the
              accident is not known to him but is solely within the
              knowledge of the defendant who caused it, the plaintiff
              can prove the accident but cannot prove how it
              happened to establish negligence on the part of the
              defendant. This hardship is sought to be avoided by
              applying the principle of res ipsa loquitur . The general
              purport of the words res ipsa loquitur is that the
              accident “speaks for itself” or tells it s own story. There
              are cases in which the accident speaks for itself so
              that it is sufficient for the plaintiff to prove the
              accident and nothing more. It will then be for the
              defendant to establish that the accident happened due
              to some other cause than his own negligence. Salmond
              on the Law of Torts) 15th Ed.) at P.306 states : “The
              maxim res ipsa loquitur applies whenever it is so
              improbable that such an accident would have
              happened without the negligence of the defendant that
              a reasonable jury could find without further evidenced
              that it was so caused”. In Halsbury’s Laws of England,
              3rd Ed., Vol. 28, at page 77, the position is stated
              thus : “An exception to the general rule that the
              burden of proof of the alleged negligence is in the first
              instance on the plaintiff occurs wherever the facts

                                      10
               already established are such that the proper and
               natural inference arising from them is that the injury
               complained of was caused by the defendant’s
               negligence, or where the event charged as negligence
               ‘tells its own story’ of negligence on the part of the
               defendant, the story so told being clear and
               unambiguous”. Where the maxim is applied the
               burden is on the defendant to show either that in fact
               he was not negligent or that the accident might more
               probably have happened in a manner which did not
               connote negligence on his part”.
14.          It is no more res integra that in a road accident claim case,
the strict principle of proof in a criminal case are not attracted. The apex
court in the case of Parmeshwari vs. Amir Chand and Ors., AIR 2011
SC 1504, held as follows:
             “The High Court appears to be not cognizant of the
             principle that in a road accident claim, the strict
             principles of proof in a criminal case are not attracted.
             The following observations of this Court in Bimla Devi
             and others v. Himachal Road Transport Corporation
             and others [(2009) 13 SCC 530] : (AIR 2009 SC 2819)
             are very pertinent.
                     In a situation of this nature, the Tribunal has
             rightly taken a holistic view of the matter. It was
             necessary to be borne in mind that strict proof of an
             accident caused by a particular bus in a particular
             manner may not be possible to be done by the
             claimants. The claimants were merely to establish
             their case on the touchstone of preponderance of
             probability. The standard of proof beyond reasonable
             doubt could not have been applied.”
15.          For the reasons stated in preceding paragraphs, this Court is
of the opinion that the learned Tribunal has not committed any error in
holding that the offending vehicle bearing Regn. No.OAX-5859 is involved
in the accident and the accident occurred due to negligence of the driver
of the said vehicle.

                                   11
             For the said reasons, the various judicial pronouncements
relied upon by Mr. G. Mishra, learned counsel for the Insurance
Company are of no help to the appellant.
16.          Now coming to the 2nd question, whether the amount of
compensation awarded by the Tribunal is just and proper, this Court
finds that admittedly, in the present case the deceased was in a stable
service as he was serving as a barber in the 1 st Bn. Charbatia. The case
of the appellant is that as per the decision of the apex Court in Jasbir
Kaur (supra), the amount of compensation should not be a bonanza for
claimants. According to Mr.Mishra, in the instant case, the amount of
compensation awarded by the Tribunal is high and excessive. Though
learned counsel relied upon the above case law, he has not stated how
the amount of compensation awarded by the Tribunal is a bonanza for
the claimants. On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the
respondent-claimants submitted that the compensation awarded by the
learned Tribunal requires to be enhanced in terms of the judgment of the
apex Court in Sarala Verma (supra) because while computing the amount
of compensation, the learned Tribunal has not taken into consideration
the future prospects of the deceased, who died at the age of 29 years and
was doing a stable job.
17.          Learned    Tribunal  while  determining    the   amount    of
compensation has taken into consideration the salary certificate and
identity card produced by the respondent-claimants before the Tribunal
which are marked as Exts. 10 & 12 respectively. The salary certificate

                                      12
(Ext.10) indicates that the deceased was getting Rs.4680/- as gross
salary. After deducting Rs.158/- which is not recoverable by the
claimants, the Tribunal has taken the monthly income of the deceased as
Rs.4460/- and annual income at Rs.53,520/-. Applying multiplier 15
and deducting 1/3rd towards personal expenses of the deceased, the
amount of compensation was computed                 by the Tribunal      at
Rs.6,42,240/-. Besides, Rs.2000/-, Rs.2,500/- and Rs.5000/- was
awarded towards funeral expenses, loss of estate and loss of consortium
respectively. Thus, the total amount of compensation was determined at
Rs.6,51,740/-. It is true that though the deceased was 29 years old at
the time of death and was in a stable service, the Tribunal has not
awarded any compensation towards his future prospect. In my view, the
Tribunal has made a holistic approach to the facts and circumstances of
the case and determined the amount of compensation at Rs.6,51,740/-in
terms of second Schedule to Act. Therefore, I am not inclined to interfere
with the same. For the said reason, I am also not inclined to interfere
with the rate of interest awarded by the Tribunal.
18.           In view of the above, the Insurance Company (O.P.No.2 ) is
directed to pay Rs.6,51,740/- as compensation along with interest @ 7%
per annum from the date of filing of the claim petition, i.e., 24.06.2002
till the date of deposit of the same in favour of the claimant-respondents.
The said amount shall be deposited before the Tribunal within a period of
two months from today. On deposit of the amount of compensation along

                                                13
       with interest as indicated above, the Tribunal shall disburse the same to
       the claimants in the manner as it has directed in its order.
       19.               On production of a receipt showing deposit of the above
       amount of compensation as directed above before the Registrar (Judicial)
       of this Court, the statutory amount of Rs.25,000/- deposited with the
       Registry of this Court along with interest accrued thereon be refunded to
       the appellant-Insurance Company.
       20.               In the result, the MACA is dismissed.
                                                             ……………………...
                                                               B.N.Mahapatra, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated 22nd July, 2011/ssd/ss/skj


