          THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                    Judgment delivered on: 06.11.2012
+        W.P.(Crl) 1552/2010
ABDUL MATEEN                                                   ... Petitioner
                                        versus
UOI AND ANR                                                    ... Respondents
Advocates who appeared in this case:
For the Petitioner           : Mr T.K. Mahapatra, Mr Dinesh, Mr Sunit Sharma
For the Respondent           : Mr Sachin Datta (CGSC) with Ms Kritika Mehra
CORAM:-
HON’BLE MR JUSTICE BADAR DURREZ AHMED
HON’BLE MS JUSTICE VEENA BIRBAL
                                     JUDGMENT
BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J.
1.       This writ petition seeks the quashing of notification S.O. No. 2941 (E)
dated 18.11.2009 issued by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue,
Government of India on the ground that it is ultra vires the Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘NDPS
Act’).
2.       The petitioner is a citizen of Afganistan and is facing trial in the case
entitled State v. Niyamatulah & Ors. which arises out of FIR No. 212/2009
of Police Station Crime Branch registered under section 21(c) of the NDPS
Act. An alleged recovery of 500 grams of heroin was made from, inter alia,
the petitioner. The Forensic Science Laboratory Report with regard to the
said alleged heroin indicated that the substance allegedly recovered
comprised of 44.5% diacetylmorphine (heroin). If this percentage is taken
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                      Page 1 of 17

into account, then, according to the learned counsel for the petitioner the
actual weight of heroin in the alleged recovery would be 222.5 grams.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner this would be less than
the commercial quantity of 250 grams specified under notification S.O. 1055
(E) dated 19.10.2001. If the petitioner is right, then, the recovery would be
of less than the commercial quantity prescribed for heroin and therefore the
punishment could be for a term which could extend to 10 years with fine
which could extend to Rs. 1 lakh. However, if the petitioner’s submission is
not accepted then the alleged recovery would be of a commercial quantity
inasmuch as the commercial quantity specified for heroin under the said
notification S.O 1055 (E) dated 19.10.2001 is 250 grams and above. If that
were to be the case, then, the punishment involved has to be not less than 10
years and may extend to 20 years with fine which cannot be less than Rs. 1
lakh and may extend to Rs. 2 lakh.
3.       Prior to the issuance of the impugned notification S.O. 2941 (E) dated
18.11.2009, there was a controversy that had been set at rest by a decision of
the Supreme Court in the case of E. Micheal Raj v. Intelligence Officer
Narcotic Control Bureau: 2008 (5) SCC 161. The Supreme Court, after
analyzing the provisions of the NDPS Act as also entries 56 and 239 of the
notification dated 19.10.2001, observed that the offending substance in that
case, which contained diacetylmorphine, was an opium derivative and hence
a manufactured drug. The Supreme Court then observed as under:-
          “15. It appears from the Statement of Objects and Reasons of
         the amending Act of 2001 that the intention of the legislature
         was to rationalise the sentence structure so as to ensure that
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                  Page 2 of 17

         while drug traffickers who traffic in significant quantities of
         drugs are punished with deterrent sentence, the addicts and
         those who commit less serious offences are sentenced to less
         severe punishment. Under the rationalised sentence structure,
         the punishment would vary depending upon the quantity of
         offending material. Thus, we find it difficult to accept the
         argument advanced on behalf of the respondent that the rate of
         purity is irrelevant since any preparation which is more than the
         commercial quantity of 250 gm and contains 0.2% of heroin or
         more would be punishable under Section 21(c) of the NDPS
         Act, because the intention of the legislature as it appears to us is
         to levy punishment based on the content of the offending drug
         in the mixture and not on the weight of the mixture as such.
         This may be tested on the following rationale. Supposing 4 gm
         of heroin is recovered from an accused, it would amount to a
         small quantity, but when the same 4 gm is mixed with 50 kg of
         powdered sugar, it would be quantified as a commercial
         quantity. In the mixture of a narcotic drug or a psychotropic
         substance with one or more neutral substance(s), the quantity of
         the neutral substance(s) is not to be taken into consideration
         while determining the small quantity or commercial quantity of
         a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance. It is only the actual
         content by weight of the narcotic drug which is relevant for the
         purposes of determining whether it would constitute small
         quantity or commercial quantity. The intention of the legislature
         for introduction of the amendment as it appears to us is to
         punish the people who commit less serious offences with less
         severe punishment and those who commit grave crimes, such as
         trafficking in significant quantities, with more severe
         punishment.”
Finally the Supreme Court concluded that:-
         “…..when any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance is found
         mixed with one or more neutral substances for the purpose of
         imposition of punishment it is the content of the narcotic drug
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                     Page 3 of 17

         or psychotropic substance which shall be taken into
         consideration.”
4.       However, that view of the Supreme Court prevailed at a time when the
impugned notification had not been issued. Before we proceed further it
would be appropriate to set out the impugned notification. The same reads
as under:-
                           “THE GAZETTTE OF INDIA
                               EXTRAORDINARY
                       PART II – Section 3 – sub-section (ii)
                         PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
                No. 18931            NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY,
                   NOVEMBER 18, 2009 / KARTIKA 27, 1931
                            MINISTRY OF FINANCE
                             (Department of Revenue)
                                 NOTIFICATION
                       New Delhi, the 18th November, 2009
         S.O. 2941(E).– In exercise of the powers conferred by clause
         (vii a) and (xxiii a) of Section 2 of the Narcotic Drugs and
         Psychotropic Substance Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) the Central
         Government, hereby makes the following amendment in the
         Notification S.O. 1055(E), dated 19th October, 2001, namely :-
         In the Table at the end after Note 3, the following Note shall be
         inserted, namely:-
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                  Page 4 of 17

         “(4) The quantities shown in column 5 and column 6 of the
         Table relating to the respective drugs shown in column 2 shall
         apply to the entire mixture or any solution or any one or more
         narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances of that particular drug
         in dosage form or isomers, esters, ethers and salts of these
         drugs, including salts of esters, ethers and isomers, wherever
         existence of such substance is possible and not just its pure drug
         content.”
                                              [F. No. 662/33/2008-NC-I]
                                          VIMLA BAKSHI, Under Secy”
5.       According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the law as declared
by the Supreme Court in E. Micheal Raj (supra) clearly entails that the
alleged recovery in the present case would be only to the extent of 222.5
grams, representing the actual weight of the heroin, and that would be less
than the commercial quantity of 250 grams specified in the notification dated
19.10.2001. But, by virtue of the impugned notification, the entire quantity
of 500 grams is sought to be reckoned as the weight of the narcotic drug, be
it regarded as heroin or as an opium derivative. If that were to be so, the
alleged recovery would be of a commercial quantity in either case, that is,
whether it is regarded as diacetylmorphine (heroin) or as an opium
derivative. He submitted that while the legislature could have provided that
the mixture of heroin and neutral substances should be considered in totality,
the Central Government could not do so by issuing a notification. It was
submitted that the Central Government could have done so only if the
legislature had empowered the Central Government to do so. According to
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                    Page 5 of 17

the learned counsel for the petitioner, the power for issuing the impugned
notification is sought to be traced to the provisions of section 2 (viia) and
section 2 (xxiiia) of the NDPS Act. According to the learned counsel for the
petitioner, a bare reading of the said provisions indicate that the legislature
has only given the Central Government power to specify the quantity of
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and no power had been conferred
by the legislature to define as to what has to be considered as part of a
narcotic drug and psychotropic substance. It was then contended by the
learned counsel for the petitioner that it was never the intention of the
legislature to consider a neutral substance as part of a manufactured drug like
heroin.      In this context it was submitted that wherever the legislature
intended a mixture to be taken into account it had made it explicit, for
example, in the case of cannabis, section 2 (iii) makes it clear that cannabis,
inter alia, means any mixture, with or without any neutral material, of any of
the given forms of cannabis or any drink prepared therefrom. Similarly, the
definition of coca leaf in section 2 (vi)(b) is also specified to mean any
mixture of the substance in clause (a) with or without any neutral material.
It was also contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the word
“preparation” included in the definition of opium derivative in section 2
(xvi)(e) was with reference to a mixture of two drugs and not a mixture of a
drug and a neutral substance. It was reiterated that wherever the legislature
intended to include the total weight of a mixture of a drug and a neutral
material, it had done so specifically by mentioning the same and, as such,
where it has not been specifically mentioned, the total weight of the mixture
of a drug with neutral material cannot be taken and it is only the weight of
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                 Page 6 of 17

the drug in that mixture that could be regarded for the purposes of
determining as to whether the contraband was of a small quantity or a
commercial quantity or an intermediate quantity. It was submitted that the
impugned notification dated 18.11.2009 issued by the Central Government
went beyond the provisions of the NDPS Act in including the weight of the
neutral substance for the purposes of determining whether the case fell
within any one of the three categories – small quantity, intermediate quantity
or commercial quantity. The learned counsel for the petitioner had also
placed strong reliance on the decision in Ansar Ahmed v. State: 123 (2005)
DLT 563 and more particularly on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of E. Micheal Raj (supra).
6.       On the other hand the learned counsel for the UOI submitted that the
impugned notification dated 18.11.2009 has been issued in exercise of
powers conferred under section 2 (viia) and 2 (xxiiia). It was submitted that
the NDPS Act itself delegates to the Central Government the power to
specify the small quantity and commercial quantity of narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances. It was then contended that the expression narcotic
drugs in section 2 (xiv) has been defined to include all manufactured drugs.
The expression manufactured drugs itself has been defined in section 2 (xi)
to, inter alia, include opium derivatives which in turn has been defined in
section (xvi) to, inter alia, mean diacetylmorphine, that is, the alkaloid also
known as diamorphine or         heroin and its salts.  The expression opium
derivative as per section 2 (xvi)(e) also means all “preparations” containing
more than 0.2% of morphine or containing “any diacetylmorphine”. The
learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the expression
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                 Page 7 of 17

“preparation” has also been defined in section 2 (xx) to, inter alia, mean, in
relation to a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, any solution or
mixture, in whatever physical state, containing one or more such drugs and
substances. It was, therefore, contended by the learned counsel for the
respondent that it is evident that the expression ‘narcotic drug’ includes
‘preparation’ which, as defined in the NDPS Act, inter alia, means one or
more drugs and substances, in the form of a solution or a mixture. In
response to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner it
was contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that the expression
“preparation” cannot be limited to mean only a mixture of two drugs and not
to a mixture of a narcotic drug and a neutral material. According to the
learned counsel for the respondent the bare language of the definition of the
word “preparation” used in section 2 (xx) of the NDPS Act makes it clear
that the same includes any solution or mixture in whatever physical state
containing one or more drugs and substances. It was, therefore, contended
that there was no merit in the writ petition and the same ought to be
dismissed.
7.       Before we embark upon a discussion of the submissions made by the
learned counsel for the parties it would be necessary to set out the relevant
provisions of the NDPS Act. They are as under:-
         “21. Punishment for contravention in relation to
         manufactured drugs and preparations.—Whoever, in
         contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order
         made or condition of licence granted thereunder, manufactures,
         possesses, sells, purchases, transports, imports inter-State,
         exports inter-State or uses any manufactured drug or any
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                Page 8 of 17

         preparation containing any manufactured drug shall be
         punishable,—
         (a) where the contravention involves small quantity, with
         rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
         months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees,
         or with both;
         (b) where the contravention involves quantity, lesser than
         commercial quantity but greater than small quantity, with
         rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
         years, and with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees;
         (c) where the contravention involves commercial quantity, with
         rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
         ten years but which may extend to twenty years, and shall also
         be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but
         which may extend to two lakh rupees:
         Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded in the
         judgment, impose a fine exceeding two lakh rupees.”
         “2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise
         requires,—
                  xxxx          xxxx         xxxx          xxxx        xxxx
         (iii) “cannabis (hemp)” means—
                  (a) charas, that is, the separated resin, in whatever form,
                  whether crude or purified, obtained from the cannabis
                  plant and also includes concentrated preparation and resin
                  known as hashish oil or liquid hashish:
                  (b) ganja, that is, the flowering or fruiting tops of the
                  cannabis plant (excluding the seeds and leaves when not
                  accompanied by the tops), by whatever name they may be
                  known or designated; and
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                      Page 9 of 17

                  (c) any mixture, with or without any neutral material, of
                  any of the above forms of cannabis or any drink prepared
                  thereform;
                  xxxx          xxxx         xxxx         xxxx        xxxx
         (vi) “coca leaf” means—
                  (a) the leaf of the coco plant except a leaf from which all
                  ecgonine, cocaine and any other ecgonine alkaloids have
                  been removed;
                  (b) any mixture thereof with or without any neutral
                  material, but does not include any preparation containing
                  not more than 0.1 per cent of cocaine;
                  (vii-a) “commercial quantity”, in relation to narcotic
                  drugs and psychotropic substances, means any quantity
                  greater than the quantity specified by the Central
                  Government by notification in the Official Gazette;
         (xi)     “manufactured drug” means—
                  (a) all coca derivatives, medicinal cannabis, opium
                  derivatives and poppy straw concentrate;
                  (b) any other narcotic substance or preparation which the
                  Central Government may, having regard to the available
                  information as to its nature or to its nature or to a
                  decision, if any, under any International Convention, by
                  notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be a
                  manufactured drug;
         but does not include any narcotic substance or preparation
         which the Central Government may, having regard to the
         available information as to a decision, if any, under any
         International Convention, by notification in the Official Gazette,
         declare not to be a manufactured drug;
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                     Page 10 of 17

                  xxxx         xxxx         xxxx         xxxx        xxxx
         (xiv) “narcotic drug” means coca leaf, cannabis (hemp), opium,
         poppy straw and includes all manufactured drugs;
                  xxxx         xxxx         xxxx         xxxx        xxxx
          (xvi) “opium derivative” means—
                  (a) medicinal opium, that is, opium which has undergone
                  the processes necessary to adopt it for medicinal use in
                  accordance with the requirements of the Indian
                  Pharmacopoeia or any other pharmacopoeia notified in
                  this behalf by the Central Government, whether in
                  powder form or granulated or otherwise or mixed with
                  neutral materials;
                  (b) prepared opium, that is, any product of opium
                  obtained by any series of operations designed to
                  transform opium into an extract suitable for smoking and
                  the dross or other residue remaining after opium is
                  smoked;
                  (c) phenanthrene alkaloids, namely, morphine, codeine,
                  thebaine and their salts:
                  (d) diacetylmorphine, that is, the alkaloid also known as
                  diamorphine or heroin and its salts; and
                  (e) all preparations containing more than 0.2 per cent of
                  morphine or containing any diacetylmorphine;
                  xxxx         xxxx         xxxx         xxxx        xxxx
         (xx) “preparation”, in relation to a narcotic drug or psychotropic
         substance means any one or more such drugs or substances in
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                    Page 11 of 17

         dosage form or any solution or mixture, in whatever physical
         state, containing one or more such drugs or substances;
                  xxxx       xxxx         xxxx          xxxx          xxxx
         (xxiii-a) “small quantity”, in relation to narcotic drugs and
         psychotropic substances, means any quantity lesser than the
         quantity specified by the Central Government by notification in
         the Official Gazette;”
8.       It would also be necessary to refer to the notification S.O. 1055 (E)
dated 19.10.2001. The said notification, to the extent relevant, as it stood
prior to issuance of the impugned notification dated 18.11.2009, reads as
under:-
            “NOTIFICATION SPECIFYING SMALL QUANTITY
                       AND COMMERCIAL QUANTITY
         In exercise of the powers conferred by clauses (viia) and
         (xxiiia) of section 2 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
         Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) and in supersession of
         Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue Notification S.O.
         527 (E) dated 16th July, 1996, except as respects things done or
         omitted to be done before such supersession, the Central
         Government hereby specifies the quantity mentioned in
         columns 5 and 6 of the Table below, in relation to the narcotic
         drugs or psychotropic substances mentioned in the
         corresponding entry in columns 2 to 4 of the said Table, as the
         small quantity and commercial quantity respectively for the
         purposes of the said clauses of that section.
                                      TABLE
             [See sub-clause vii(a) and xxiii(a) of Section 2 of the Act]
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                     Page 12 of 17

           Sl.    Name of Narcotic   Other non-    Chemical Name    Small Comme
          No.         Drug and       proprietary                    Quan    rcial
                    Psychotropic        name                         tity Quantit
                      Substance                                      (in      y
                 (International non-                                gm.)     (in
                  proprietary name                                        gm./kg.)
                        (INN)
          (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)        (5)     (6)
           --              --             --               --         --      --
          56    Heroin                           Diacetylmorphine     5   250 gm.
           --              --             --               --         --      --
                                                 [other than
                                                 diacetyl morphine
          93    Opium Derivatives                (heroin), morphine   5   250 gm.
                                                 and those listed
                                                 here in]
           --              --             --               --         --      --
                Any mixture or
                preparation that of
                with or without a                 …………………
          239                                                         *      **
                natural material, of                   ………
                any of the above
                drugs.
         * Lesser of the small quantity between the quantities given
         against the respective narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances
         mentioned above forming part of the mixture.
         ** Lesser of the Commercial quantity between the quantities
         given against the respective narcotic drugs or psychotropic
         substances mentioned above forming part of the mixture.
         Note. –
            1.    The small quantity and the commercial quantity given
                  against the respective drugs listed above apply to
                  isomers, within specific chemical designation, the esters,
                  ethers and salts of these drugs, including salts of esters,
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                          Page 13 of 17

                  ethers and isomers; whenever existence of such substance
                  is possible.
           2.     The quantities shown against the respective drugs listed
                  above also apply to the preparations of the drug and the
                  preparations of substances of note 1 above.
           3.     "Small quantity" and "Commercial Quantity" with
                  respect to cultivation of opium poppy is not specified
                  separately as the offence in this regard is covered under
                  clause (c) of section 18 of the Narcotic Drugs and
                  Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.”
It would be pertinent to remember that another note [Note (4)] has been
added by virtue of the impugned notification dated 18.11.2009, which we
have already set out in paragraph 4 above.
9.       We have to first of all examine whether the legislature had empowered
the Central Government to bring out a notification of the kind which is
impugned before us. As indicated by us earlier in this judgment, the law
prior to the issuance of the notification dated 18.11.2009 had been settled by
the Supreme Court by holding that when any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance is found mixed with one or more neutral substance, for the
purpose of imposition of punishment, it is only the content of the narcotic
drug or psychotropic substance which has to be taken into consideration.
That position is sought to be altered by virtue of the impugned notification
dated 18.11.2009 inasmuch as the entire mixture and not just the pure drug
content has to be considered by virtue of the said notification. The question
which arises is whether the Central Government had the power to bring out
such a notification.           While the case of a mixture of two drugs and
combination of more than one drug and psychotropic substance was
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                    Page 14 of 17

specifically dealt with under Sl. No. 239 of the notification dated
19.10.2001, there was no provision for dealing with the situation where the
mixture was of just one narcotic drug or psychotropic substance with neutral
material. It is in the context of the notification dated 19.10.2001 prior to its
amendment in 2009 that the decision in Ansar Ahmed and E. Micheal Raj
(supra) had been rendered. Now a specific note (that is note 4) has been
added by virtue of the notification dated 18.11.2009 so as to include the case
of a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance mixed with a neutral material.
The distinction between S.L. No. 239 and note 4 is that while S.L. No.239
required that the mixture was of one narcotic drug with another narcotic drug
or psychotropic substance which may or may not also include neutral
material, Note 4 widens the scope by introducing a mixture of one drug or
psychotropic substance with a neutral substance. It is not at all necessary
that the mixture must contain more than one drug or psychotropic substance
along with neutral material for the said Note 4 to apply.
10.      In order to understand as to whether the Central Government had the
legislative mandate to do so, it would be necessary to examine as to what the
exact limits of power of the Central Government were under section 2 (viia)
and 2 (xxiiia). Whether we consider 2 (viia) which defines the commercial
quantity or section 2 (xxiiia) which defines small quantity the language is
virtually identical. The ‘small quantity’ and the ‘commercial quantity’ are in
relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.           The Central
Government has been given the power to specify, by a notification in the
official gazette, the quantity representing the small quantity or commercial
quantity in relation to each narcotic drug and psychotropic substance. In the
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                 Page 15 of 17

present case we are concerned with heroin and, therefore, we shall restrict
our discussion to narcotic drugs. Narcotic drugs are defined in section 2
(xiv) to include “all manufactured drugs”. The latter expression has also
been defined in section 2 (xi) to inter alia, mean “opium derivative”. And,
‘opium derivative’ itself has been defined in section 2 (xvi) to, inter alia,
mean diacetylmorphine and all ‘preparations’ containing more than 0.2% of
morphine or containing ‘any’ diacetylmorphine.             In other words a
preparation containing ‘any’ diacetylmorphine would be regarded as an
opium derivative.
11.      The word ‘preparation’ itself has been defined in section 2 (xx) to,
inter alia, mean any solution or mixture, in whatever physical state
containing one or more such narcotic drug or psychotropic substance. It is
obvious that if there is only one narcotic drug and we are referring to a
mixture, then the other material must be a neutral material. Therefore, the
word “preparation” includes reference to a mixture of one narcotic drug with
a neutral material.    Once we understand this, it becomes clear that the
Central Government has been given the power to specify the quantity of this
‘preparation’ or mixture of a narcotic drug and a neutral substance. Once
this is accepted then there is no escape from the conclusion that the Central
Government had the power to specify the quantities shown in column 5 and
6 of the Table appended to the notification dated 19.10.2001 with reference
to the entire mixture and not just its pure drug content. This is so because all
preparations which contain diacetylmorphine would be opium derivatives
which, in turn, would be manufactured drugs and that would lead us to the
expression narcotic drugs. And, ultimately to the said expression as used in
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                  Page 16 of 17

section 21 of the NDPS Act. We would tend to agree with the learned
counsel for the respondent that the decision of the Supreme Court in the case
of E. Micheal Raj (supra) was rendered at a point of time when this so-
called “loop-hole” had not been plugged and therefore it is not as if we are
taking a view contrary to the Supreme Court. The Central Government, at
that point of time had catered to a situation which involved a mixture of one
or more narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances with or without neutral
material. It had not dealt with a situation which involved one narcotic drug
or one psychotropic substance with some neutral material. Unless and until
there was a specific provision for it, the courts could not supply the gap
particularly because these were penal provisions. Now, that the gap has been
filled by the amendment to the notification dated 19.10.2001 by introducing
note 4 therein, the earlier decisions would really not be applicable. We make
it clear that apart from the challenge to the notification as being ultra vires
the provisions of the NDPS Act, there is no challenge whatsoever to the
provisions of the NDPS Act.
12.      In view of the foregoing discussion, we find that there is no merit in
the writ petition. The same is dismissed. There shall be no orders as to
costs.
                                            BADAR DURREZ AHMED, J
                                                  VEENA BIRBAL, J
NOVEMBER 06 , 2012
kb
WP(Crl) 1552/2010                                                 Page 17 of 17


