                     HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                          W.P. (C) NO. 9091 OF 2010
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                                   -------------
Secretary, Rotary Club, Puri               …….           Petitioner
                                         -Versus-
Sri Debakanta Ray                         ………           Opposite Party
                    For Petitioner     -- Mr. G.Mukherjee
                  For Opposite Party -- M/s. B.H. Mohanty,
                                           Mr D.P. Mohanty, R.K.Nayak,
                                           Mr.T.K.Mohanty, P.K.Swain,
                                           Mr. M. Pal, Advocates.
PRESENT:
               THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K.MISRA
                        Date of judgment:      10.12.2012
B.K.MISRA, J.       Assailing the order passed by the learned District Judge,
     Puri in F.A.O. No.40 of 2008 arising out of the order dated 13.5.2008 in
     the Interim Application No. 48 of 2008 of the learned Civil Judge
     (Jr.Divn.), Puri (Annexures-4 and 3 respectively), the present petitioner
     has approached this Court by invoking the extra-ordinary jurisdiction
     under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
     2.               The present opposite party as plaintiff had instituted
     Civil Suit No.71 of 2008 praying for decree of permanent injunction
     restraining the present petitioner who was the defendant in the said suit
     from raising any construction or obstructing the right of user of plaintiff
     over the ‘B’ Suit Schedule property claiming that he had purchased the

                                   2
‘A’ Suit Schedule property by two registered sale deeds on 24.5.2000
from Smt. Binapani Sahoo. According to the plaintiff after purchasing
the suit property he got the same mutated in his name and constructed
a three storied building which has been let out to Saint Xavier School
where the school is running. It is the further case of the plaintiff that
abutting the ‘A’ schedule property there is a road which has been
described as ‘B’ schedule property and the same has been recorded as a
road (RASTA) in the settlement papers since 1927. The said road is used
for ingress and egress to the schedule ‘A’ property as a natural right.
But the Revenue Authorities changed the ‘Kissam’ of the schedule ‘B’
property from ‘Road’ to ‘Patita’ and leased out the same to Secretary,
Rotary Club, Puri, namely, the present petitioner Club which came to
the knowledge of the plaintiff when the petitioner Club started making
constructions over the ‘B’ schedule property. It is the further case of the
plaintiff that along with the suit the plaintiff also filed an application
under Order 39, Rule 1 and 2 of the Civil Procedure Code (hereinafter
referred to as ‘C.P.C’.) praying for ad interim order of injunction which
was registered as I.A.No.48 of 2008. The present petitioner as defendant
opposite party on being noticed appeared in the suit and filed his
objection. Thereafter, the learned Civil Judge (Jr.Divn.), Puri after
hearing the parties by his order dated 13.5.2008 directed maintenance
of status quo over the ‘B’ Schedule suit land (Annexure-3). The said
order was challenged by the aggrieved defendant-opposite party before
the learned District Judge, Puri in F.A.O. No. 40 of 2008 and the
learned District Judge while affirming the order of the learned Civil

                                   3
Judge (Jr.Divn.), Puri in I.A. No.48 of 2008 dismissed the aforesaid
appeal.
3.            The present opposite party in his counter affidavit averred
that the ‘B’ Suit Schedule property is communal in nature and before
grant of lease to the petitioner Club it belonged to the State and the
same is being used as a road always as because the adjoining land
owners including the plaintiff and others have a natural right to use the
same. The specific stand of the present opposite party is that a
communal land cannot be alienated as the right of way is attached to
the land and not with the title. It is also the stand of the plaintiff that if
the petitioner Club would be permitted to proceed with the construction
over the ‘B’ Suit Schedule property, irreparable loss would be caused to
the students and staff and that will badly hinder the functioning of the
school standing over the ‘A’ Suit Schedule property as the ‘B’ schedule
property is being used as the access to the school and the right of user
of the school road is to be protected. Besides that it is the case of the
opposite party that when the courts below have directed to the parties
to maintain status quo over the ‘B’ Suit Schedule property and the
impugned orders are speaking orders and when a Revision Petition is
pending i.e. Civil Revision No. 3 of 2010 before the District Judge, Puri
challenging the rejection of the prayer of the petitioner-defendant for
rejection of the plaint under Order 7, Rule 11 C.P.C, the impugned
orders at Annexures-3 & 4 should not be disturbed in the greater ends
of justice and that too in view of the specific observation of this Court
while disposing of O.J.C. No.894 of 2001 giving liberty to the parties to
resort to the Civil Proceeding where the facts are to be properly traced

                                   4
about the easementary right and the alleged road in question and
decision is to be taken in accordance with law.
4.             I have heard learned counsel appearing for the respective
parties at length. Mr. Gautam Mukherjee, learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner very strenuously urged that when the present opposite
party as plaintiff in Civil Suit No.71 of 2008 have not sought for any
declaratory relief i.e. declaration of his right or interest over the ‘B’
schedule property, the plaintiff cannot maintain the suit for injunction
simplicitor and only on this ground the courts below should have
refused to entertain the prayer for injunction and more so in view of the
specific observation of this Court in O.J.C. No.894 of 2001 that this
Court did not find any illegality with the lease proceeding. The order of
the courts below directing maintenance of status quo is without
jurisdiction simply because of the reason that complicated question of
title could only be examined in a properly constituted suit for
declaration and consequential relief and not in a suit for injunction
simplicitor. In that context, Mr. Mukherjee, learned counsel placed
reliance on a judgment of the Apex Court as reported in AIR 2008 S.C.
2033, Anathula Sudhakar –v- P.Buchi Reddy (dead) by L.Rs. and
others.    Besides   that  other  contentions   were  raised  about   the
maintainability of the suit.
5.             Mr. B.H. Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for the
opposite party contended that non impletion of the State is not at all
fatal since the State is not a necessary party in the suit in the court
below as there was no resistance from the State and besides that even if
a person has not been impleaded as a party in the original forum the

                                   5
same can be cured during the pendency of the suit as adequate
provisions have been made in that regard in the Code of Civil Procedure.
It was argued by Mr. Mohanty, learned counsel for the opposite party
that when Civil Revision is pending before the learned District Judge,
Puri which was filed against the order of the learned Civil Judge
(Jr.Divn.) rejecting the prayer of the present petitioner (who was the
defendant in the court below) for rejection of the plaint, that matter
cannot be agitated before this forum in a writ jurisdiction as no final
order has yet been passed in Civil Revision No.3 of 2010. Further, it was
his submission that the impugned orders suffer from no illegality and
the same is just and proper in the best interest of the parties the Writ
Petition should be dismissed with cost.
6.             After hearing the contentions of the learned counsel for
the respective parties and perusing the materials placed before this
Court, it is seen that the ‘A’ and ‘B’ schedule properties are adjacent to
each other and over the ‘A’ schedule property a school is functioning. In
1927 Settlement Record of Right ‘B’ schedule property was recorded as
a ‘Rasta’ with a noting in the remarks column that the said road is used
for ingress and egress by the public. According to the petitioner the
nature of the ‘B’ schedule property from the ‘Rasta’ has been changed to
‘Patita’ and the same has been leased out to Rotary Club, Puri, the
present petitioner. Admittedly, the said sanction of lease of the ‘B’ Suit
Schedule property by the Government in favour of Rotary Club, Puri
was challenged by two persons, namely Satchidananda Misra and Smt.
Indumati Sahoo in a Writ Petition before this Court vide O.J.C. No. 894
of 2001 and the said writ petition was disposed of with an observation

                                   6
that disputed facts cannot be conveniently determined in a writ
proceeding and the dispute relating to the right of user as road linked to
the easementary right can be decided in a civil proceeding.
7.             The main thrust of the argument of Mr.Mukherjee,
learned counsel is that since the suit in question is for injunction
simplicitor without any prayer for declaration of right, title or interest
over the ‘B’ schedule property the suit is bad in law and this important
aspect has not been dealt with by the court below including the 1 st
Appellate Court and therefore the impugned order at Annexure-4 and
Annexure-3 cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
8.               The undisputed fact is that the present petitioner as
defendant in the court below had filed an application for rejection of the
plaint under Order 7, Rule 11 of the C.P.C. and when that was rejected,
Civil Revision No.3 of 2010 has been filed before the learned District
Judge, Puri which is said to be pending. At his stage, I refrain from
expressing any opinion on the merits of the suit and its maintainability
and arrive at a categorical finding one way or other, as that may
influence the minds of the Courts below.
9.             It is the settled law that while considering the prayer
under Order 39, Rules 1 and 2 of the C.P.C. the Court is required to
consider three basic principles, namely prima facie case, balance of
convenience and inconvenience and irreparable loss and injury. While
granting injunction in addition to the aforementioned three basic
principles, the Court also take into consideration the conduct of the
parties. Grant or refusal of injunction always has serious consequences
depending upon the nature thereof and while dealing with such matters

                                   7
the Court must make all endeavour to protect the interest of the parties.
In the instant case, the courts below after considering the materials on
record were inclined to direct maintenance of status quo in respect of
the nature and character of the suit property as prima facie they were
satisfied that the present opposite party as plaintiff-petitioner in C.S.
No.71 of 2008 and in Interim Application No.48 of 2008 had made out
an arguable case and materials are there prima facie to show that ‘B’
Suit Schedule property was recorded as road in the finally published
settlement record of right in the year, 1927. When a school is running
over the ‘A’ schedule property and the said ‘A’ schedule property abuts
the alleged road i.e. ‘B’ schedule property over which the opposite party-
plaintiff and others claim right of way in other words they exercise their
easementary right those disputed matters are to be decided in the main
suit after the parties lead evidence. In view of the claims of the parties
over the ‘B’ Suit Schedule property and when there is scramble over the
same, in my humble view, at this stage, it is not desirable to go into all
the details and render a specific finding which would undoubtedly affect
the claim of both parties in the main suit. I am in complete agreement
with the conclusion arrived at by the learned courts below.
10.            Thus, after giving my anxious consideration to the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and having
regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, I consider it most
appropriate in the interest of justice that there is a need to preserve
status quo with respect to the subject matter of dispute in order to
enabling the parties which eventually succeeds in the litigation, to enjoy
the fruits of the success.

                                       8
    11.            In the aforesaid premises, the impugned orders at
    Annexures-4 and 3 calls for no interference by this Court. Considering
    the peculiar nature of the dispute the learned District Judge, Puri is
    directed to dispose of Civil Revision No.3 of 2010 within a month on
    production of the certified copy of this order before him. Besides that
    the parties are also directed that they shall make all endeavour for an
    early decision of the suit and shall not take adjournment unless
    absolutely necessary and if pleadings are complete in all respect, the
    learned Civil Judge (Jr.Divn.), Puri is directed to dispose of the suit
    within a period of six months from the date of receipt of the copy of this
    order, if there is no legal impediment for such disposal.
                     With the aforesaid observations, the writ petition stands
    disposed of, but in the circumstances without any cost.
                                                  ……………………..
                                                    B.K.Misra, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 10th December, 2012/RNS

9

