                         ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                          WRIT APPEAL No.426 of 2011
        This appeal arises out of the judgment dated 11.7.2011 passed by
        the learned Single Judge in O.J.C. No.10925 of 1996.
                                       ----------
        Pramila Khatua and others                ………         Appellants
                                        -versus-
        CESU of Orissa, represented through
        Managing Director and another               ………      Respondents
                                 _______________
               For Appellants      :  M/s.Tahali Charan Mohanty,
                                      Sarad Chandra Swain, S.Patnak,
                                      K.Mohanty, S.Mohanty, A.Rout,
                                      Smt. B.Mohanty.
               For opp.parties   :   Mr. B.K.Nayak (For Respondent No.1)
        PRESENT:
        THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SHRI V.GOPALA GOWDA
                                          AND
                    THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K.MISRA
                         Date of judgment :        13.12.2012
B.K.MISRA,J.         The two appellants, who are not only helpless but hapless
        also being aggrieved with the order of the learned Single Judge in
        O.J.C. No. 10925 of 1996 dated 11.7.2011 rejecting their case for
        award of compensation to the tune of Rs.3,50.000/-, because of the
        death of the sole bread winner of their family by electrocution have
        filed this Writ Appeal urging various facts and contentions.

                                    2
2.           The case of the appellants is that the deceased Golekh
Khatua who was the husband of the first appellant and son of the
second appellant was eking out living by catching fish. It is alleged that
on 23.6.1996 around noon time the deceased was returning to his
house after catching fish from the river Sapua and on his way at
Kundapatna near Jenapur came in contact with a live electric wire
which had been snapped from the main line and had fallen on the field
covered with green grass. The deceased could not see the live electric
wire which had been covered with grass over the ground and died at
the spot being electrocuted. The said incident was reported at
Gurudijhatia Police Station. The police on receipt of the said information
registered Gurudijhatia U.D. Case No.5 of 1996 which ultimately
culminated in registration of G.R. Case No.19 of 1996. According to the
appellants, the respondents were totally negligent in performance of
their statutory duties and therefore when they failed to discharge their
duties and responsibilities in proper maintenance of the electric line
they   are  vicariously  liable to  adequately   compensate the      legal
representatives of the deceased. It is alleged that the deceased was 42
years old when he died and had left behind his widow, two minor sons
and two minor daughters besides the widow mother having no source
of income. It is the further case of the appellants that the deceased
was earning Rs.3,500/- per month by catching fish. The appellants,
who were starving after the death of the sole bread winner approached

                                       3
this Court to get compensation by invoking the extra-ordinary
jurisdiction of this Court, for their survival.
3.            Though the respondents, who were the opposite parties in
O.J.C.No.10925 of 1996 entered appearance through their counsel, but
they did not file any counter affidavit.
4.            Learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition holding
that the appellants could not establish as to what was the cause of the
death of the deceased and when no material is available on record to
show that the deceased Golekh Khatua died of electrocution, it was
difficult for the Court to attribute negligence on the part of the opposite
parties and accordingly liberty was given to the petitioners to approach
the Civil Court for getting compensation in accordance with law.
5.            Dr. Tahali Charan       Mohanty,  learned  Senior Advocate
argued with vehemence that the findings of the learned Single Judge
cannot be sustained in the eye of law as ample materials were there to
show that the deceased died of electrocution because of the sole
negligence of the opposite parties and the direction of the learned
Single Judge to approach the Civil Court amounts to putting salt to the
injury as the same is inequitable because of long lapse of 15 years from
the date of the unfortunate death of the deceased till the judgment of
the learned Single Judge was delivered. Asking the applicants to
approach the Civil Court would be working out grave injustice to them.
By placing reliance on several decisions of the Apex Court and of this

                                     4
Court it was strenuously contended by Dr. Mohanty, learned Senior
Counsel that the law Courts will lose their efficacy if they cannot
possibly respond to the need to the society. Justice oriented approach
ought not to be thwarted by adopting a pedantic approach and
resorting to technicalities especially when there is an infringement of
the indefeasible right to life of the citizen. Monetary compensation at
times perhaps the only effective remedy to apply balm to the wounds
of the family members of the deceased victim the bread earner of the
family. (AIR 1997 SC 610,D.K.Basu -v- State of West Bengal, AIR
2005 MP 2, Ramesh Singh Pawar –v- Madhya Pradesh Electricity
Board and others).
6.          Mr. B.K.Nayak, learned counsel appearing for the opposite
parties on the other hand submitted that the order of the learned
Single Judge needs no interference as the same is based on sound
proposition of law that disputed questions of facts cannot be gone into
in the writ jurisdiction as it is the competent Civil Court who after
examining legal evidence on record to prove the fact of negligence can
direct payment of compensation.
7.          Upon hearing learned counsel for the respective parties we
have carefully examined the correctness of the impugned order of the
learned Single Judge. We have perused the materials placed before us
including the information obtained by the appellants under the Right to
Information Act with regard to Gurudijhatia Police Station U.D. Case

                                    5
No.5 of 1996 dated 23.6.1996 as well as the F.I.R. lodged by one
Prasanta Kumar Khatua at Gurudijhatia Police Station, Athagarh on
23.6.1996 at 4.30 P.M. basing upon which U.D. Case No.5 of 1996 was
registered and enquiry was taken up by the A.S.I., of Police, Sri
K.K.Sahoo attached to the said Gurudijhatia Police Station. Similarly,
we have also perused the final report submitted in Gurudijhatia Police
Station U.D. Case No.5 of 1996. The final form so submitted by police
in Gurudijhatia Police Station U.D. Case No.5 of 1996 categorically
shows that the deceased Golekha died because of the electrocution
when he came in contact with the live electric wire while returning after
catching fish from river Sapua. The F.I.R. also reveals of such a fact
and there is absolutely no denial of such alleged death of Golekh
Khatua because of electric shock though the opposite parties had
entered appearance and contested the matter before this Court. Thus,
it is established on record that the death of the deceased was due to
electrocution by coming in contact with live electric wire which had
been snapped from the main over head line and lying on the field being
covered with grasses. It is an admitted fact that the opposite parties
are responsible for maintenance of the electric lines and they are duty
bound to take protective measures so that live electric wires do not fall
on any surface or touches any live object be it a human being or
animal. There is absolutely no material to show that the live electric
line got snapped suddenly because of heavy lightening, storm or heavy

                                         6
rain before the accident took place. The respondent no.1 Company who
is engaged in supply of electricity has the statutory duty and
responsibility for its proper maintenance and adopt all safety measures
to see that the wires snapped do not remain alive on the road or path
way or the premises of the inhabitants of the locality and users of the
road. It is the duty of the respondent no.1 Company to install such
device/devices to disrupt supply of energy automatically in case of
snapping of the live electric line. The argument that the officials of
respondent no.1 Company had no knowledge of snapping of wire is not
acceptable at all.
8.             The rule of strict liability has been applied in our country
and there are catena of decisions on the point including that of the
Apex Court and of this Court also. In M.C. Mehta –v- Union of India
(1987) 1 SCC 395) the Apex Court by going beyond the rule of ‘strict
liability’ held that:-
                     “Where an enterprise is engaged in a
              hazardous or inherently dangerous activity and
              harm is caused on any one on account of the
              accident in the operation of such activity the
              enterprise is strictly and absolutely liable to
              compensate those who are affected by the
              accident, such liability is not subject to any of the
              exception to the principle of strict liability under
              the rule in Ryelands –v- Flecteher”.
9.             By following the dictum of the Apex Court reported in M.S.
Grewal –v- Deep Chand Sood (2001) 8 SCC 151, D.K.Basu –v-
D.K.Basu –v- State of West Bengal (Supra), Ramesh Singh

                                     7
Pawar     –v-   Madhya     Pradesh    Electricity   Board   and     others
(Supra), Executive Engineer, CESU, Cuttack Electrical Division,
Jobra, Cuttack –v- Hema Sethy, 2011 (II) OLR 708 and after
hearing the learned counsel for both parties, we have no hesitation in
coming to a clear and cogent conclusion that the writ petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution is maintainable and the respondents are
liable on the principles of strict liability to pay compensation to the
appellants in the instant case and the conclusions arrived at by the
leaned Single Judge in O.J.C. No. 10925 of 1996 dated 11.7.2011
which is impugned in this appeal is not sustainable in the eye of law.
10.         The appellants while filing the writ petition had claimed
Rs.3.5 lakhs compensation for the death of Golekh Khauta, who was
electrocuted because of the negligence on the part of the opposite
parties but enhanced the same to Rs.7 lakhs in this appeal along with a
prayer to grant interest @ 12% per annum on the said sum with effect
from the date of filing of the writ petition in the year 1996 till the said
sum is paid in full. According to the appellants the deceased Golekh
Khauta was a fisherman by profession and was earning Rs.3,500/- per
month and he was 42 years old when he died. Following the guidelines
laid down by the apex Court in the case of Lata Wadhwa V. State of
Bihar, (2001) 8 SCC 197, M.S.Grewal V. Deep Chand Sood and
the decisions of this Court in the case of Executive Engineer,
Central Electricity Supply Utility Limited, Cuttack Electrical

                                    8
Division, Jobra, Cuttack V. Hema Sethy (supra) and Nirmala
Nayak and others V. Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Grid
Corporation of Orissa Limited and another and Sambari Nayak
V.   the   Chief    General     Manager,     Telecom     Orissa     Circle,
Bhubaneswar and others as the guiding factor and especially by
adopting the scientific method contained in the 2nd Schedule to Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, in our considered view that with the long passage
of time since the death of the deceased in 1996 the poor helpless
widows are knocking the doors of justice with begging bowl for their
sustenance and the four children left behind the deceased, the
respondents i.e. CESU is directed to pay compensation of Rs.3.50,000/-
(Rupees three lakhs fifty thousand) to Pramila Khatua, the widow of the
deceased late Golekh Khauta with interest @ 6% per annum i.e. from
the date of filing of the writ petition on 04.10.1996 till the actual
payment is made. Besides that the opposite parties are also directed to
pay Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh) as compensation to appellant
No.2 the widow mother of the deceased with interest @ 6% per annum
from the date of filing of the writ petition i.e. 4.10.1996 till the actual
payment    is  made.   Out   of  the   total   amount   of Rs.3,50,000/-
compensation to be paid to the appellant No.1 i.e. the wife of the
deceased, a sum of Rs.3,00,000/- be kept in fixed deposit in any
Nationalised Bank for a period of five years with condition that the
monthly interest accrued on such fixed deposit be paid to her every

                                        9
     month regularly. The rest Rs.50,000/- is to be paid to appellant No.1 in
     cash. Further, we direct that out of the compensation amount
     Rs.1,00,000/- to be paid to appellant No.2 the mother of the deceased,
     a sum of Rs.75,000/- be kept in fixed deposit in any Nationalised Bank
     for a period of five years with condition that the monthly interest
     accrued    on such fixed deposit be paid to her regularly. The rest
     Rs.25,000/- is to be paid to appellant No.2 in cash. Further, we give
     liberty to the appellant Nos. 1 and 2 to move this Court for early
     disbursement of the amounts so kept in fixed deposit in their name, if
     for the welfare of their family and urgent need like marriage, medical
     expenses, repair of the dwelling house, there would be need of money.
                  With the aforesaid observations and directions, the writ
     appeal is allowed.
                                                ………………………………….
                                                    B.K.Misra,J.
V.Gopala Gowda, C.J.         I agree.
                                               ………………………………………
                                                V.Gopala Gowda,C.,J.

                            10
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
13th December,2012/ RNSahoo


