                                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
                                            RFA NO.243 OF 2007
          From the judgment and decree respectively passed by the learned Civil Judge
          (Senior Division), Bhubaneswar in C.S. No.532 of 2004.
                                               -------------
          Ranjit Kumar Patnaik                           …            …             Appellant.
                                                       Versus.
          Industrial Promotion & Investment
          Corporation of Orissa Ltd(IPICOL) & another …               …              Respondents
                                For Appellant          : M/s. N.K. Sahoo & B. Swain.
                                For Respondents : Mr. S.S. Mohanty,
                                                         (for respondent no.1)
          PRESENT
                               THE HON’BLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K.NAYAK
          -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
          Date of hearing : 04.03.2015 :               Date of judgment:            01.05.2015
B.K.NAYAK, J.            This appeal has been filed by the plaintiff challenging the
          judgment and decree passed by the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division),
          Bhubaneswar in C.S. No.532 of 2004.
          2.             The plaintiff-appellant filed the aforesaid suit for a declaration
          that the suit property seized by the police on 06.10.1993 as per the seizure
          list belonged to the plaintiff in his individual capacity and for a direction to
          the defendants to deliver/restore the said property to him.
                         The case of the plaintiff is that he worked in top positions in
          Textile Industry at various places for about 30 years and planned to start a
          Small Scale Industry after his retirement. For the said purpose, he purchased
          some second hand machines from M/s. Swan Mills, Bombay on 10.03.1990.

                                          2
One Mr. A.H. Shah of Bombay had purchased a sick textile unit, called
“Lingaraj Textiles Ltd.” on 02.03.1990 at Mancheswar, Bhubaneswar from
one Amarendra Dash and others with the permission of IPICOL and OSFC
(defendants), who had granted Term Loans to the company on mortgage of
the land and hypothecation of plant and machinery, in their favour on 100%
share purchase basis. Mr.A.H. Shah having failed to run the unit sold the
same to the plaintiff on share transfer basis on 05.09.1990 and the plaintiff
ran the unit for two years by investing about Rs.40,00,000/- in the Unit and
had paid about Rs.32,00,000/- to IPICOL/OSFC. The plaintiff had purchased
the aforesaid second hand machines from M/s. Swan Mills Limited, Bombay
for the purpose of doubling unit at Mancheswar. During 1993 because of
financial difficulties the work of the plant was seriously affected and the
plaintiff failed to pay the installments to the defendants. It is further alleged
by the plaintiff that on 04.10.1993, defendant no.1-IPICOL took over the
assets of Lingaraj Textiles limited in a surprise move without recalling the
loan and without giving prior notice. The plaintiff filed T.S. No.491 of 1993 in
the court of the Sub-ordinate Judge, 1st Court, Cuttack and had got order of
injunction against the defendants preventing future sale of the assets, but the
injunction order was vacated by the learned District Judge and the
defendants sold away the assets at a low price.
               It is the further case of the plaintiff that on 05.10.1993, IPICOL
had managed to obtain an ex-parte search warrant from the District
Magistrate, Khurda, Bhubaneswar to search the residential premises of the
plaintiff for some machines allegedly stolen from the factory. On 04.10.1993,
the defendants had taken over the unit under Section 29 of the State
Financial Corporation Act and made an inventory of the machines and

                                         3
prepared a list of machines which the company had never purchased. The
search warrant include the description of alleged stolen machines, namely,
six numbers of Ring frame, two numbers of winding machines, two doubling
machines, and some other equipments and machineries with spare parts. On
the basis of search warrant, the defendants through police searched the
personal godown of the plaintiff and seized certain machines and took
possession of the same which the plaintiff had purchased from M/s. Swan
Mills, Bombay, but it did not belong to the company, Lingaraj Textiles.
Though seized property did not belong to the              company, nor were
hypothecated to the defendants, the documents of title of the plaintiff to the
seized property had been misplaced at the time of search and seizure, which
he could not produce at that time. It was only on 25.08.2004 the plaintiff
could be able to trace out the title deeds with respect to his personal
ownership over the seized machineries. On the basis of the seizure of the
machineries from the godown of the plaintiff and the F.I.R. registered in that
respect at Mancheswar Police Station on 02.10.1993 G.R. Case No.3539 of
1993 had been initiated against the plaintiff in the court of the learned
S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar in which the plaintiff was convicted. Challenging
such conviction, the plaintiff has filed Criminal Appeal No.215 of 2002 before
the High Court, which is still pending. It is further alleged that the seized
properties are the personal properties of the plaintiff and not that of the M/s.
Lingaraj Textiles Limited and that after tracing out the documents of title to
such property, the plaintiff approached defendant no.1 on 27.08.2004 and
requested to return the properties to him, but to no effect.
              Hence, the plaintiff filed the suit on 14.09.2004 claiming the
reliefs as aforesaid.

                                        4
3.           Defendant no.1-IPICOL filed a written statement stating that the
suit was not maintainable and was barred by limitation being filed after the
lapse of ten years. It was also stated that the suit was hit under Section 10 of
the C.P.C. as the plaintiff had filed another suit bearing T.S. No.461 of 2003
before the learned Civil Judge (Junior Division), Bhubaneswar for the same
cause of action, which was still pending. The other averments made in the
plaint were denied. It was specifically pleaded in the written statement that
the hypothecated property of M/s. Lingaraj Textiles were illegally removed by
the plaintiff to his godown located at his residence for which an F.I.R. was
lodged giving rise to Mancheswar Police Station Case No.203 of 1993,
corresponding to G.R. Case No.3539 of 1993 in the court of the learned
S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar wherein the plaintiff was convicted under Section
406 of the I.P.C. and such conviction was upheld in the appeal preferred by
him. On the basis of search warrant, the plaintiff’s godown was searched and
huge quantity of company’s properties stolen or illegally removed were
recovered from the godown for which an inventory was prepared. The plaintiff
had no title to the properties seized and that he has tried to make out a
concocted story that documents with regard to his ownership over the
machineries had been misplaced and that he has prepared fabricated
document for the said purpose. M/s. Lingaraj Textile was financed by IPICOl
and OSFC and accordingly the Unit with its plant and all machineries both
present and future were hypothecated to IPICOL as a first charge to secure
the loan and necessary documents were executed by the company through its
Director. The plaintiff having become a defaulter in repayment of the loan,
IPICOL was compelled to invoke Section 29 of the SFC Act and seized the
assets of the company. The plaintiff having come to know about such

                                         5
proposed seizure, dismantled various machineries and illegally removed the
same from the factory premises to his residence at Bhubaneswar on the day
of Gandhi Jayanti, which was a public holiday. On getting information about
such removal, the defendants filed F.I.R. and got a search warrant from the
Collector, Khurda, on the basis of which the godown at his residence was
searched and the machineries were recovered. Such facts having been
proved, the plaintiff was convicted in the criminal trial. The plaintiff was thus
not entitled to any relief claimed in the suit.
              Defendant no.2, OSFC did not file any written statement and was
set ex-parte.
4.            On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the trial court farmed
four issues, out of which Issue Nos.2 and 3 relate to the question of
ownership of the plaintiff over the seized property in his individual capacity
and the entitlement of the plaintiff for recovery of the same. No specific
finding on the issue with regard to limitation has been given by the trial
court, who stated that the same was not pressed.
              In the suit, the plaintiff examined two witnesses including
himself as P.W.1 and defendant examined one D.W. Besides both the parties
relied upon and proved some documents. On consideration of the evidence,
the trial court came to the conclusion that the plaintiff failed to prove his
personal ownership over the disputed properties and hence was not entitled
to any relief.
5.            In assailing the impugned judgment, the learned counsel for the
appellant submitted that the trial court based his findings mainly on the
judgment of the criminal court, i.e., the Sub Divisional Judicial Magistrate
passed in G.R. Case No.3539 of 1993 where the plaintiff was convicted for

                                       6
criminal breach of trust and not on independent assessment of evidence.
Since a civil court is not bound by the finding of the criminal court and that
the trial court in the case in hand having not given its independent finding
with regard to plaintiff’s ownership over the suit property, its judgment is
liable to be set aside. He also submits that the evidence on record including
the documents of title with regard to the suit property prove the title of the
plaintiff and that there is no evidence to show that the suit properties were
ever hypothecated to the defendants as security against loans advanced by
the defendants to Lingaraj Textile Limited.
              Refuting the contention raised by the learned counsel for the
appellant, the learned counsel for the respondent no.1 submitted that on
plaintiff’s own showing the suit was barred by limitation under Article 69 of
the Limitation Act and, therefore, the suit should be dismissed on that
ground alone and that the trial court could not have entertained the suit
simply stating erroneously that the issue of limitation was not pressed. He
also submits that the trial court has recorded his findings with regard to
illegal and unauthorized removal of the suit properties by the plaintiff from
the factory premises to his residential godown not merely on the findings
recorded by the criminal court but also on independent assessment of the
evidence. It is also his submission that as per the hypothecation agreement
(Ext-L) all existing and future assets and machineries of Lingaraj Textiles
stood hypothecated in favour of the defendant and that there is ample
evidence that the plaintiff unauthorisedly removed the suit properties from
the factory premises of the Unit to his residential godown which were seized
by the police on the basis of search warrant.

                                          7
               On the point of limitation, it was replied by the learned counsel
for the appellant that in the instant case the question of limitation was a
mixed question of law and fact and that the defendants having not pressed
the same, the lower court was justified in not giving any specific finding on
the issue.
6.                The points of determination in this appeal are :
          (i)     Whether the suit properties are the personal properties of the
                  plaintiff and were not the properties of Lingaraj Textiles and
                  hypothecated to the defendants as security;
          (ii)    Whether the plaintiff’s suit is barred by limitation.
7.             With regard to the plaintiff’s title over the suit property, it may be
stated that in the plaint, plaintiff has not given the description of the
properties either in the body of the plaint or in the form of a schedule
attached thereto. The suit properties are descried as those, which were seized
by the police on 06.10.1993, as per the seizure list from the godown situated
within the residential premises of the plaintiff. Admittedly, D.W.1, who was
an Officer of defendant no.1 having received information about illegal and
unauthorized removal of some machineries by the plaintiff from the mill
premises, lodged F.I.R. at Mancheswar Police            Station on 02.10.1993 and
obtained a search warrant from the Collector and District Magistrate,
Khurda, on the basis of which the police searched the residential godown of
the plaintiff and recovered certain machines and spare parts which are used
in Taxtile Mills and prepared search list/seizure list (Ext.Q) which contain
fourteen items of properties, such as machines, motors etc. Plaintiff claims
that he had purchased those articles from one M/s. Swan Mills, Bombay on
10.03.1990 for opening a textile unit in Orissa and that he had lost the

                                       8
documents of title (Purchase memo) of such machines and that only after
such document could be found out by him that he demanded from defendant
no.1 to return those properties and having failed to get the same, filed the
suit. The plaintiff’s averments indicate that on 10.03.1990, the plaintiff had
not acquired Lingaraj Textiles. On the contrary, it is specifically stated that he
purchased the said unit on 05.09.1990 from one Mr. A.H. Shah, who was
unable to run the sick unit.
            The sale invoice proved by the plaintiff as Ext.2 reveals that on
10.03.1990 one M/s. Swan Mills Limited, Bombay sold some used
unserviceable machines and spares to the plaintiff. The said invoice refers to
some machines by names without indicating their make and number and
they do not completely and exactly tally with the properties recovered from
the residential godown of the plaintiff by the police on search. In his cross-
examination, the plaintiff admitted that by the time of purchase of the
machines from Bombay he had not initiated the process for establishment of
any factory, such as acquisition of land, registration with D.I.C., Sales Tax
and clearance from Environmental Authority. It sounds highly improbable
that a person without initiating any process for establishment of an Industry,
purchased some machines usable in Textile Industry with the hope that
sometime in future he would establish an Industry and run it by using those
machines. It is also admitted by the plaintiff in his pleading that he acquired
Lingaraj Textiles on purchase about six months after alleged purchase of
machines from Bombay. He also admits in his cross-examination that he
cannot name the spare parts purchased by him and the value thereof. It is
also admitted by him in his cross-examination that at the time of recovery of
the suit properties from his personal godown by the police, he did not

                                         9
intimate the police that he had purchased those machines from M/s. Swan
Mills Limited. He also admits that there is nothing in Ext.2 to indicate that
M/s. Swan Mills Limited is a textile industry and that it was authorized to
sell such machines. For all such reasons, the trial court has rightly
concluded that Ext.2 is a fake and fabricated document which has not been
proved by the author thereof or the authorized representative of M/s. Swan
Mills Limited. Hence, no reliance can be placed on Ext.2 as being the
document of title of the plaintiff in respect of the suit properties.
8.            It is claimed by the plaintiff that the suit properties were never
the properties of Lingaraj Textiles and were not hypothecated to defendant
no.1 against loans advanced to the unit. D.W.1 on the other hand has stated
that under the deed of hypothecation not only all existing machineries and
assets of the unit were hypothecated but all future acquisition also stood
hypothecated as per the terms of the hypothecation agreement. He has
however admitted that the agreement did not contain the names and
description of specific properties and particularly the suit properties.
Admittedly after acquisition of Lingaraj Textiles Ltd., as revealed from the
evidence of the plaintiff, the plaintiff became the Managing Director and his
daughter became another Director of the said company. It is admitted by the
plaintiff in his cross-examination in paragraph-9 that his wife and daughter
had filed a suit bearing O.S. No.26 of 1994 impleading the plaintiff and the
OSFC as parties for taking back the machines (suit properties) from Lingaraj
Textiles Limited on the ground that they had obtained those machineries by
lease and on the date of such suit, the present plaintiff was the Chairman of
the Lingaraj Textile Pvt. Ltd. This admission of the plaintiff goes to show that
the suit machineries were being used in the factory of Lingaraj Textiles. It is,

                                       10
therefore, clear that such machineries, which formed part of the assets of the
unit, irrespective of the time of their acquisition     by the company, stood
hypothecated to the defendants and the recovery of the same from the
personal godown of the plaintiff irresistibly leads to the conclusion that they
were illegally and unauthorisedly removed by the plaintiff from the factory
premises on getting information that defendant no.1 was about to seize the
factory in exercise of power under Section 29 of the S.F.C. Act.
             For the reasons aforesaid, it must be held that the plaintiff has
failed to prove that the suit properties recovered by the police from the
personal godown of the plaintiff were the plaintiff’s personal property.
9.           With regard to the second point, a clear plea was taken in the
written statement to the effect that the suit was barred by limitation. As per
the plaint the cause of action for the suit was unauthorized and wrongful
search and removal of the suit properties at the instance of defendant no.1
from the personal godown of the plaintiff. The search and the recovery of the
property was made on 06.10.1993. The plaintiff pleaded that the cause of
action arose on 25.08.2004 when the plaintiff could be able to trace out the
documents in respect of the suit properties and on 27.08.2004 when he
approached the defendant no.1 and asked to return the said properties.
             The suit for specific movable property wrongfully taken away by
the defendant is required to be filed within three years when the property was
wrongfully taken, as per Article 69 of the Limitation Act. The plaintiff’s
specific case being that the suit property was his personal property and not
that of Lingaraj Textile and that they were wrongfully seized and taken away
from his godown at the instance of defendant no.1, it is squarely covered
under Article 69 of the Limitation Act. Non-availability of documents of the

                                         11
title of the property with the plaintiff on the date of allegedly wrongful seizure
would not save limitation or extend the limitation till the date of availability of
documents of title which were said to be missing.              The trial court in
paragraph-11 of its judgment has clearly held that the cause of action arose
on 06.10.1993 that is, the date of seizure of the properties and not on
25.08.2004 when the plaintiff allegedly could be able to trace out Ext.2, i.e.,
the document of title. However, the trial court has stated in the judgment that
defendant no.1 has not pressed the question of limitation. It is not
understood, as to how the trial court came to such finding, particularly when
plea of limitation has been clearly taken in the written statement and the trial
court has itself found that cause of action for the suit arose on 06.10.1993.
              Limitation in the instant suit being for three years from
06.10.1993, the suit filed in the year 2004 was hopelessly barred by
limitation. Section 3 of the Limitation Act mandates that every suit instituted
after the prescribed period of limitation shall be dismissed although limitation
has not been set up as a defence. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the decision
reported in (2005) 4 SCC 613 : V.M. Salgaocar and Bros. v. Board of
Trustees of Port of Mormugao have held as follows :
                    “The mandate of Section 3 of Limitation Act is that it
                    is the duty of the Court to dismiss any suit
                    instituted after the prescribed period of limitation
                    irrespective of the fact that limitation has not been
                    set up as a defence. If a suit is ex-facie barred by
                    the law of limitation, a Court has no choice but to
                    dismiss the same even if the defendant intentionally
                    has not raised the plea of limitation.”

                                          12
                A numbers of decisions have been cited by the learned counsel
for the appellant, which are not relevant to the point in issue. Hence I do not
propose to deal with the same.
                Therefore, the trial court having clearly come to the conclusion
that cause of action did not arise on 25.08.2004 but arose on 06.10.1993
should have dismissed the suit as barred by limitation instead of observing
that the issue of limitation was not pressed by the defendants. The mandate
of Section 3 did not leave him a choice than to dismiss the suit as barred by
time. I therefore hold that the plaintiff’s suit is hopelessly barred by limitation
and the same is dismissed as such.
10.             On the aforesaid analysis, I find no merit in the appeal which is
accordingly dismissed.
                                                                ……………………
                                                                B.K.Nayak,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 1st May, 2015/Gs.


