                                HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
                                  O.J.C. NOS.5678 & 5679 OF 2002
         An application under Articles, 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
                                              -------------
         O.J.C. No.5678 of 2002
         Udaya Majhi & others                                   …     …            Petitioners.
                                                      Versus.
         Hadia Majhi & others                                …         …            opp.parties.
                               For Petitioners        : Mr. P.C. Acharya.
                               For opp.parties        : M/s. R.C.Rath and S.K.Panda.
         O.J.C. NO.5679 OF 2002
         Udaya Majhi & others                                   …     …            Petitioners.
                                                      Versus.
         Hadia Majhi & others                                …         …            opp.parties.
                               For Petitioners        : Mr. P.C. Acharya.
                               For opp.parties        : M/s. R.C.Rath and S.K.Panda.
         PRESENT
                             THE HON’BLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K.NAYAK
         ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Date of hearing : 16.04.2015 :                   Date of judgment: 18.06.2015
B.K.NAYAK, J.           In these writ petitions the petitioners challenge the common
         order dated 09.05.2002 (Annexure-3) passed by the Joint Commissioner,
         Settlement and Consolidation, Bhubaneswar in Consolidation Revision Case
         Nos.709 & 710 of 2001. Since both the writ petitions involve common
         questions of law and fact, they were heard analogously and are being
         disposed of by this common judgment.

                                      2
2.          Disputed property appertains to L.R. Plot No.342, Ac.0.10, Plot
No.344 Ac.0.19 and Plot No.344/670 Ac.0.07 under L.R. Holding No.68
corresponding to M.S. Holding No.32 and L.R. Plot No.340 Ac.0.38, Plot
No.341 Ac.0.46, Plot No.343 Ac.0.05, Plot No.366 Ac.0.06 and Plot No.369
Ac.0.35 under L.R. Khata No.132 corresponding to M.S. Khata No.113 of
village-Rangamatia. The total extent of land involved under both the Khatas
are Ac.0.1.30 dec.
3.          Present opposite party nos.1 to 3, were the petitioners in the
Consolidation Revisions before the Joint Commissioner, Settlement and
Consolidation and the present petitioners were the opposite parties therein.
4.          Admittedly, the disputed land along with other lands totally
measuring Ac.5.18 stood recorded in the name of Saiba Majhi, the father of
the present petitioners in the 1921-22 and 1943-44 Settlement Records of
Rights. The genealogy given below gives the interse relationship between the
parties.
                               GENEALOGY
                                 Bala Majhi
               Raghu                 Saiba              Madhu
               Debada
                                                   Hadia        Jata
         Bhadu       Bharat
              Kanduru        Raghu         Bisu    Kampal
         Budhiram        Udaya

                                        3
5.           In the Major Settlement record of rights published in 1979, the
disputed land was recorded in the names of opposite party nos.1 and 2.
Challenging the same to be erroneous and claiming declaration of title
thereover, the present petitioners filed Title Suit No.5 of 1980 in the court of
the learned Munsif-Baripada. The suit having been dismissed, the
petitioners filed Title Appeal No.18 of 1986-1987 before the District Judge,
Baripada, which was also dismissed. The petitioners then filed Second
Appeal No.178 of 1991 before this Court. During the pendency of the Second
Appeal, consolidation operation was started in the suit village and,
therefore, the second appeal was disposed of on 16.08.1999         setting aside
the judgments of the trial court as well as the first appellate court and
directing abatement of the suit itself.
             Thereafter, the petitioners filed Objection Case Nos.963 & 964 of
1999 before the Consolidation Officer, Baisinga claiming their right, title and
interest over the disputed land. In the objection, the petitioners claimed that
the parties originally belonged to village-Ramnagar in the district of
Balasore. However, Saiba Majhi, the petitioners’ father migrated to village-
Rangamatia (the suit village) and there he acquired disputed properties
along with other properties which were recorded in his name in the 1921-22
and 1943-44 Settlement Records of Rights. After the death of Saiba Majhi,
the petitioners are the owners in possession. It was further stated that the
opposite parties came to village Rangamatia to stay there and seeing their
pitiable condition, the petitioners allowed them to possess the suit land.
Opposite party nos.1 to 3 having no right, title and interest and behind the
back of the petitioners got the suit properties recorded in their names in
1978-79 Major Settlement record or rights. Challenging such recording and

                                       4
claiming their title over the land, the petitioners filed the suit which, as
aforesaid, got abated by the High Court in the second appeal.
             Opposite party nos.1 to 3 filed a written statement before the
Consolidation Officer claiming that the suit property along with other
property having a total extent of Ac.5.18 in village-Rangamatia are the Joint
ancestral properties of the parties in which the opposite parties have 1/3rd
share and it was not the self acquired property of Saiba Majhi alone. It was
alleged that during jointness of the family, Raghu Majhi having died, the
elder brother Saiba Majhi became the Karta of joint family and, therefore,
got the suit land exclusively recorded in his name in the previous
settlements. It was alternatively pleaded by them that in case it was found
that the property was the self acquired property of Saiba Majhi, the opposite
parties being in possession thereof for more than the statutory period have
acquired title by adverse possession over the same.
6.           The Consolidation Officer on considering the evidence on record
came to hold that there was no adequate evidence to prove that the parties
originally belonged to village-Ramnagar. It was further held that the
disputed properties along with other properties standing in the name of
Saiba Majhi were not the joint family properties of the parties, which
continued to be recorded in the name of Saiba Majhi alone from the year
1921-22 and, therefore, the opposite parties claim of 1/3rd share in the total
properties is baseless. The Consolidation Officer, however came to find that
the opposite parties are possessing the suit land at least since 1952, if not
earlier, with the knowledge of the petitioners and their possession is not
permissive and, therefore, they have perfected their title by adverse
possession. The petitioners filed two appeals bearing Appeal Nos.47 of

                                     5
2000(B) and 48 of 2000(B) before the Deputy Director, Consolidation of
Holdings, Baripada Range, Baripada, challenging the said order of the
Consolidation Officer. By judgment dated 18.09.2001 under Annexure-2,
the Deputy Director, Consolidation held that the successive records of rights
of 1921-22 and 1943-44 indicate that the suit land was the self acquired
properties of deceased Saiba Majhi, ancestor of appellants and, therefore,
the M.S. record of rights prepared in the name of opposite parties was
palpably erroneous and that the appellant-petitioners having come to know
about such erroneous recording filed title suit and that the ingredients of
adverse possession of respondent-opposite party nos.1 to 3 is clearly
missing. It was also held by the Deputy Director that the possession of the
respondent-opposite party nos.1 to 3 over the disputed land is permissible.
Accordingly, Deputy Director allowed the appeals and set aside the order of
the Consolidation Officer.
7.          Aggrieved by the appellate order under Annexure-2, opposite
party nos.1 to 3 filed Consolidation Revision Nos.709 and 710 of 2001,
which was heard and allowed by the impugned common order. The
revisional authority took into consideration the extract of documents from
Khanapuri Yaddast No.116 dated 29.06.1967 and mistake no.401/82 dated
05.12.1969 and came to the conclusion that those documents indicated that
the present opposite parties are possessing the disputed land since 1951-
52 and that the Major Settlement Record of Rights was prepared in presence
of Kanduri Majhi (one of the son’s of Saiba), who signed on those
documents. Accordingly, without giving any specific finding on the question
of adverse possession of the opposite party nos.1 to 3, the Joint

                                        6
Commissioner, Settlement and Consolidation set aside the appellate order
and upheld the order passed by the Consolidation Officer.
8.           Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the impugned
revisional order suffers from following infirmities;
             (i)   the appellate court having found that the opposite parties
                   were in permissive possession of the disputed land, the
                   revisional authority without      considering the nature of
                   possession of the opposite parties and without giving any
                   reason as to how the possession of the opposite parties
                   was adverse, should not have altered the decision of the
                   appellate    authority  and    upheld    the  order  of  the
                   Consolidation Officer, which is illegal and unsustainable;
             (ii)  Khanapuri Yaddast No.116 dated 29.06.1967 and Mistake
                   No.401 of 1982 dated 05.12.1969, which have been taken
                   into consideration by the revisional authority were not led
                   in evidence by any of the parties and, therefore, the
                   revisional authority could not have relied upon the same
                   behind the back of the petitioners;
             (iii) Jointness of the parties and the ancestral character of the
                   disputed    land   having   been   disbelieved  by  all  the
                   authorities    including   the    Joint    Commissioner    of
                   Consolidation and that the Joint Commissioner having not
                   given any finding as to how and when the possession of
                   opposite party nos.1 to 3 over the disputed land became
                   adverse and that the pleadings and evidence with regard to

                                         7
                      adverse possession having not at all been considered, the
                      impugned order is liable to be set aside.
9.             Learned counsel for opposite party nos.1 to 3 submits that the
Major Settlement Record of Rights in respect of the property was prepared
in the name of the opposite party nos.1 to 3 with the consent of Kanduru,
one of the sons of Saiba Majhi and, therefore, it cannot be said that
opposite party nos.1 to 3 have no right title over the land. His further
submission is that the revisional authority having found the possession of
the opposite party nos.1 to 3 over the land from 1951-52, its finding with
regard to adverse possession is quite justified.
10.            It is found that the appellate authority gave a specific finding
that the possession of opposite party nos.1 to 3 over the disputed land in
permissive. The revisional authority has not reversed such finding. One
who claims acquisition of title by adverse possession must plead and prove
that his possession is as of right with hostile animus, i.e., in denial of right
and title of the true owner and further that such possession was open,
peaceful and continues for more than the statutory period. In absence of
such pleading and proof, the claim of acquisition of title by adverse
possession would not succeed. Hostile animus can be shown if the
possession is as of right without any attempt at concealment. But where
the initial possession is permissive, in order to show that the possession
became adverse to the knowledge of true owner, the claimant has to clearly
plead and prove that at a subsequent point of time he exercised such overt
acts in relation to his possession    which would clearly amount to denial of
title of the real owner.

                                       8
11.          In the case of Thakur Kishan Sing v. Arvind Kumar,
reported in AIR 1995 SC 73, the Hon’ble apex Court held as follows :
             “….. 5 As regards adverse possession, it was not disputed
             even by the trial Court that the appellant entered into
             possession over the land in dispute under a licence from
             the respondent for purposes of brick kiln. The possession
             thus initially being permissive, the burden was heavy on
             the appellant to establish that it became adverse. A
             possession of a co-owner or of a licencee or of an agent or
             a permissive possession to become adverse must be
             established by cogent and convincing evidence to show
             hostile animus and possession adverse to the knowledge of
             real owner. Mere possession for however length of time
             does not result in converting the permissive possession
             into adverse possession.”
12.          The revisional court has not reversed the finding of the appellate
court that the possession of opposite party nos.1 to 3 over the land in question
was initially permissive. It has however simply jumped to the conclusion, relying
on some remarks in the Yaddast and Mistake prepared during the course of the
Major Settlement that the possession of the opposite parties is adverse, though
those documents are said to have been utilized behind the back of the
petitioners. The revisional order also does not indicate that the possession of the
opposite party nos.1 to 3 was noted in the Yaddast as adverse. The revisional
court should have tried to find out the exact pleadings of the opposite party
nos.1 to 3 with regard to adverse possession and the proof of ingredients of such
plea. The initial possession of the opposite parties over the land being permissive
in nature, it was incumbent        upon them to clearly plead and lead evidence
indicating the particular point of time and the exact nature of overt act in

                                          9
relation to their possession, which is indicative of denial of the title of the real
owners, viz., the petitioners. The revisional court has not considered these
aspects.     In the circumstances, the impugned revisional order is illegal and
unsustainable and the matter needs re-consideration by the revisional authority.
13.             Accordingly, the impugned revisional order (Annexure-3) is set aside
and the matter is remanded back to the Joint Commissioner, Settlement and
Consolidation, Bhubaneswar for fresh disposal of the Consolidation Revision
Case Nos.709 & 710 of 2001 only on the question of acquisition of title by
opposite party nos.1 to 3 by adverse possession on the basis of pleadings and
evidence already available on record. The revisions should be disposed of within
a period of four months from the date of appearance of the parties before the
revisional court. To cut short the delay, the petitioners and opposite party nos.1
to 3 are directed to appear before the revisional court on 13th July,2015.
                Both the writ petitions are accordingly disposed of.
                                                             ……………………
                                                              B.K.Nayak,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 18th June, 2015/Gs.


