                   HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                      F.A. NO.77 of 1985
         From the judgment dated 22.12.1984 and decree dated 8.1.1985
         passed by Shri D.K.Sahu, Subordinate Judge, Bhadrak in T.S.No.86 of
         1983-I.
         Collector, Balasore
         (now Bhadrak)                                   ……         Appellant
                                  - Versus-
         M/s Sasu Bahu Salt Factory,
         Markona, through its partners
         Nilasaila Nayak and others.                     ……         Respondents
                      For Appellant         :   Addl. Government Advocate.
                      For Respondents : M/s. R.P.Mohapatra
                                                    A.Mohanty, B.K.Bal, U.Patnaik,
                                                    J.M.Das, M.Kanungo,
                                                    Bibek Mohanty & Sisir Das
                                       ---------
         PRESENT:
                      THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K. PATEL
          Date of hearing – 19.5.2011 ::       Date of judgment – 8.9.2011
B.K. PATEL, J.       Defendant no.1 is in appeal against the judgment and decree
         passed by the learned Subordinate Judge (now Civil Judge, Senior
         Division ), Bhadrak in T.S.No.86 of 1983-I.
         2.           Plaintiff is a registered partnership firm which filed the suit
         through its partners for declaration that the plaintiff is the original
         owner of the suit lands described under Schedules ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ of the

                                      2
plaint.  Suit lands, situated on the shore of Bay of Bengal, were part of
ex-intermediary estate of Parhi family.
3.           Plaintiff’s case is that partners Nilasaila Nayak and
Nilamadhab Nayak purchased ‘A’ schedule suit lands on the strength of
registered sale deeds executed by 24 persons in whose favour said lands
had been settled by the Zamidar. Suit lands under ‘B’ schedule were
leased out in favour of partner Kanhu Charan Samal whereas suit lands
under ‘C’ schedule were leased out in favour of partner Krushna Charan
Jena by the Zamidar. Said lessees and vendors of above said Nilasaila
Nayak and Nilamadhab Nayak were paying rent and in possession of the
suit lands. After acquisition of the suit lands partners possessed the
suit lands. In order to carry out rubber plantation partners formed a
partnership and planted some rubber plants which did not grow due to
ecological reasons. Thereafter, the partners carried out manufacture of
salt over a part of the suit lands for a short period. It is asserted that
the partners are raising paddy crops over the suit lands. It is further
pleaded that since sea is receding towards east, more lands have been
created adjacent to the suit lands. Attempt of the partners to get the
suit lands recorded during major settlement operation as well as
mutated by the Tahasildar, Basudevpur did not yield any result.         In
the meanwhile, partners have formed a registered partnership firm by
inducting two other partners. It is alleged that defendant no.1, State of
Orissa, has made symbolic delivery of possession in respect of a

                                      3
substantial portion of suit lands as described under Schedule ‘D’ of the
plaint to defendant no.2,     Orissa Maritime of Chilika              Area
Development Corporation Limited, Bhubaneswar (hereinafter called as
‘the Corporation’) which has cast cloud on plaintiff’s title and ownership
over the suit lands.     It is asserted that defendant no.2 has never
possessed the suit lands nor has manufactured salt on the same.
4.           Defendant no.1 filed written statement      denying plaintiff’s
claim of grant of lease of suit lands by the Zamidar. It is pleaded that
the suit lands belong to the Government and accordingly recorded in the
record of rights.   It is further averred that the possession of lands
measuring about 250 acres was delivered to the Corporation for
manufacture of salt. Plaintiff was never in possession of the suit lands
nor raised paddy or grew rubber plants.
5.           In a separate written statement defendant no.2-Corporation
has pleaded that the Corporation is owner in possession over the lands
in question. It is pleaded that defendant no.1 delivered possession of
the lands measuring area of 260 acres through the Tahasildar,
Basudevpur to the defendant no.2 in the year 1979.          Defendant no.2
placed pillars to demarcate the area, cleared bushes and shrubs,
reclaimed the lands and developed the same for preparation of salt.
Defendant no.2 has been preparing salt in an area extending about 100
acres out of the suit lands.

                                            4
6.              Considering the rival pleadings, following issues were
settled by the trial court :
          “(i)     Have the plaintiffs any cause of action ?
          (ii)      Is the suit maintainable in the present form ?
          (iii)    Is the plaintiffs firm a registered partnership firm
                   as contemplated under Indian Partnership Act ?
          (iv)     Is the suit barred by law of limitation ?
          (v)      Is the plaintiff in possession of the disputed land?
          (vi)     Is the suit for mere declaration maintainable in law ?
          (vii)    Is the defendant no.2 Corporation in possession
                   of the land ?
          (viii) Have the plaintiffs any right, title and interest in the suit
                   property?
          (viii) To what relief, if any, the plaintiff are entitled ?”
7.              In order to substantiate their cases plaintiffs examined
P.Ws.1 to 10 and relied upon documents marked exts.1 to 60 whereas
defendants examined D.Ws 1 to 6 and relied upon documents marked
Exts.A to H.       Upon appraisal of evidence on record the court below
answered the issues in favour of the plaintiffs and decreed the suit.
8.              The defendant no.1 has preferred this appeal mainly on the
grounds that
          (1) the finding of the court below is illegal, arbitrary and
                  against the weight of evidence,

                                         5
           (2) the court below committed error in placing reliance
                 on the evidence of P.W.3, and
           (3) the court below has completely ignored              the
                 evidence of the defendants that possession of the
                 suit property was delivered to the defendant no.2.
9.             Learned Government counsel supporting the grounds
raised in the appeal memo contended that the court below failed to
appreciate the evidence adduced on behalf of the defendants that
during the settlement operation in the year 1963-64 and 1973, suit
lands were recorded as Abad Yogya Anabadi and Abad Ajogya Anabadi
and an area of 124 acres was recorded under Rakhit Khata as the
plaintiffs failed to show any document establishing their right over the
suit property. It was urged that the documents on which the plaintiff
relied upon had never seen the light of the day till filed in the trial court
and as such the trial court should not have admitted or relied upon
those documents to pass a decree in favour of the plaintiff.
10.            Learned counsel for the respondent nos.1 to 4, on the other
hand, supported the judgment of the court below and urged that the
judgment is supported by oral and documentary evidence and there is
no scope to interfere with the impugned judgment and decree.
11.            Law is well settled that while dealing with first appeal the
court is required to examine both facts and law involved in the case
and keeping in view the said principle, it is necessary to examine

                                        6
whether the impugned judgment suffers from any illegality or infirmity
which warrants interference.
12.            The plaintiff brought the suit for declaration of right over
the ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ schedule lands which correspond to Touzi No.953, of
which undisputedly the Parhi family was the intermediary as is evident
from Ext.59 the C.S. record of right. To establish the claim the plaintiff
relied upon voluminous documents of which reference may be made to
sale deeds Exts.13 to 35 through which the plaintiff purchased the suit
lands from the original lease holders; and Exts.5 and 7 to 11 the lease
documents through which the lease holders namely Kanhu Ch. Samal
and Krushna Ch. Jena and some Bengalis had taken lease from the ex-
Zamidar.      Reliance was also placed on Ext.38 series, the rent receipts
granted by the State to the Bengalis from whom Nilasaila and
Nilamadhab purchased lands.        All these documents further relate to
Ext.56 series, the Ekpadia submitted by the ex-intermediary to the
State after the estate abolition.      Over and above, the plaintiff also
placed reliance on Exts.39 to 44 which are the correspondences with
various Government Departments and on rent receipts Ext.38 series
which raise presumption of possession in favour of the plaintiff. This
Court in Rabindranath Ojha –vs- State of Orissa : 2011(I) CLR 912
has held that rent is a necessary condition of tenancy. Rent receipts
granted by the lesser are the best evidence so far as creation or
existence of a tenancy is concerned.       Consequently, after vesting of

                                        7
estate the State became the owner of the land free from all
encumbrances and the transferee under the ex-intermediary              was
transposed to be as such with the same rights and obligation as he was
subjected to under the ex-intermediary.        It would be pertinent to
mention that all these documents relate to a period when there was no
controversy and Defendant no.2 was not in picture. Hence, the court
below has not committed any error in placing reliance on those
documents which support the claim of the plaintiff.        Trial court has
also placed reliance on the oral testimonies of the witnesses in support
of the possession of the plaintiff of whom P.W.10 is none other than one
of the original lease holders. He supported the plaintiff’s case that 150
acres of land was leased out to him and to Kanhu Ch.Samal by the
Parhi Zamidari and he had paid Rs.15,000/- as salami. Evidence of
P.Ws.3 to 6 is also of much relevance inasmuch as P.W.3 was the
Tahasildar during the ex-intermediary period who proved the lease
documents vide Exts.5 and 7 to 11.        It was elicited in course of his
cross examination that Zamidar submitted Ekpadia. P.W.6 is another
material witness who is one of the ex-intermediaries. He supports the
case of the plaintiff about leasing out of the lands to Krushna Jena,
Kanhu Samal and some Bengalis. P.Ws. 5 and 8 proved the sale deeds
and testified their competence to depose in this case which has not
been discredited in the cross-examination. So far as the evidence of
P.W.1 and 10 is concerned, they are partners of the plaintiff and has
supported the possession. P.W.2 is a boundary witness and as such is

                                       8
competent to say about the possession.           Similar is the evidence of
P.Ws. 4 and 7.      Evidence of none of these witnesses suffers from
any infirmity so as to disbelieve plaintiff’s possession.
13.           On the other hand, evidence of none of the witnesses
examined on behalf of defendants inspires confidence inasmuch as
none of these witnesses has any knowledge regarding state of affairs
prior to possession alleged to have been delivered to defendant no.2.
The court below having found their evidence to be not satisfactory has
rightly not relied on their evidence. It appears from their evidence that
they deposed about possession of D.W.2 from June 1979 only by way of
delivery of symbolic possession. The court below has also considered
the documents relied upon by the defendants to rightly conclude that
by the time alleged possession was delivered to defendant no.2, the
plaintiff had already acquired title on the basis of sale deeds and lease
deeds.    It may be stated at the cost of repetition that the factum of
transfer by way of lease and thereafter by sale was testified by one of
the ex-intermediaries who also supported plaintiff’s claim of delivery of
possession, payment of rent to the Zamidars and submission of
Expadia after abolition of Zamidari.
14.           The defendants made feeble attempt to support their case
by relying on the ROR. The court below has rightly discarded the claim

                                        9
on the ground that ROR does not create or extinguish any right.
Further,    law     is  also   well settled that settlement    authorities
have no jurisdiction or authority to decide disputed questions of title.
 15.          Thus, on appraisal of the evidence and materials on record
upon reference to rival contention, the court below is found to have
rightly decreed the suit and there being no infirmity or illegality, there
is no scope to interfere with the findings of the lower court. Hence, the
appeal being devoid of merit, is dismissed.      Impugned judgment and
decree are confirmed. Parties shall bear their own costs.
                                                    ….………………
                                                    B.K. Patel, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 8th Sept.,2011/Palai


