                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                           JCRA NO.55 OF 2002
From the judgment and order dated 10.5.2002 passed by Shri G.C.
Tripathy, Additional Sessions Judge, Boudh in S.T. No.17 of 2001 (S.T.
No.85/2001 of D.C.).
Aparti Rout                                …….             Appellant
                      -  Versus-
State of Orissa                            …….             Respondent
             For Appellant     :    Mrs. Madhusmita Panda
             For Respondent    :    Mr. Sangram Das,
                                    Addl. Standing Counsel
PRESENT:
            THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                  AND
              THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K. PATEL
                 Date of hearing & judgment – 17.1.2012

                                               2
B.K. PATEL, J.       This appeal from jail is directed against the judgment and
        order dated 10.5.2002 passed by learned Additional                Sessions
        Judge, Boudh in S.T. No.17 of 2001 (S.T. No.85/2001 of D.C.) convicting
        and sentencing the appellant to undergo imprisonment for life under
        Section 302 of the I.P.C. for having committed murder of deceased Rania
        Rout.
        2.           Appellant is deceased’s husband. Informant P.W.1 and P.W.2
        are their son and daughter respectively.      Occurrence took place on
        24.5.2001.
        3.           Prosecution case is that at about 8 A.M. on the date of
        occurrence when the deceased was returning from bari side after washing
        utensils, the appellant picked up quarrel with her in front of the house.
        When the deceased got annoyed and was going out of the house, appellant
        pulled her saree as a result of which she fell down on the verandah.
        Appellant procured tangia M.O.I from inside the house and dealt one blow
        on deceased’s left scapula and another blow on her back side neck.
        Deceased sustained injuries and died at the spot. When informant P.W.1
        raised alarm to call the neighbours, appellant left with tangia M.O.I on a
        bicycle. On the basis of written report Ext.1 presented by P.W.1 at
        Purunakatak P.S., the Officer-In-Charge P.W.11 registered the case and
        took up investigation.     In course of investigation, dead body of the
        deceased    was   subjected   to  post-mortem   examination    at  District
        Headquarters Hospital, Boudh by P.W.10. It is alleged that blood stained

                                         3
tangia M.O.I was recovered and seized at the instance of appellant while in
police custody under seizure list Ext.5/1 in presence of P.Ws.3 and 6.
It is also alleged that prior to his apprehension the appellant made extra-
judicial confession before P.Ws.7 and 9.         Seizure of articles including
appellant’s blood stained lungi was affected.             On completion of
investigation, charge-sheet was submitted against the appellant under
Section 302 of the I.P.C.
4.            Appellant took the plea of denial.
5.            In order to substantiate the charge, prosecution examined
eleven witnesses. Informant P.W.1 and P.W.2, who were examined as eye
witnesses, turned hostile. P.Ws.3 and 6 are witnesses to seizure of articles
from the spot under seizure list Exts.3 and 4 as well as seizure of tangia
M.O.I under seizure list Ext.5/1. Of them P.W.3 turned hostile. P.Ws.4
and 8 are post-occurrence witnesses.       P.W.5 is a witness to seizure of
appellant’s lungi and shirt under seizure list Ext.6 from the appellant’s
house. P.Ws.7 and 9 deposed the appellant to have made extra-judicial
confession before each of them. P.W.10 is the doctor who conducted post-
mortem examination over the dead body of the deceased. P.W.11 is the
investigating officer.   Prosecution also relied upon documents marked
Exts.1 to 16 and material object M.O.I. No defence evidence was adduced.
              On an appraisal of evidence on record, in the absence of
evidence of any eye witness, the trial court held the appellant guilty of the
charge on the basis of circumstantial evidence.

                                        4
6.           In assailing the impugned judgment it is contended by the
learned counsel for the appellant that none of the circumstances relied
upon by the prosecution is supported by cogent evidence. With regard to
the circumstance of seizure of blood stained tangia M.O.I it is contended
that out of two witnesses P.W.3 did not support the prosecution case
whereas the other witness P.W.6 vitally contradicted himself in course of
cross-examination. Evidence of P.Ws.7 and 9 with regard to extra-judicial
confession also suffers from infirmities. It is argued that prosecution has
not led any evidence to indicate that the appellant had any relationship
with P.Ws.7 and 9 so as to repose confidence on them.           That apart,
circumstance of detection of blood stains on tangia M.O.I and appellant’s
lungi was not brought to the notice of the appellant in course of his
examination under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. It is strenuously contended
that in absence of cogent evidence implicating the appellant with the
offence, medical evidence of P.W.10 cannot sustain the conviction.
7.           Placing reliance on the circumstances of the recovery of blood
stained tangia M.O.I, the extra-judicial confession of the appellant, the
seizure of appellant’s blood stained lungi and the medical evidence learned
counsel for the State supports the impugned judgment.
8.           We have carefully scrutinized the entire evidence on record.
The two eye-witnesses informant P.W.1 as well as his sister P.W.2 did not
support the case of the prosecution. Therefore, the entire prosecution case

                                         5
hinges upon circumstantial evidence only. Circumstances relied upon by
the prosecution are:
             (i) discovery of tangia M.O.I. consequent     upon information
             received from the appellant;
             (ii) appellant’s extra-judicial confession stated to have been
             made before P.Ws.7 and 9;
             (iii) detection of human blood stains on appellant’s lungi; and
             (iv) medical evidence regarding homicidal death of the
             deceased.
9.           P.W.3, a signatory to seizure list Ext.5/1 under which tangia
M.O.I was seized, denied regarding seizure of any tangia in his presence
on production by the appellant. He was declared to be a hostile witness.
P.W.6 stated in his evidence that on the date of occurrence at about 4
P.M. police came with the appellant in custody to his village. Being asked,
the appellant confessed to have assaulted the deceased by means of a
tangia and concealed it in the Palas bush near gaon-munda tank.
Thereafter, he led them to the place and gave recovery of the tangia M.O.I
from inside the Palas bush which was seized under seizure list Ext.5/1.
P.W.6 did not whisper a word regarding recording of disclosure statement
made by the appellant by the investigating officer P.W.11. That apart, at
paragraph-5 of his cross-examination P.W.6 admitted to the suggestion
made by the defence and deposed:

                                          6
              “ It is not a fact that the accused while in police custody
             confessed his guilty and led us to the place where concealing
             the tangia and gave recovery of the same        which    was
             seized by the police in my presence” (sic).
Thus, in his cross-examination P.W.6 totally gave a gobye to the assertion
that blood stained tangia M.O.I was recovered and seized consequent
upon information received from the appellant. Therefore, prosecution is
found to have failed to establish the circumstance under which tangia
M.O.I was recovered and seized.
10.          P.W.7 happens to be a Gramrakhi of village Pitambarpur
whereas the appellant belongs to village Tileswar. P.W.7 deposed that the
appellant came to P.W.7’s house and told that he had killed his wife and
requested him to take him to the police station. Appellant was kept in his
house and P.W.7 reported the matter to the O.I.C., Purunakatak P.S. By
that time the O.I.C. of the P.S. told him that the appellant’s son had
already reported the matter and took the appellant. In his cross-
examination P.W.7 admitted that he did not know the appellant prior to
the occurrence.
             P.W.9 is a resident of village Kanpur.        He stated that the
appellant came to his house and begged for water. Thereafter, appellant
told that he had committed one wrong. Being asked, appellant confessed
to have killed his wife. P.W.9 asked him to leave his house. Appellant told
him to show the way to police station. P.W.9 showed him the way.
Appellant kept his cycle near P.W.9’s house and left. Immediately after

                                         7
departure of the appellant police came and P.W.9 told the police about the
appellant. In his cross-examination P.W.9 also stated that he did not
know the appellant prior to the occurrence. Thus, both P.Ws.7 and 9
admitted that they had no prior acquaintance with the appellant. In such
circumstances, prosecution has not been able to adduce any evidence
regarding the reason which prompted the appellant to repose confidence
on them to make confession.
11.           Chemical examination report reveals that human blood stains
were detected from tangia M.O.I and lungi seized from appellant’s house.
Seized lungi does not appear to have been produced in court. Also, in
course of examination of appellant under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C.
appellant has not been asked regarding the circumstance of detection of
blood on the tangia M.O.I or the lungi. Therefore, circumstance of
detection of blood stains on seized tangia M.O.I and lungi is not available
to be utilized as an incriminating circumstance against the appellant.
12.           No doubt P.W.10, in course of post-mortem examination over
the dead body of the deceased, found incised wounds on back of neck and
lower end of left scapula, and opined that cause of death of the deceased
was due to spinal and hemorrhagic shock due to said injuries. However,
medical evidence of homicidal death of the deceased as a circumstance by
itself does not indicate complicity of the appellant with the offence.
13.           In view of the above discussions, it is found that none of the
circumstances relied upon by the prosecution to implicate the appellant

                                         8
with the murder of the deceased has been established in view of infirmities
and inconsistencies in the evidence of the witnesses.           Therefore, the
impugned judgment is not sustainable and the appellant is entitled to be
acquitted.
14.          In the result, the appeal is allowed. The order of conviction
and sentence dated 10.5.2002 passed by learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Boudh in S.T. No.17 of 2001 (S.T. No.85/2001 of D.C.) convicting
the appellant under Section 302 of the I.P.C. and sentencing him to
undergo imprisonment for life is set aside, and he is acquitted of the
charge.
             It is stated that the appellant is in custody. If that be so, the
appellant, Aparti Rout, be set at liberty forthwith, unless his detention is
required in any other case.
                                              ………………………….
                                                L. Mohapatra, J.
                                              ……………………..…
                                                  B.K. Patel, J.

                               9
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 17th Jan., 2012/B.Jhankar.


