                    ORISSA HIGH COURT,CUTTACK
                                   JCRLA NO. 55 OF 2002
        From the judgment and order dated 24.7.2002 passed by Shri
        A.P.Sahoo,        learned        Sessions         Judge,      Kalahandi-Nuapada,
        Bhawanipatna in Sessions Case No.15 of 2001.
                                               ----------
        Pitambara Gouda                                             …       Appellant
                                      -versus-
        State of Orissa                                             …      Respondent
                       For appellant          - Mr. A.Mohanty
                       For respondent         - Mr. S.K.Das,
                                                Addl. Standing Counsel.
        PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE L.MOHAPATRA
                                                 AND
                      THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K.PATEL
        -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Date of hearing & judgment- 12.12.2011
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
B.K.Patel,J.       This appeal from jail is directed against the judgment dated
        24.7.2002 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Kalahandi-Nuapada,
        Bhawanipatna in Sessions Case No.15 of 2001 convicting the appellant
        and sentencing him to undergo imprisonment for life under section
        302 I.P.C. for having committed murder of deceased Raghunath
        Dandasena.
        2.             Occurrence took place on 1.8.2000 in the evening.
        Deceased belonged to village Siriliguda.                   Appellant belongs to
        occurrence village Bandelguda. Prosecution case is that on the date of

                                   2
occurrence at about 7.30 P.M. informant P.W.1, who happens to be
Ward Member of the occurrence village, was present in his house,
P.W.3 and his nephew P.W.6 hurriedly came to his house and told that
the deceased while returning from their village Bandelguda after
arranging labourers, shouted from nearby bridge that he was being
killed ( DHANRE PARSU MATE MARIDELA). Hearing his shout P.W.3
and his nephew P.W.6 rushed to the spot and saw that the appellant
was dealing successive tangia blows on the deceased.        Co-accused
persons Surendra Pujhari and Chhaturbhuja Sunani, who also faced
trial along with the appellant, were standing nearby.      Out of fear
P.Ws.3 and 6 could not venture to go near the deceased.           While
returning, they saw the appellant holding tangia and the co-accused
persons running away from the spot.      P.W.1 called some of his co-
villagers before whom P.Ws.3 and 6 narrated the occurrence.
Thereafter, they went to the spot and found that the deceased was
lying dead with injuries on him. His bicycle and bag were lying nearby.
On the basis of written report submitted at Sadar Police Station,
Bhawanipatna, the then O.I.C. P.W.10 registered the case and took up
investigation.   On completion of investigation, charge-sheet was
submitted under section 302 of I.P.C. against the appellant and under
section 302/109/34 of I.P.C. against co-accused persons.
3.           Considering the materials on record charge under section
302 I.P.C. was framed against the appellant and under section 302

                                    3
read with 34 I.P.C. and under section 109 read with 34 of I.P.C.
against the co-accused persons.
4.           Appellant took the plea of denial and false implication.
5.           In order to substantiate the charge prosecution examined
10 witnesses. As stated above, P.W.1 is the informant and P.Ws. 3 and
6 are eyewitnesses to the occurrence. P.W.2 is also an eyewitness to
the occurrence.    P.W.4 deposed regarding seizure of axe M.O.I and
wearing apparels of the appellant at his instance. P.W.5, deceased’s
son, is a post-occurrence witness. P.W.7 is a seizure witness. P.W.8 is
the doctor who conducted post mortem examination over dead body of
the deceased. P.Ws. 9 and 10 are Investigating Officers. No defence
evidence was adduced.
             Placing reliance on the evidence of eyewitnesses stated to
have been corroborated by medical evidence and other incriminating
circumstances, trial court held the prosecution to have proved the
charge under section 302 of the I.P.C. against the appellant. However,
co-accused persons were acquitted of the charge.
6.           In assailing the impugned judgment it is submitted by the
learned counsel for the appellant that the occurrence took place in the
evening in an Amabasya night. In such circumstances, it was not at
all possible for any one to identify the assailant. It is contended that
the evidence of three eyewitnesses P.Ws.2,3 and 6 is not supported by
probability factors.

                                    4
7.           Learned counsel for the State placing reliance of the
evidence   of  eyewitnesses   and   medical   evidence  supported  the
impugned judgment. It is also contended by the learned counsel for
the State that the appellant being a co-villager of the eyewitnesses,
their evidence with regard to complicity of the appellant with the
commission of murder of the deceased cannot be disbelieved on the
unfounded contention that the occurrence took place early in the
evening. Therefore, there is no infirmity in the impugned judgment.
8.           There is no dispute that death of the deceased was
homicidal in nature. P.W.8 conducted post mortem examination of the
deceased.    Deceased was found to have sustained as many as six
incised wounds. Three of the injuries were on his head. P.W.8 opined
that cause of death of the deceased was due to haemorrahge and shock
produced by extensive wounds.      Having examined axe M.O.I, P.W.8
also opined that injuries found on the deceased were possible with the
said weapon.
9.           P.W.3 testified that at sun set time on the date of
occurrence when he was in his house with P.W.6 who happens to be
his nephew, they heard shout of the deceased DHANRE PARSU MATE
MARIDELA. They rushed to the spot and saw the appellant assaulting
the deceased by means of tangia giving successive blows on his body
near a bridge. They also saw co-accused persons near the appellant.
After assaulting, the accused persons fled away. P.W.3 came to the
spot and saw that the deceased was lying dead. He went to the village

                                    5
and informed P.W.1 about the occurrence. P.W.3 further deposed that
P.W.2 also told that he had seen the appellant assaulting the deceased.
P.W.3 also stated that on the date of occurrence deceased had come to
his village for searching labourers. It has been elicited in the cross-
examination of P.W.3 that his house is situated at a distance of 50 to
60 cubits from the spot. Nothing has been elicited in course of cross-
examination of P.W.3 to disbelieve his testimony.
       P.W.6 stated that on the date of occurrence in the evening at
about 6 P.M. while he was in the house of P.W.3, who is his maternal
uncle, they heard alarm raised by the deceased. They rushed to the
spot and saw that the appellant was assaulting the deceased by means
of tangia by giving successive blows while he was lying on the ground.
The two co-accused persons were standing nearby. Out of fear while
they were returning to their house they saw the appellant and co-
accused persons fled away from the spot. Thereafter, they went to the
spot and saw dead body of the deceased. Immediately they came to the
village and informed P.W.1.     In the meanwhile, P.W.2 also came to
P.W.1 and narrated that he saw the incident. P.W.6 deposed that as
per dictation of P.W.1, he scribed the F.I.R. Ext.1.       Thus, P.W.6
corroborated P.W.3 in material particulars.
        P.W.2 testified that on the date of occurrence at about 5 to 6
P.M. while he was going to attend call of nature, he saw that the
appellant had concealed his presence by holding an axe. He also saw

                                    6
the deceased was returning from his village to Siriliguda. When the
deceased was at the spot situated near tube well where there was a
small bridge, appellant gave an axe blow on the head of the deceased.
Deceased made hullah DHANRE PARSU MATE MARIDELA                   and fell
down on the ground. Thereafter, appellant gave successive axe blows
on the body of the deceased. On seeing the incident out of fear he ran
away and went to P.W.1 to whom he narrated about the occurrence
and at that time P.Ws. 3 and 6 were also with P.W.1.         In course of
cross-examination, evidence of P.W.2 has also been no discredited in
any manner.
         P.W.1 corroborated P.Ws. 2,3 and 6.          He stated that on
1.8.2000 when he was sitting in his house P.Ws. 3 and 6 came and
called him. When he came out from his house, both of them stated that
the appellant committed murder of the deceased.          Immediately he
called some of his co-villagers. By that time P.W.2 also came and told
that he had seen the occurrence while he was giving to attend call of
nature.   They went to the spot thereafter.       P.W.1 testified to have
lodged F.I.R. Ext.1 in the police station and to have witnessed inquest
over dead body of the deceased. Evidence of P.W.1 is corroborated by
contents of the F.I.R. Ext.1.
10.          P.W.4 testified that while in police custody appellant made
disclosure statement Ext.6 confessing his guilty and led to recovery of
his wearing apparels which he had concealed in a palasa bush under a

                                    7
papal tree as well as axe M.O.I from under a Karla tree where he had
thrown it. Axe M.O.I. was seized under seizure list Ext.4. Investigating
Officer P.w.10 corroborated P.W.4 on this aspect. It appears from the
chemical examination report that axe M.O.I was found stained with
human blood.
11.           P.W.5, deceased’s son, in his evidence stated that at about
8 months prior to the occurrence when his sister had gone to tube
well to bring water appellant told her as to whether the said tube well
belonged to her father. In that connection, there was quarrel in course
of which deceased had dealt a stick blow on the appellant.          Thus,
evidence of P.W.5 shows that the appellant bore grudge against the
deceased for assaulting him.
12.           Thus, on reappraisal of evidence on record, it is found that
as many as three eyewitnesses implicated the appellant to have
committed murder of the deceased. It is apparent from the evidence
that the occurrence took place early in the evening.       They saw the
occurrence from a very close quarters. Appellant being their co-
villagers is closely known to them. There is no infirmity in the evidence
of any of the eyewitnesses.      They corroborated each other.       Their
evidence is corroborated by medical evidence, circumstance of seizure
of weapon of offence M.O.I as well as evidence of P.W.5 regarding
motive on the part of the appellant for committing the offence. Post-
occurrence witness P.W.1 also supported evidence of each of the

                                    8
eyewitnesses. In the circumstances, prosecution is found to have well
established the charge against the appellant. There appears no
infirmity in the impugned judgment warranting interference.
              Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
                                                ……………………
                                                 L.Mohapatra,J.
                                               ………………………
                                                  B.K.Patel,J
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated 12th Dec.,2011/Palai


