                          HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                  JCRLA NO.39 OF 2002
        From the judgment and order dated 23.8.2002 passed by Shri S.C.
        Mishra, Additional Sessions Judge, (Fast Track Court), Baripada in S.T.
        No.1/150 of 2001-2002.
        Pahala Dehury                               …….               Appellant
                               - Versus-
        State of Orissa                             …….               Respondent.
                           For Appellant     :     Mr. Samarendra Ku. Bal
                                                   & Mandakini Panda
                     For Respondent    :     Mr. Sangram Das,
                                             Addl. Standing Counsel
        PRESENT:
                    THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                            AND
                      THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K. PATEL
                         Date of hearing & judgment – 22.2.2012
B.K. PATEL, J.       This appeal from jail is directed against the judgment and
        order dated 23.8.2002 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
        (Fast Track Court), Baripada in S.T. No.1/150 of 2001-2002 convicting
        and sentencing the appellant to undergo imprisonment for life and to pay
        a fine of Rs.2000/-, in default to undergo R.I. for one year, under Section
        302 of the Indian Penal Code (for short ‘the I.P.C.’) for having committed
        murder of deceased Gangadhar Dehury.
        2.           Appellant is a distant relation of the deceased. Deceased
        alongwith his son informant P.W.1, daughter-in-law P.W.2 and wife P.W.9
        were occupying one portion and the appellant was residing on the other

                                        2
portion of a house allotted to the appellant under Indira Awas Yojana. It
is alleged that on 21.3.2001, informant P.W.1 returned home from work
at about 7.00 P.M. and asked his wife P.W.2 for food. As P.W.2 did not
respond, P.W.1 dealt her a slap.          P.W.2 tried to escape and she
accidentally trod upon the rice plate of the appellant who was taking food
on the verandah. Appellant picked up quarrel with P.W.1. The deceased
intervened and tried to pacify the appellant. The appellant became angry
and all of a sudden assaulted on the head of the deceased by means of a
bamboo bahungi.       Deceased sustained injury, fell down and became
unconscious. When people assembled, the appellant threatened them not
to report the matter before the police and escaped. Deceased was taken to
Baripada Sadar Police Station where on the basis of oral narration about
the incident made by P.W.1 the A.S.I. of Police P.W.7 prepared First
Information Report Ext.4, registered the case under Sections 325 and 506
of the I.P.C, and took up investigation. The deceased died on the next day
while under treatment in District Headquarters Hospital, Baripada. On
completion of investigation, charge-sheet was submitted against the
appellant for commission of offences under Sections 302 and 506 of the
I.P.C.
3.           Appellant took the plea of complete denial.
4.           In order to substantiate the charge, prosecution examined
nine witnesses. P.Ws.1, 2 and 9 as well as deceased’s brother P.W.3 and
P.W.4 were examined as eye-witnesses. However, P.W.3 admitted in

                                      3
course of his cross-examination that he was a post-occurrence witness,
and P.Ws.4 and 9 were declared to be hostile witnesses.       P.W.5 is a
doctor who conducted post-mortem examination over the dead body of the
deceased.    P.W.6 is another doctor who had medically examined the
deceased in the hospital.    P.Ws.7 and 8 were the investigating officers.
Prosecution also relied upon documents marked Exts.1 to 12 and material
object M.O.I. No defence evidence was adduced.
             Placing reliance on the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 stated to
have been corroborated by the evidence of P.Ws.3 and 9 as well as medical
evidence of P.Ws.5 and 6, the trial court held the prosecution to have
established the charge under Section 302 of the I.P.C. against the
appellant. However, the appellant was acquitted of the charge under
Section 506 of the I.P.C.
5.           In assailing the impugned judgment it is submitted by the
learned counsel for the appellant that P.Ws.1, 2, 3 and 9, who are closely
related to the deceased, were examined as eye-witnesses. But P.W.9 did
not support the prosecution case and P.W.3 admitted in his cross-
examination to have arrived at the spot after the assault was already over.
In such circumstances, the trial court should not have placed reliance on
the evidence of P.Ws. 1 and 2.          Alternatively, it is argued that
circumstances proved in the case established that appellant on the spur of
the moment being provoked by the intervention of the deceased all of a
sudden dealt a single blow by means of a bahungi on the deceased.

                                       4
Therefore, the appellant had no intention to cause death of the deceased
for which he is not liable to be convicted under Section 302 of the I.P.C.
6.           Placing reliance on the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 as well as
medical evidence of P.Ws.5 and 6 learned State counsel supports the
impugned judgment.
7.           We have carefully scrutinized the entire evidence on record.
P.W.1 stated in his evidence that appellant had been allotted with a house
under Indira Awas Yojana. Appellant was residing in a portion of it and
the other portion of the house was occupied by informant’s family
members. On the date of occurrence P.W.1 returned home at about 7.30
P.M. and assaulted his wife P.W.2 as she caused delay in supplying him
food. The appellant was taking his meals on the verandah of the house.
When P.W.2 was going away, her leg came in contact with the rice plate of
the appellant for which the appellant quarreled with P.W.1. However, the
deceased intervened and impressed upon the appellant not to quarrel. The
appellant being angry gave a blow by the bahungi made by bamboo on the
head of the deceased with force as a result of which there was bleeding
injury. The deceased lost his sense. P.W.1 removed the deceased to Sadar
P.S., Baripada and reported the matter. Police sent the deceased to the
hospital where the deceased died on the next day. Evidence of P.W.1 has
not been discredited in course of cross-examination in any manner.
Contents of the First Information Report Ext. 4 materially corroborate the
evidence of informant P.W. 1. P.W.2 testified that her husband returning

                                      5
from work asked for food. When there was delay, P.W.1 assaulted her.
When P.W.2 was going away, her leg came in contact with the rice pot
of the appellant. Though P.W.2 gave two pots of rice, the appellant was not
satisfied. He quarreled with the deceased and gave a bahungi blow on the
head as a result of which the deceased sustained injury. Evidence of this
witness also has not been discredited in any manner in course of cross-
examination.     Though P.W.3 stated in his examination-in-chief that
appellant assaulted the deceased with a bahungi on his head and ran
away, in his cross-examination P.W.3 stated that he went to the house of
his uncle Nakula from the house of the deceased, and that quarrel and
assault was already over on his return to the house of the deceased from
the house of Nakula. P.W.4 stated that he did not know anything about
the case and was declared to be hostile witness. Deceased’s wife P.W.9
stated that after consuming handia she returned to the house during
evening time and went to sleep. Subsequently, she ascertained that the
appellant assaulted her husband by a bahungi as a result of which he
died. She categorically stated in her cross-examination that she had not
seen the actual assault on the deceased for which she could not say as to
how her husband died. Thus, even though evidence of P.Ws.3, 4 and 9 is
of no help to the prosecution, evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 with regard to
assault on the deceased by the appellant by means of a bahungi causing
injury remained unshaken. It is also evident from their evidence that the
occurrence was preceded by a quarrel between the appellant on the one

                                        6
hand and the informant P.W.1 on the other. The appellant was infuriated
as P.W.2 trod upon her rice plate when he was eating.      When deceased
intervened, all of a sudden the appellant dealt a blow by means of a
bahungi on his head.
8.           P.W.5 as well as P.W.6 deposed to have found a lacerated
injury on deceased’s right parietal region.     P.W.5 found a depressed
fracture on the right parietal bone and opined that cause of death of the
deceased was due to neurogenic shock on account of the injury on the
vital part of the brain. Occurrence took place on 21.3.2001 and P.W.6
deposed to have medically examined the deceased on 22.3.2001. Thus, it
is also obvious that death of deceased was homicidal in nature.
9.           As has been observed earlier the occurrence was preceded by
quarrel between the deceased and informant P.W.1 when P.W.2’s leg came
in contact with appellant’s rice plate. When the deceased intervened, all of
a sudden without any premeditation the appellant assaulted the deceased
by means of a bamboo bahungi causing injury sustained by the deceased.
It is amply established that being deprived of self control due to sudden
provocation the appellant dealt a single blow on the deceased. Therefore,
though the appellant might have dealt the blow with the knowledge that
injury caused by the blow may result in death, the appellant is not found
to have harboured intention or knowledge required to constitute the
offence under Section 302 of the I.P.C. Therefore, the appellant cannot

                                              7
      escape the liability for commission of offence under Section 304, Part-II of
      the I.P.C.
      10.          In view of the above, we allow the appeal in part, and set aside
      the impugned judgment and order dated 23.8.2002 passed by the learned
      Addl. Sessions Judge, (Fast Track Court), Baripada in S.T. No.1/150 of
      2001-2002 convicting the appellant for commission of offence under
      Section 302 of the I.P.C. and sentencing him to undergo imprisonment for
      life and to pay fine of Rs.2000/-, in default to undergo R.I. for one year.
      We find the appellant guilty of commission of offence under Section 304,
      Part-II of the I.P.C. and accordingly, convict him thereunder. He is
      sentenced to imprisonment for a period of seven years.
                   It is stated that the appellant is in custody for more than ten
      years. If that be so, the appellant-Pahala Dehury be set at liberty
      forthwith, unless his detention is required in connection with any other
      case.
                                                    ………………………….
                                                       B.K. Patel, J.
L. Mohapatra, J.    I agree.
                                                    ……………………..…
                                                      L. Mohapatra, J.
      Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
      The 22nd Feb., 2012/B.Jhankar.


