                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                         JCRLA NO.42 OF 2003
From the judgment and order dated 31.3.2003 passed by Shri Satrughana
Pujahari, Second Additional Sessions Judge, Berhampur in S.C. No.5 of
2001 (S.C. No.447 of 2000-GDC).
Bhramara Swain                             …….              Appellant
                      -  Versus-
State of Orissa                            …….              Respondent
             For Appellant     :    M/s A.K. Dalai, P.K. Sahu-2
                                         and N. Tripathy
             For Respondent    :    Mr. Sangram Das,
                                        Addl. Standing Counsel
PRESENT:
            THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                  AND
              THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.K. PATEL
                 Date of hearing & judgment – 29.2.2012

                                              2
B.K. PATEL, J.       This appeal from jail is directed against the judgment and
        order dated 31.3.2003 passed by learned Second Additional Sessions
        Judge, Berhampur in S.C. No.5 of 2001 (S.C. No.447 of 2000-GDC)
        convicting and sentencing the appellant to undergo imprisonment for life
        under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (for short ‘the I.P.C.’) for
        commission of murder of deceased Gandu Swain. Appellant has also been
        convicted under Section 324 of the I.P.C. for voluntarily causing hurt by
        sharp cutting weapon to P.W.7 Sajani Swain, but no separate sentence
        has been awarded for the same.
        2.           Appellant and informant P.W.1 are deceased’s sons. P.W.2 is
        deceased’s first wife and mother of appellant and P.W.1. P.W.7 is
        appellant’s step mother. P.W.8 is deceased’s brother. Occurrence took
        place on 14.10.1999 at about 11.00 P.M. in the house of deceased and
        appellant.
        3.           Prosecution case is that deceased and his family members
        including the appellant were joint in mess, residence and property.
        However, the appellant used to quarrel with the deceased demanding
        partition after his marriage which took place seven to eight months prior
        to the occurrence. There was a village meeting to decide the dispute. On
        the date of occurrence at about 9.00 P.M. all the family members of the
        deceased went to sleep after taking food. At about 11.00 P.M., on hearing

                                         3
the sound KUCH KUCH, P.W.7 woke up and found                the     appellant
assaulting the deceased by means of Kati M.O.I.        Other inmates of the
house also woke up.        When P.W.7 resisted and caught hold of the
appellant, the appellant assaulted her by means of M.O.I on her hand
causing bleeding injury. Deceased sustained injuries and died at the spot.
It is alleged that the appellant threw M.O.I at the spot and left towards the
village. P.Ws.1 and 2 shouted out of fear. Hearing the shout many
villagers including P.Ws.5, 10 and 12 gathered. While leaving, appellant
muttered that he had killed his father. He also confessed before P.Ws.10
and 12 to have committed murder of the deceased. Gram Rakhi and
others came to the spot and took the appellant to Beguniapada Police
Out-Post where informant P.W.1 submitted First Information Report
Ext.1. Sub-Inspector of Police, Beguniapada Out-Post P.W.16 made entry
in the Station Diary Book, sent the First Information Report for
registration to O.I.C., Kodola P.S. and took up investigation.            On
completion of investigation, charge-sheet was submitted against the
appellant for commission of offences under Sections 302 and 324 of the
I.P.C.
4.            Appellant took the plea of denial.
5.            In order to substantiate the charge, prosecution examined
sixteen witnesses. Of them P.W.1 the informant and P.W.7 the injured

                                      4
were eye-witnesses to the occurrence. P.Ws.5, 8,   10    and   12   were
examined to depose regarding extra-judicial confession made by the
appellant before each of them.    However, P.W.10 was declared to be a
hostile witness. P.W.8 was a witness to inquest also. P.W.2 was also
declared hostile. P.Ws.3, 4 and 9 were seizure witnesses.     P.W.6 is a
doctor who conducted post-mortem examination over the dead body of the
deceased. P.W.11 is a doctor who medically examined the appellant and
collected his nail clippings. P.W.15 is another doctor who medically
examined P.W.7. P.W.14 deposed regarding the meeting of the village
panch which was held to settle the land dispute between the appellant
and the deceased. P.Ws.13 and 16 were the investigating officers.
Prosecution also relied upon documents marked Exts.1 to 12 and material
objects M.Os.I to V.
            No oral evidence was adduced from the side of defence.
However, certain signatures Exts. A,B and C were marked on behalf of the
defence.
6.          Placing reliance on the evidence of two eye-witnesses P.Ws.1
and 7 stated to have been corroborated by the evidence of P.W.5 with
regard to extra-judicial confession made by the appellant and medical
evidence of P.Ws.6 and 15 the trial court held the prosecution to have
proved the charge against the appellant.

                                        5
7.           In    assailing   the     impugned judgment it is contended
by the learned counsel for the appellant that evidence of both the eye-
witnesses P.Ws.1 and 7 suffers from inconsistencies and discrepancies.
During pendency of the investigation both of them had come up with
different version about the occurrence by implicating one Tika Parida to be
the assailant of the deceased. The trial court has failed to take note of
P.W.1’s admission made in course of his cross-examination that he had
given an affidavit before the court that one Tika Parida cut the throat of
the deceased sitting on his chest. It is also contended that the trial court
having not accepted the evidence of P.Ws.8 and 12 regarding the extra-
judicial confession made by the appellant, should not have placed any
reliance on the evidence of P.W.5 in order to record the finding that the
appellant had made extra-judicial confession.
8.           Placing reliance on the evidence of the eye-witnesses learned
counsel for the State supports the impugned judgment and contends that
evidence of both the eye-witnesses is corroborated by the evidence of
P.W.5 with regard to extra-judicial confession as well as by medical
evidence.
9.            There is no dispute that death of the deceased was homicidal
in nature. P.W.6 conducted post mortem examination over dead body of
the deceased at 1.30 P.M. on 25.10.1999. P.W.6 testified that he found as

                                        6
many as ten incised wounds and opined that cause         of death    of  the
deceased could be due to haemorragic and neurogenic shock. It is also in
the evidence of P.W.6 that the injuries on the deceased could have been
caused by seized Kati M.O.I.
10.          P.Ws. 1, 2 and 7 who are close relations of the deceased as
well as appellant deposed regarding ill-feeling of the deceased and the
appellant. It is in their evidence that all the family members were staying
in one house.     P.W.1 deposed that prior to the occurrence there was
quarrel between the appellant and the deceased due to demand for
partition of the property by the appellant, and one month prior to the
occurrence deceased called one village meeting in which it was settled that
the deceased and his sons would remain in jointness till harvesting of the
paddy after which paddy would be divided.         P.W.2 appellant’s mother,
stated that wife of appellant brought some articles from her father’s house
but the deceased and his family members denied to wear the said articles
brought by her for which appellant demanded partition of the landed
property. There was a punch which decided that the appellant would stay
separately from the deceased during ensuing Summer.          P.W.7 testified
that appellant got married 7 to 8 months prior to the occurrence. The
appellant demanded share from the property of the deceased and there
was dispute. Bhadraloks decided that partition would be made after rainy

                                       7
season and after harvesting of the crops. P.W.14,          an independent
witness, happened to be the President of the village during the period. He
testified that there was a village punch to settle the dispute between the
appellant and the deceased. As there was already crop on the paddy field,
the village gentlemen decided to effect physical partition of the landed
property either in the month of January or in the month of Baisakha.
Thus, prosecution has led cogent evidence to substantiate the allegation
that appellant was not pulling on well with the deceased.
11.          Prosecution mainly relied upon direct evidence of P.Ws. 1
and 7 to establish complicity of the appellant with the murder of the
deceased.     Informant P.W.1 testified that in the night of occurrence
appellant slept in one room whereas others slept in another room.       At
about 11 P.M. appellant came and assaulted the deceased by means of
Kati M.O.I on the root of the ear, neck, chest, palm and elbow. At that
time P.W.2, P.W.7 and his younger brother were present and had seen the
occurrence. Deceased sustained bleeding injuries. Wearing apparels of
the deceased and the appellant were stained with blood. His step mother
P.W.7 intervened and the appellant also gave one blow on her left hand as
a result of which she sustained bleeding injury and her wearing apparels
were stained with blood.    P.W.1 identified M.O.II and M.O.III to be the
napkin and lungi respectively of the appellant and M.O.V to be the sari of

                                       8
P.W.7.     Evidence of P.W.1 has not been discredited in any manner
in course of cross-examination.         His evidence is also materially
corroborated by the contents of F.I.R. Ext.1 lodged by him in the morning
on 15.10.1999.      P.W.7 also testified that in the night of occurrence
appellant was sleeping in one room and others were sleeping in another
room. Hearing sound of KUCH KUCH she woke up and found that the
appellant was cutting the deceased by means of Kati M.O.I. She resisted
and embraced the appellant and the appellant assaulted her and she
sustained injury on her left hand left finger. P.Ws.1 and 2 also saw the
occurrence. They separated the appellant and closed the door. Evidence
of this witness has not been discredited in any manner in course of cross-
examination.     P.Ws. 1 and 7 corroborated each other in material
particulars. P.W.7 is an injured eyewitness. P.W.15 medically examined
P.W.7 on 15.10.1999 and found three incised wounds. It is also found
that upon chemical examination the seized weapon of offence M.O.I,
napkin(gamuchha) M.O.II and lungi M.O.III belonging to the appellant as
well as sari M.O.V belonging to P.W.7 were found to be stained with
human blood.       Appellant’s lungi and napkin as well as Kati M.O.I
contained blood of same group with which the deceased’s dhoti was found
stained. All these circumstances as well as medical evidence of P.W.6 also
corroborated the ocular testimonies of P.Ws. 1 and 7.

                                        9
12.          Though P.W.5 as well as P.Ws. 8 and 12 stated to have
heard extrajudicial confession made by the appellant, trial court has not
placed reliance on P.Ws. 8 and 12 on this score. P.W.5 testified that at
about 11 P.M. he heard hullah and came outside from his house.            He
found the appellant going stating that he had murdered his father. There
is nothing in the evidence of P.W.5 to disbelieve him.              In such
circumstances, evidence of P.W.5 also corroborated ocular testimonies of
P.Ws. 1 and 7.
13.          In course of his cross-examination P.W.1 admitted that he
had filed an affidavit before the court that one Tika Parida sitting on the
chest of my father cut his threat by means of one Kukuri. However, on a
question put by court, P.W.1 stated that he had seen the appellant
assaulting the deceased by Kati and he had not seen Tika Parida
assaulting the deceased by any instrument.       As per advice of his step-
mother he had given the affidavit in court. Statement made by P.W.1 to
have filed affidavit implicating Tika Parida to be assailant of the deceased
is being relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant to assail the
veracity of P.W.1.     However, immediately after such admission, P.W.1
testified that he had not seen Tika Parida assaulting the deceased and he
had seen the appellant assaulting the deceased.        That apart, there is

                                      10
nothing in the evidence that at any point of time P.W.1 did not make
allegation against the appellant to be the assailant of the deceased.
Rather, soon after the occurrence, in the first information report Ext.1 he
implicated the appellant to be assailant of the deceased.     Therefore, we
find no reason to disbelieve evidence of P.W.1 which finds corroboration
from the ocular testimony of P.W.7 as well as other incriminating
circumstances narrated above.
14.         Thus, on analysis of evidence on record, it is found that the
prosecution has established beyond reasonable doubt that due to dispute
with his father in connection with demand for partition appellant
assaulted the deceased to death.      Appellant also assaulted P.W.7 by
means of Kati M.O.I causing injuries on her. We find no infirmity in the
impugned judgment so as to warrant interference.
15.         In the result, the appeal is dismissed. The impugned
judgment and order are confirmed.
                                            ………………………….
                                                B.K. Patel, J.
 L. Mohapatra, J.    I agree.
                                            ……………………..…
                                              L. Mohapatra, J.

                              11
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 29th Feb. 2012/B.Jhankar.


