                               HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                        W.P(C ) No.25358 of 2014
         In the matter of application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
         Constitution of India.
                                                      ----------
         Tiki Raut and others                         …………                        Petitioners
                                                      -versus-
         Ajaya Kumar Mohapatra & others ..………                                      Opp. Parties
                         For Petitioners         : M/s. B.N.Rath & Mr. A.K.Jena
                         For Opp. Parties : None.
         P R E S E N T:
                         THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE BISWAJIT MOHANTY
           ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Date of Judgment:18.12.2015
         -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biswajit Mohanty,J. In this application, the petitioners have prayed for
         quashing the order dated 12.8.2014 passed by the learned Motor
         Accident Claims Tribunal, Berhampur, Ganjam under Annexure-1
         refusing premature withdrawal of the fixed deposits made on behalf of
         the petitioners for defraying marriage expenses of petitioner no.2 and
         permitting the petitioners to withdraw their compensation amounts as
         kept in fixed deposit.
         2.      Heard B.N. Rath, learned counsel for the petitioners.
         3.      The facts relating to filing of the writ application as stated by the
         petitioners are as follows:-

                                   2
       Petitioner no.1 is the widow of one Diga @ Digambar Rout.
Petitioner nos.2,3, and 4 are children of Petitioner no.1 and late Diga
@ Digambar Rout. Late Diga @ Digambar Rout died in a motor vehicle
accident leaving the petitioner nos.2,3 and 4 in a helpless condition.
After untimely death of the sole bread earner of the family, the
petitioners have filed M.A.C. No.74 of 2012 in the court of 1st M.A.C.T.,
Berhampur claiming compensation of Rs.6,00,000/-. After filing of the
claim case, opposite party no.2 appeared and filed its written
statement. Ultimately, on 26.7.2013 the claim case was disposed of in
terms of compromise by awarding an amount of Rs.3,70,000/-. Out of
the said amount, Rs.1,40,000/- was directed to be kept in a fixed
deposit account in the name of Petitioner no.1 and Rs.40,000/- each
was directed to be kept in three separate fixed deposit accounts in the
names of Petitioner nos.2,3 and 4 in any Nationalized Bank for a
period of seven years. It was also indicated that there should be no
premature withdrawal of amount deposited in the above manner
without prior permission of the Tribunal. The balance amount of
Rs.1,10,000/- was directed to be paid to Petitioner no.1. As per the
above direction, fixed deposit amounts have been opened for seven
years in the Corporation Bank, Berhampur. On 11.7.2014, the
marriage of petitioner no.2 was solemnized. Since petitioner no.1
performed the marriage ceremony of petitioner no.2 by borrowing
money from her relatives and well wishers, therefore, on 14.7.2014 an
application under Annexure-2 was filed before the learned Tribunal for

                                      3
release of the fixed deposits of petitioners, so that the amount could be
utilized for clearing the loans so incurred. However, learned Tribunal
rejected the application of the petitioners on 12.8.2014 on the ground
that since such fixed deposits have been made for future sustenance of
the petitioners, this object would be frustrated if premature withdrawal
would be allowed. Challenging the same, the present writ application
has been filed by the petitioners.
       Since no relief has been claimed against opposite party nos.1
and 2, this Court did not choose to issue notice to the said opposite
parties.
4.     Mr. B.N. Rath, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that
the order dated 12.8.2004 rejecting the application of the petitioners
for premature release of the fixed deposit amount of the petitioners is
bad in law and the same has been passed without appreciating the
facts and materials in their proper perspective and without application
of judicial mind. Learned Tribunal failed to appreciate the fact that the
compensation amount was awarded for the benefit of the family and
since the petitioners have no other viable source of income, the learned
Tribunal ought to have released the entire amount of Rs.2,60,000/-
kept in fixed deposit in the name of the petitioners in order to clear the
loan incurred for performing marriage of petitioner no.2. In any case,
he submitted that under the facts and circumstances, the learned

                                      4
Tribunal has gone wrong in not releasing any amount, which has
resulted in grave injustice in this case.
5.    In this context, let us examine the law on point. As per the
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in General Manager Kerala
State Road Transport        Corporation,Trivandrum –v- Mrs. Susama
Thomas and others, (AIR 1994 S.C.1631) it has been made clear that
in case of compensation for death, it is appropriate that the learned
Tribunal should keep in mind the principles enunciated in the case of
Union Carbide Corporation –v- Union of India (AIR 1992 S.C.248)
in the matter of appropriate investments to safeguard the feed from
being frittered away by the beneficiaries owing to ignorance, illiteracy
and exploitation. In that case, Hon’ble Supreme Court offered the
following guidelines.
      “(i) The Claims Tribunal should, in the case of minors, invariably
order the amount of compensation awarded to the minor invested in
long term fixed deposits at least till the date of the minor attaining
majority. The expenses incurred by the guardian or next friend may
however be allowed to be withdrawn;
             (ii) In the case of illiterate claimants also the
      Claims Tribunal should follow the procedure set out
      in (i) above, but if lump sum payment is required for
      effecting purchases of any movable or immovable
      property, such as, agricultural implements, rickshaw
      etc., to earn a living, the Tribunal may consider such
      a request after making sure that the amount is
      actually spent for the purpose and the demand is not
      a rouge to withdraw money;

                                     5
             (iii) In the case of semi-illiterate persons the
      Tribunal should ordinarily resort to the procedure set
      out at (i) above unless it is satisfied for reasons to be
      stated in writing, that the whole or part of the amount
      is required for expanding and existing business or for
      purchasing some property as mentioned in (ii) above
      for earning his livelihood, in which case the Tribunal
      will ensure that the amount is invested for the
      purpose for which it is demanded and paid;
             (iv) In the case of literate persons also the
      Tribunal may resort to the procedure indicated in (i)
      above, subject to the relaxation set out in (ii) and (iii)
      above, if having regard to the age, fiscal background
      and strata of society to which the claimant belongs
      and such other considerations, the Tribunal in the
      larger interest of the claimant and with a view to
      ensuring the safety of the compensation awarded to
      him thinks it necessary to do order;
              (v) In the case of widows the Claims Tribunal
      should invariably follow the procedure set out in (i)
      above.
             (vi)      In personal injury cases if further
      treatment is necessary the Claims Tribunal on being
      satisfied about the same, which shall be recorded in
      writing, permit withdrawal of such amount as is
      necessary for incurring the expenses for such
      treatment;
            (vii)   In all cases in which investment in long
      term fixed deposits is made it should be on condition
      that the Bank will not permit any loan or advance on
      the fixed deposit and interest on the amount invested
      is paid monthly directly to the claimant or his
      guardian, as the case may be;
           (viii) In all cases Tribunal should grant to the
      claimants liberty to apply for withdrawal in case of an
      emergency. To meet with such a contingency, if the
      amount awarded is substantial, the Claims Tribunal
      may invest it in more than one Fixed Deposit so that if
      need be one such F.D.R. can be liquidated”.
6.    For the purpose of this case, guidelines under (i),(v) and (viii) are
relevant. A conjoint reading of these three guidelines make it clear that

                                    6
in case of minors the amount of compensation awarded is to be
invested in long term fixed deposits atleast till the minors attain the
majority. However, the expenses incurred by the guardian for such
minor be allowed to be withdrawn. Further, the learned Tribunal
should grant to the claimants liberty to apply for withdrawal in case of
any emergency.
7.     In view of the above discussion, this Court has no hesitation to
hold that the learned Tribunal has committed grave illegality in totally
rejecting the prayer of the petitioners for release of the fixed deposit
amounts. It appears that the Tribunal has acted mechanically without
application of judicial mind in passing the impugned order. The
Tribunal has shut it’s eyes to realities of life relating to the expenses
required for performing a daughter’s marriage. The Tribunal thought
that premature release of the amount would have jeopardized the
future sustenance of the petitioners. The guidelines (i) and (viii) of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court as indicated earlier clearly permit withdrawal
in case of necessity and for defraying the expenses incurred for minor.
Therefore, under the circumstances, the Tribunal should have
considered release of the entire amount deposited against the name of
Petitioner no.2, as the Petitioner no.1 has incurred loan in her
marriage. Similarly, the Tribunal should have considered releasing a
part of the awarded amount which remains in the fixed deposit
account     of  Petitioner no.1   without    jeoparadising    her   future
sustenance, as it remains undisputed that Petitioner no.1 has no other

                                     7
viable source of income, without touching the fixed deposit accounts of
Petitioner nos.3 and 4.
8.     In such background, this Court quashes the impugned order
dated 12.8.2014 by which the learned Tribunal has rejected the claim
of the petitioners for premature withdrawal and remands the matter to
the 1st Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Berhampur to hear the matter
afresh and direct release of appropriate amount keeping in mind the
observations made above. The Tribunal shall complete the entire
exercise within a period of two months from today.
       Accordingly, the writ application is partly allowed. No costs.
                                             ……………………………….
                                              BISWAJIT MOHANTY, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 18th December, 2015/RNS


