                           ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                                W.P. (C) No.3201 of 2016
    In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
    Constitution of India.
                                        ---------------
        M/s. Midas Bottling Pvt. Ltd.,
        54-Industrial Estate, Khurda
        represented by its Managing Director,
        Shri Samarjit Padhi                   ……                  Petitioner
                                              -versus-
        State of Odisha and others ……                             Opp. parties
                  For Petitioner          : M/s. Prasanna Ku. Nayak-I,
                                               P.Mohanty, M.K.Das & S.K.Das
                  For Opposite parties : Mr. M.Sahoo
                                          (learned Addl. Govt. Advocate)
                            ----------- -------------------------------
                               Date of Judgment: 31.08.2016
                             ----------- -------------------------------
    P R E S E N T:
                      THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE I. MAHANTY
                                             AND
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE BISWAJIT MOHANTY
      ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biswajit Mohanty, J.        In this writ application, the petitioner-company
    has     prayed     for    quashing       of   the    order    dated     19.10.2015
    (Annexure-3) issued by the Excise Commissioner, Odisha (opp. party

                                     2
No.2) so also the demand notice dated 8.2.2016 (Annexure-1) issued
by the Superintendent of Excise, Khurda (opp. party No.4). The
petitioner-company has further prayed that it should be allowed
compensation for destruction of stocks which have not been declared
unfit for human consumption by the Chemical Examiner of the State
Drugs Testing and Research Laboratories, Bhubaneswar.
2.     The case of the petitioner according to Mr. P.K.Nayak, learned
counsel that there was a bottling unit in the name and style of M/s.
Gemini Distilleries Pvt. Ltd. at 54 Industrial Estate, Khurda, which
was engaged in production of IMFL under the cover of licenses
granted to it by the State Excise Department. But in course of time, it
became sick and was closed down and was under lock and seal of the
State Excise Department from 1.1.2005 to 19.06.2014. The petitioner-
company applied for required licenses from the State Excise
Department with necessary permission to carry on manufacturing
and bottling of IMFL in the said defunct unit. Vide letter dated
19.10.2011, the State Government in the Excise Department issued
orders for grant of license in favour of the petitioner-company to
operate M/s. Gemini Distilleries Pvt. Ltd. on the condition that any
tax liability of M/s. Gemini Distilleries Pvt. Ltd. would be borne by the
petitioner-company. But no license was granted to the petitioner-
company from district level and ultimately licenses were issued to the
petitioner-company     on  30.3.2012     vide   Annexure-2   series.  The
petitioner-company     incurred   heavy    expenditure   on   account  of

                                    3
renovation and reconditioning of the defunct unit and also deposited
sum of Rs.99,04,572/- towards grant and renewal of licenses for
bottling of IMFL. Notwithstanding the fact that there was inordinate
delay at the level of Excise Commissioner, Odisha (opp. party No.2) to
issue NOC for import of spirit from outside the State for the purpose
of blending, compounding and bottling of IMFL by the petitioner-
company, the petitioner-company could only produce 64,407 B.L. of
IMFL till date on trial and error basis, which is far less than the
installed capacity of the Unit. On 19.6.2013, the District Exicse Office
issued demand notice to the petitioner-company regarding payment of
Excise Duty on old stock of IMFL, spirit etc. lying in the premises of
the bottling unit. Thereafter, on 27.5.2015, 28.5.2015, 30.5.2015,
1.6.2015 and 2.6.2015, the Chemical Examiner of the State Drugs
Testing   and   Research    Laboratories, Bhubaneswar      carried  out
chemical examination of samples of Cheap Liquor, Blended Liquor
and IMFL which were received from the officer-in-charge of the
petitioner unit and recorded the finding vide Annexure-4 series that
all the samples were found fit for human consumption and potable.
According to the petitioner, all the chemical reports along with the
report of scrutinising committee were sent to Excise Commissioner,
Odisha-(opp. party No.2) along with representation dated 14.9.2015 of
the petitioner-company. After considering all these, the opp. party
No.2 strangely passed the impugned order under Annexure-3 whereby
he directed the low strength of IMFL (Cheap Liquor) be destroyed with

                                    4
only payment of one time excise duty as prevalent during the year of
manufacture as the same is no longer in circulation as per the
government policy decision. Similarly, opp. party No.2 vide Annexure-
3 directed destruction of Blended Spirit stock with only payment of
one time excise duty as available for the lowest slab of liquor, i.e.,
Country Spirit. Opp. party No.2 also directed destruction of IMFL
after realisation of excise duty at the then prevailing rate along with
fine under Rule 39-A (7) (b) read with Rule 39 (1) of Board’s Excise
Rules, 1965 as the unit failed to liquidate the stock during the
required period. Opp. party No.2 also made it clear that the question
of conversion/reprocessing of finished IMFL products did not arise at
that stage. Relying on the said order under Annexure-3, opp. party
No.2 has issued the impugned order under Annexure-1 dated
8.2.2016     demanding payment of excise duty along with fine
calculated under Rule 39-A (7) (b) of Board’s Excise Rules, 1965 to
the tune of Rs.64,90,664/- while cancelling the earlier mentioned
demand notice dated 19.6.2013.
3.    According to the petitioner so far as demand on Cheap Liquor
(low strength IMFL) is concerned the policy of marketing Cheap Liquor
though was introduced in Odisha in 1996-97 was rescinded in 1998-
99 and for that reason, the Cheap Liquor held in the warehouse-in-
bond could not be marketed and the stock was lying there since
1998-99 and the same was never subjected to taxation as its
destruction was the only option left by then. As far as Blended Spirit

                                    5
is concerned, the same could not be bottled and marketed on account
of closure and seal of the plant by the Excise Department from
1.1.2005 to 19.6.2014 though the unit had paid the cost of the spirit,
import fee on spirit, blending and compounding cost, incidental
charges including the cost of establishment on the said stock lying in
the blending tanks. Lastly, so far as the finished products of IMFL are
concerned, the same could not be sold firstly for the reason that the
privilege of wholesale supply, import, export and transport of foreign
liquor was vested on Orissa State Beverage Corporation ltd., for short,
“OSBC” to the exclusion of other private operators from March 2001
onwards and OSBC decided from whom to receive stock and whom
not to receive basing on the market demand. Thus, the erstwhile
Gemini Distillery Pvt. Ltd had left with no scope to remove the stock
within a period of three months from the date of manufacture for the
purpose of sale on account of non-receipt of any demand from
“OSBC”. Thus, the unit was put to a heavy loss as it had paid the cost
of spirit, import fee, bottling fee, establishment cost and other
incidental charges on that account. In such background, Mr. Nayak,
learned counsel for the petitioner-company submitted that levy of
duty of low strength of IMFL Cheap Liquor, Blended Spirit stock and
finished products of IMFL is arbitrary and illegal. Furhter, he
submitted that levy of duty on all these materials cannot be made as
the stock is lying/stored in the petitioner unit. According to him, a
reading of Sections 17 and 27 of the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act,

                                   6
1915, for short, “the Act” makes it clear that incidence of duty
depends upon removal of stock for sale from the distillery. In such
background, he reitereated that the demand for duty on low strength
IMFL (Cheap Liquor), Blended Spirit and the finished products of
IMFL was illegal and without any authority of law and if not
interefered with would amount unjust enrichment of the State.
Secondly, he submitted that atleast once the Blended Spirit and
finished products of IMFL have been found to be potable, there is no
earthly reason to destroy those materials. Lastly, he pointed out that
so far as saddling of finished product of IMFL with a fine equal to five
times of duty payble is concerned, the same has been done wholly in
an illegal manner as requirements of Rule 39-A (7) (b) of      Board’s
Excise Rules, 1965 under which such fine has been imposed are not
at all satisfied in the present case in the background of certificates
issued under Annexure-4 series certifying the IMFL samples to be fit
for human consumption. Mr. Nayak, learned counsel for the
petitioner further submitted that despite fitness certificate under
Annexure-4 series, if destruction is carried out, the petitioner is
entitled to compensation.
4.           Mr. M.Sahoo, learned Addl. Government Advocate relying
on counter affidavit filed by opp. parties 2 and 4 defended the
impugned orders under Annexures-3 and 1 and submitted that the
directsions for levying of duty on Low Strength IMFL (Cheap Liquor),
Blended Spirit and finished products of IMFL and their destruction

                                     7
have been made in accordance with law. Mr. Sahoo further submitted
that the petitioner is liable to pay the Excise duty as levied made
under Annexure-1 as vide Annexure-A/2 series the petitioner took all
the liabilities of M/s.Gemini Distillery Pvt. Ltd. and also agreed to pay
any dues which might arises in future vis-à-vis M/s. Gemini Distillery
Pvt. Ltd. He further submitted that the petitioner is liable to pay the
entire arrear import dues amounting Rs.64,90,664/-. He also
submitted that although the old IMFL stocks of the petitioner unit
have    been found     fit  for  human consumption but under no
circumstances, the said stock can be             marketed as there is
apprehension of risk to human beings if old stocks are sold in the
market.
5.     Relying on the rejoinder filed by the petitioner, learned counsel
for the petitioner submitted that the direction under Annexure-3 to
destroy Blended Spirit stock and finished products of IMFL defies all
logic inasmuch as all these have been found potable as per Annexure-
4 series. Similarly, he submitted that direction to impose fine on
finished products of IMFL by making use of Rule 39-A (7) (b) also
defies all logic as these have been found fit for human consumption.
He also reiterated that how IMFL could not be sold on account of non-
receipt of any demand from “OSBC”. He further submitted that since
all the goods like Blended Spirit stock, finished products of IMFL have
been found fit for human consumption, in case of destruction, the
petitioner is clearly entitled to compensation.

                                   8
6.    Heard Mr. P.K.Nayak, learned counsel for the petitioner-
company and Mr. M.Sahoo, learned Addl. Government Advocate for
the opp. parties.
7.    The   undisputed     fact is  that  on   27.5.2015,  28.5.2015,
30.5.2015, 1.6.2015 and 2.6.2015, upon chemical examination, the
State Drugs Testing and Research Laboratories, Bhubaneswar vide its
chemical examination report under Annexure-4 series has found
Cheap Liquor, Blended Spirit stock and IMFL are fit for human
consumption and potable. A perusal of Annexure-3 shows that
though the chemical examination reports were brought to the notice
of the opp. party No.2, however, without discussing the said reports
and without overcoming the findings made thereunder; in a
mechanical manner, the order under Annexure-3 has been passed
directing destruction of Blended Spirt stock and finished products of
IMFL. This is a clear case of non-application of mind on the part of
opp. party No.2. In such background, direction under      Annexure-3
for destruction of Blended Spirit stock and finished products of IMFL
cannot be sustained in law being arbitrary in nature. However, so far
as low strength IMFL (Cheap Liquor) is concenred, since the Cheap
Liquor is no longer under circulation as per government policy, the
same might have to be destroyed with payment of compensation, as
these are still fit for human consumption as has been certified under
Annexure-4 series, if it cannot be used for any other purpose. Now,
coming to the direction for payment of duty on low strength of IMFL

                                     9
(Cheap Liquor), Blended Spirit stock and finished products of IMFL,
the contention of Mr. Nayak is that Excise duty has to be paid only at
the time of removal of stock for sale cannot be accepted as the
charging Section, i.e., Section 27 of “the Act” no way confines the
power to impose duty only to a situation when stocks are removed for
sale. Section 27 deliniates various types of activities on which the
Excise   duty    can    be  imposed.   However, the  order  of  Excise
Commissioner, Odisha does not deal with detail factual background
and specific provisions of law under which such duty has been
directed to be levied. The order under Annexure-3 so also the counter
are silent on this aspect. With regard to various legal contentions of
Mr. Nayak, relating to imposition of duty as made out in paragraphs-9
to 11 of the writ application, the reply in the counter is delightfully
vague and the same also does not throw any light. With regard to
direction of Excise Commissioner, Odisha under Annexure-3 for
imposion of fine under Rule 39 (A) (7) (b) read with Section 39 (1) of
Board’s Excise Rules, 1965, this Court has no hesitation in accepting
the submission of the petitioner that such imposition is clearly illegal
as the finished products of IMFL have been found to be fit for human
consumption as certified under Annexure-4 series. So imposition of
five times fine is illegal.
8.     For all these reasons, the order under Annexure-3 so far as it
directs levy of duty on low strength IMFL (Cheap Liquor), Blended
Spirit stock and finished products of IMFL are set aside, so also the

                                     10
direction to pay fine under Rule 39-A (7) (b) of The Board’s Excise
Rules. Further, the order under Annexure-3 is also set aside so far as
it directs destruction of the stocks of Blended Spirit stock and
finished products of IMFL. Consequently, the order under Annexure-1
is also quashed and the matter is remitted back to the Excise
Commissioner, Odisha (opp. party No.2) to take a fresh decision in the
matter relating to levying Excise duty on low strength IMFL (Cheap
Liquor), Blended Spirit stock and finished products of IMFL in
accordance with law after giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to
the petitioner-company. He is also directed to take a decision on
payment of compensation in case he decides to go ahead with
destruction of low strength IMFL (Cheap Liquor) which have been
found fit for human consumption in accordance with law.
             The writ application is accordingly disposed of.
                                           ……………………………
                                          Biswajit Mohanty, J.
I. Mahanty, J.       I agree.
                                           ……………………………
                                             I. Mahanty, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 31st August, 2016/bns


