                        HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                         W.P.(C) Nos.17955 & 17956 of 2012
        In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the
        Constitution of India.
                                        -----------
        National Aluminium Company Ltd.
        and others                                            …     Petitioners
                                       -Versus-
        Employees State Insurance Corporation
        and others                                            …     Opp. Parties
                                                                (In both the cases)
                     For Petitioners     :      M/s. B.Rath, S.K. Jethy &
                                                S.K. Mishra
                     For Opp. Parties :         Mr. P.P. Ray
                                                [For O.P.Nos. 1 & 2)
                                                (In both the cases)
                                   -----------    -------
 P R E S E N T:
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.N.MAHAPATRA
                            Date of Judgement : 05.11.2012
B.N. Mahapatra, J.        These two writ petitions have been filed with identical
        prayer to quash Annexures-11,12 and 17 on the ground that those are
        bad in law and in operative. The further prayer in both the writ
        petitions is to issue a writ of mandamus directing opp. party no.1-
        Employees State Insurance Corporation and opp. party no.2-Deputy
        Director (Revenue), Employees’ State Insurance Corporation not to
        insist implementation of the provisions of Employees’ State Insurance
        Act,1948 (in short, “ESI Act”) and the scheme framed therein until the

                                   2
ESI Dispensary functions effectively and starts parallel service to such
Contract Labourers.
             Annexure-11 is a show-cause notice dated 25.7.2012
issued by opp. party no.2 to the petitioner to show-cause within ten
days from the date of that show-cause notice as to why the petitioner
as one of the factory of M/s.Nalco (Project) should not be prosecuted
for non-compliance with the provisions of the ESI Act, 1948 and
Regulations framed thereunder.
             Annexure-12     is also   a  show-cause      notice   dated
25.7.2012 issued by opp. party no.2 to the petitioner to show-cause
within fifteen days as to why assessment should not be made as
proposed in the said letter with further opportunity to file statement
showing full particulars of contribution and for personal hearing.
             Annexure-17 is also a show-cause notice dated 6.8.2012
issued by opp. party no.2 to the petitioner-Company to show-cause
within ten days from the date of that show-cause notice as to why
the petitioner as one of the Principal Employer of their factory
M/s.Nalco(Project) should not be prosecuted for non-compliance with
the provisions of the ESI Act, 1948 and Regulations framed
thereunder.
2.           Since the issues involved and the relief sought for in
both the writ petitions are identical, they are dealt with together by
this common judgment.
3.           Petitioners’ case in a nutshell is that NALCO is a
Government of India Public Sector Company having its Head Office

                                   3
at Bhubaneswar and Unit Office at Angul as well as Damanjodi. The
petitioner manages some of its work in the Project establishment
through Contractors by way of tender works and at present its
project establishment has total strength of 517 contract labourers.
Such works are generally conducted through tender process to
different Contractors and as per conditions the Contractors used to
have their own E.S.I. Code as well as P.F. Code and under the terms
of contract they are bound to follow the statutory provisions and
responsibility of NALCO comes only when such contractors fail in
undertaking such statutory obligations. NALCO has its own hospital
at all its units including Damanjodi. The hospitals of NALCO are
providing the hospital benefits only to its regular employees and
providing medical facility to the Contractors’ workers as per the
settlement, the Management of NALCO at Damanjodi entered into a
settlement with the Utkal Contractors Association representing the
Contractors working there at Damanjodi and the Alumina Mazdoor
Sangh at Damanjodi representing such workmen on 26.02.2007 .
Under Clause-3 of the said settlement the NALCO Management has
agreed to provide medical allowance @ 4.75% of the earned wages to
the contract labourers w.e.f.01.02.2007 and to continue such
facilities till the workmen are covered under the E.S.I. Scheme. The
said settlement even though was operative up to 25.02.2008, but the
condition as narrated above is allowed to continue as on date and all
the contractors workers are being paid by their employer the
aforesaid benefits every month and their employer used to get the

                                    4
same reimbursed from NALCO. While the matter stood thus, the
petitioners received a letter dated 29.10.2010 indicating therein that
the Factory of NALCO has been covered under E.S.I. Act, 1948 w.e.f.
01.01.2010 and was allotted Code No.44000071450000501 vide
letter No.6885 dated 29.10.2010 and in the said letter the NALCO
was directed for starting the deposit of the ESI dues in respect of the
contractor workers from January, 2010, besides submitting details of
the Contract Labourers.
4.           The petitioners objected to the coverage of the ESI Act to
its establishment in respect of contractors’ workers raising several
grounds. The opp. parties without considering the same, issued two
letters dated 22.7.2010 asking the petitioner to show-cause as to
why    the   assessment    so   made    will not  be   recovered    and
simultaneously also issued the other notice to show-cause as to why
the petitioners shall not be prosecuted for non-compliance with the
provisions of the ESI Act, 1948 and Regulations framed therein. In
response to the said notices dated 22.7.2010, the petitioner
submitted its reply on 5.8.2010. In spite of the objection of the
petitioner, the opp. parties raised a demand of Rs.62,96,648/- as ESI
contribution for the period from 01.07.2010 to 30.09.2010 and
further asked the NALCO authority to show-cause within fifteen days
as to why the proposed assessment should not be made and further
asked to produce all relevant records for arriving at actual
assessment.     Vide  letter  dated   13/15.11.2010,    the  petitioner
indicated the reason not to apply the provisions of ESI Act requested

                                  5
the ESI Authority to treat the show-cause notice as withdrawn and
waive the demand under assessment. However, the ESI Authority
made the final assessment raising Rs.60,92,873/- for the period
from 1.1.2010 to 30.9.2010 in respect of Contractors’ employees
engaged in its Project Establishment (Annexure-9). Challenging the
said final assessment order under Annexure-9, the petitioners filed
an ESI Case before Employees’ State Insurance Court, Bhubaneswar
under Section 75 of the Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948 which
was registered as ESI Misc. Case No.105/2011. On 28.6.2011, the
ESI Court directed the Employees State Insurance Corporation not to
take any coercive action. The same order is being extended from time
to time and continued till 25.9.2012. Till date in the said ESI Misc.
Case, no counter has been filed by the parties, though interim order
has been passed by the Employees State Insurance Court. In spite of
the same, vide communication letter dated 25.7.2012, the opp.
parties issued show-cause notices under Annexures-11 and 12 as
stated above.
5.           The petitioner-Company is very much aware that there is
absolutely no infrastructure of the ESI Authority in the locality to
provide the benefit to the members under the scheme even though
there has been some appointments for the ESI Dispensary to be
taken place at Damanjodi but it is only paper sake. The so-called
dispensary at the instance of ESI Corporation is yet to be
inaugurated. The Insurance Medical Officer I/C, ESI Dispensary,
Damanjodi, District Koraput vide his letter dated 16.7.2012 has

                                   6
written to the State Medical Commissioner, ESI Corporation,
Bhubaneswar     indicating   therein  that  the  estimated  cost   for
inaugural function of ESI Dispensary, Damanjodi and claimed
therein a sum of Rs.80,000/- for the said purpose.
6.          There is heavy resentment amongst the contractors’
labourers and the contractors for the irrational behaviour of the ESI
Authorities enforcing the scheme on the poor labourers even if it is
not in proper shape and in the meanwhile apart from their exhibiting
protest through various forums, there is stiff opposition to such
switching over. All the operating unions have submitted their written
protest with the Regional Director of ESI Corporation with copy to
National Aluminum Company Ltd. strongly opposing the move to
bring them under such a badly shaped ESI Dispensary. While
protesting the union has also therein requested the ESI Authority to
start  the  Dispensary    with   proper  infrastructure, ambulance,
Laboratory Equipments/Sufficient Medicine/ Medical Staff so that
its workmen can be motivated. At this juncture, the ESI Authorities
issued a show-cause dated 6.8.2012 (Annexure-17).
7.          Mr. B. Rath, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
NALCO Authority submitted that there is no ESI Dispensary at
Damanjodi and therefore, the ESI authority is not entitled to apply
the provisions of the ESI Act on the petitioner’s establishment. In
view of the settlement between the contractors’ union and the
workers’ representatives dated 26.2.2007, the provisions of ESI Act
should not have been enforced on the petitioner’s establishment. As

                                    7
there was no Dispensary of the ESI Corporation, the immediate
employer i.e. the Contractor has not made the necessary deduction
from the Contractor’s employee. Rather it goes on paying its
employees engaged in NALCO, the ESI benefits of 4.75% of the
earned wages subject to reimbursement of the same from NALCO,
the Principal Employer. Deduction in this regard in absence of ESI
Hospital in the locality may not be practical and will face resentment
amongst the workers leading to industrial unrest. Being insisted by
ESI   authorities,   NALCO    Authority   immediately    provided  the
contractors and the workers with registration form and enrolment
form, yet there is no move to file the same and submit the same with
the management for their further action in the matter. NALCO
management vide communication letter dated 4.2.2012 has already
intimated this aspect to the ESI Authorities. NALCO authorities also
informed the ESI authorities that infrastructure like posting of
Pharmacist, Paramedical Staff,        Path laboratory and sufficient
medicine have not yet been provided and for this reason, the
contractors’ workers are in no mood to switch over to ESI scheme.
Forcing the contractors’ workers to join the ESI Scheme even before
proper functioning of the dispensary will lead to law and order
problem and create bad industrial relation seriously affecting the
functioning of the factory. Factory of the petitioner is depending on
the contractors’ labourers in many of its operation and it cannot
jeopardise its position and invite problem on these small issues. The
Utkal Contractors’ Association vide their letter dated 25.7.2012 also

                                    8
requested the ESI Authorities to take steps for functioning of the ESI
Hospital.
             Mr. Rath further submitted that the issues involved in
this case cannot be decided by the ESI Court.
8.             Mr. P.P. Ray, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
opp. Parties-ESI Corporation challenges the maintainability of the
writ petitions on the ground that in the writ petitions only the show-
cause notices have been challenged and at this stage this Court
should not interfere. He further submitted that the ground taken in
the writ petition challenging the impugned orders can be taken
before the ESI Court. The payment of employees’ contribution has no
relevance with regard to the medical benefit extended by the ESI
authorities. The questions raised in the writ petitions are covered
under Section 75 of the ESI Act for the previous period. The
petitioner-company has filed ESI Case before ESI Court for previous
period.
             It was further submitted that once the notification made,
the ESI authority has to implement the provisions of the ESI Act. ESI
contribution is made not only for the medical facility, but also for
other benefits like payment of compensation etc. Settlement between
the parties cannot suspend the operation of the statutory provisions.
In support of his contentions, Mr. Ray, relied upon some decisions of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as the High Court.
9.           On the rival contentions of the parties, the questions
that arise for consideration by this Court are as follows:

                                      9
              (i)   Whether in order to discharge statutory obligation,
                    the   petitioner-management     can   impose    any
                    condition which is not provided under the statute?
              (ii)  Whether     there   is any  relation  between    the
                    contribution made by the employer and employee
                    and the benefit availed by the employees ?
              (iii) Whether the operation of the statutory provisions
                    can be suspended in view of any settlement
                    entered into between the petitioner-management
                    and the representatives of the union of contractor
                    labourers?
              (iv)  Whether any writ of mandamus can be issued
                    directing opp. party nos.1 and 2 not to insist
                    implementation of the provisions of ESI Act and
                    scheme framed therein until the ESI Dispensary
                    functions effectively and starts parallel service to
                    such contractor labourers ?
10.           Since the question Nos.(i) and (ii) are interlinked, they
are dealt with together. The Employees State Insurance Act, 1948
provides for certain benefits to industrial employees in case of
sickness, maternity, employment injury. Under the statute, the
liability to pay the entire contribution under Section 39 of the ESI
Act is on the employer. This is because of the mandatory obligation
fastened under Section 39 read with Section 40 of the ESI Act.
Section 40 of the ESI Act says that the Principal Employer shall pay
in respect of every employee, whether directly employed by him or by
or through an immediate employer, both the employer’s contribution

                                  10
and the employee’s contribution. However, Section 40(2) of the ESI
Act authorises the employer to recover the employee’s contribution
by deducting the same from his wages. But the primary liability to
pay contribution envisaged under Section 39 is that of the employer.
11.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of E.S.I.C. V.
C.C. Santhakumar, 2007 LAB I.C. 597 held that the provisions of
ESI Act unmistakably indicate that the whole scheme is dependent
upon the contributions made by the employer not only with respect
to the amounts payable by him but also in respect of those payable
by the employee. There is no dispute that in the present case, the
petitioner-employer has not paid his own contribution and the
employee’s contribution. This is a clear case of violation of statutory
provision. The plea of the management that the ESI authorities have
not established the ESI Hospital providing facilities to the contractor
labourers cannot exonerate the employer from discharging its
statutory obligation of payment of the employer’s contribution and
employee’s contribution which has no relation with the benefit to be
provided by the Corporation to the employees under the Employees’
State Insurance Act.
12.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Employees’
State Insurance Corpn., vs. M/s.Harrison Malayalam Pvt. Ltd.,
1994 LAB I.C. 24, held that there is no relation between contribution
made and the benefit availed of. The contribution is uniform for all
workmen and is percentage of the wages earned by them. It has no
relation to the risks against which a workman stands statutorily

                                    11
insured. It is for this reason, the Act envisages automatic obligation
to pay the contribution. Once the factory or the establishment is
covered by the Act, the obligation to pay the contribution commences
from the date of application of the Act to such factory or
establishment. The obligation ceases only when the Act ceases to
apply   to  the    factory/establishment.  The   obligation  to  make
contribution does not depend upon whether any particular employee
or employees cease to be employee/employees after expiry of the
contribution period and the benefit period.
13.          Needless to say that it is the statutory duty of the
employer to deposit its own contribution and employees’ contribution
once the factory or establishment is covered by the Act.
14.          The Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case of
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation, Chandigarh V. T.C.
Vermani, 1984 LAB I.C. 1406, held that there is no provision under
the Act which enjoins a duty on the Corporation to keep on
informing the factory owners that they are covered by the Act. The
Corporation is not their advisor. On the contrary, the duty is
enjoined on the principal employer of the factory to discharge
statutory obligation the moment it stands covered by the provisions
of the Act. If the employer fails to deduct the employees’
contribution, no fault can be found with the Corporation. Section 40
of the Act fixes the responsibility on the Principal employer to pay
the contributions.

                                    12
15.           Similar view has also been taken by the Madras High
Court in the case of Regional Director of Employees’ State
Insurance Corporation V. Amalgamation Repeo Ltd., 1982 LAB
I.C. 1691 wherein it has been held that management is liable to
contribute on its own accord and such payment is not made
conditional on any demand by the Employees’ State Insurance
Corporation.
16.           In view of the above, all the pleas taken by the
petitioners not to discharge its statutory obligation are not legally
sustainable. This     Court    is  shocked    to note  that a Central
Government Public Sector Undertaking is avoiding to discharge its
statutory obligation on some plea or other which is not at all tenable
under the law.
17.           The petitioner-employer is bound to discharge its
statutory obligation under the E.S.I. Act and cannot impose any
condition which is not provided under the statute to discharge its
statutory obligation.
18.           So far question no.(iii) is concerned for the reasons
stated above and in absence of any statutory provision any
settlement     reached   by    the   petitioner-Management    and  the
representatives    of  the   Union    of  Contractor-Labourers  cannot
exonerate the petitioner-Management from discharging its statutory
liabilities under the E.S.I. Act.
19.           Therefore, under the Act duty is cast on the employer to
deposit with the Employees’ State Insurance Corporation its share of

                                    13
contribution as well as the share of contribution of the employees
irrespective of whether the Corporation has provided full-fledged
hospital or not or that the employees are willing or not to be covered
under the ESI Scheme or that any kind of settlement has been
entered    into    between    the   petitioner-Management     and    the
representatives of Union of Contractor Labourers.
20.           So far question No.(iv) is concerned, for the reasons
stated above, the prayer made in the writ petition for issuance of a
direction to opp. party nos.1 and 2 not to insist implementation of
the provisions of ESI Act and scheme framed therein until the ESI
Dispensary functions effectively and starts parallel service to such
Contractor Labourers cannot be granted to the petitioner. It may be
noted that the benefit provided under the ESI Act is not confined to
hospital   facility;  the   benefit  covers   to   sickness, maternity,
employment injury etc.
21.           Apart from the above, the notices challenged by the
petitioners in the present writ petitions, are all show cause notices. It
does not appear that show cause notices have been issued by
opposite parties without having authority of law or without having
jurisdiction.
22.           In   A.V.   Venkateswaran      Collector    of  Customs,
Bombay vs. Ramchand Sobhraj Wadhwani & Anr., AIR 1961 SC
1506, the Constitution Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court held
that where there is a complete lack of jurisdiction of any officer or

                                   14
authority who takes the action impugned, the writ jurisdiction
should be exercised.
23.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of
Uttar Pradesh vs. Shri Brahm Datt Sharma and another, AIR
1987 SC 943, held as under:
            “9. The High Court was not justified in quashing
            the show cause notice. When a show cause
            notice is issued to a government servant under a
            statutory provision calling upon him to show
            cause, ordinarily the government servant must
            place his case before the authority concerned by
            showing cause and the courts should be
            reluctant to interfere with the notice at that
            stage unless the notice is shown to have been
            issued palpably without any authority of law.
            ‘The purpose of issuing show cause notice is to
            afford opportunity of hearing to the government
            servant and once cause is shown it is open to the
            Government to consider the matter in the light of
            the facts and submissions placed by the
            government servant and only thereafter a final
            decision in the matter could be taken.
            Interference by the court before that stage would
            be premature, the High Court in our opinion
            ought not have interfered with the show cause
            notice.”
24.         This Court in the case of Rohit Kumar Behera vs.
State of Orissa, 2012 (II) ILR-CUT-395, held as under:
            “21. Law is well settled that unless it is shown
            that the notice to show cause has been issued
            palpably without any authority of law, the show
            cause notice cannot be quashed in exercise of
            writ jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of
            the Constitution.”
25.         Moreover, challenging the identical show cause notices
issued for the previous period, the petitioners have approached the

                                     15
Employees’ State Insurance Court under Section 75 of the ESI Act,
1948.
26.            In the above premises, it is not a fit case where
interference of this Court in exercise of its extraordinary jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is called for. Thus, this
Court is not inclined to entertain the writ petitions. Accordingly, both
the writ petitions are dismissed.
               No order as to costs.
                                                 …….……………………
                                                   B.N. Mahapatra,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 5th November, 2012/bkb.


