                   HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
In the matter of applications under Section 114 read with Order XLVII, Rule-
1 C.P.C. for review of judgment dated 22.02.2012 passed in W.P.(C)
No.13185 of 2006.
                                   --------
RVWPET No.224 of 2012
Sanjaya Das                                             … Petitioner
                                   Versus
State of Odisha and others                              … Opp. Parties
            For Petitioner     :     Mr.Y.Das, Senior Advocate
                                     Mr.Sandeep Parida (2)
            For Opp. Parties :       Addl. Government Advocate
                                                 (for O.Ps. 1 and 2)
                                     M/s Prasant Ku. Mohanty &
                                     M.K.Panda
                                                 (for O.P. No.3)
RVWEPT No.332 of 2012
State of Odisha and another                             … Petitioner
                                   Versus
Sanjay Das and another                                  … Opp. Parties
            For Petitioner     :     Addl. Standing Counsel
            For Opp. Parties :       M/s Nirmal Ch. Mohanty &
                                     P.Ranjan
                                                 (for O.P. No.1)
RVWEPT No.7 of 2013
Cuttack Development Authority                           … Petitioner
                                   Versus
Sanjay Das and others                                   … Opp. Parties
            For Petitioner     :     M/s Prasant Ku. Mohanty &
                                     M.K.Panda
            For Opp. Parties :       --
                                  ----------

                                              2
   P R E S E N T:
                     THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE I. MAHANTY
                                          AND
                  THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.N.MAHAPATRA
                                Date of Judgment: 26.02.2014
B.N. Mahapatra, J.        All the above three Review Petitions have been filed with a
      prayer to review of our judgment dated 22.02.2012 passed in W.P.(C)
      No.13185 of 2006.
      2.           To deal with various grounds taken in three Review Petitions the
      background facts relevant for disposal of the said petitions in a nut shell are
      that in W.P.(C) No.13185 of 2006, the petitioner challenged the land
      acquisition proceeding in relation to petitioner’s land. The reliefs, as prayed
      for, are for quashing of the land acquisition proceeding and for direction to
      the opposite parties for not taking any steps to interfere with the peaceful
      possession of the petitioner over the land under acquisition till disposal of
      the writ petition.
      3.           The above said writ petition was disposed of on 22.02.2012, inter
      alia, holding as follows:
                   “29. So, it would be suffice for this Court to hold that
                   though the petitioner succeeds in the writ petition, we
                   need not quash the acquisition proceedings and award
                   as prayed for by the petitioner. We hold that the land
                   acquisition proceedings and award are void ab initio in
                   law. But as the land is required to be acquired for the
                   purpose of forming residential        lay out and the
                   allotment of sites in favour of the residents as rightly
                   contended by Mr. Mohapatra, learned Govt. Advocate
                   that public purpose is the prime consideration against
                   the private interest , we have to mould the reliefs as
                   prayed for by the petitioner. In this regard, in the case
                   of Ramniklal N. Bhutta and another V. State of

                            3
Maaharashtra and others, reported in AIR 1997 SC
1236 upon which reliance has been rightly placed by
the learned Govt. Advocate, the Apex Court has held at
paragraph 10, the relevant portion of which reads thus:
“ ……. The courts have to weigh the public interest vis-
a-vis the private interest while exercising the power
under Article 226 – indeed any of their discretionary
powers. It may even by open to the High Court to
direct, in case it finds finally that the acquisition was
vitiated on account of non-compliance with some legal
requirement that the persons interested shall also be
entitled to a particular amount of damages to be
awarded as a lump sum or calculated at a certain
percentage of compensation payable. There are many
ways of affording appropriate relief and redressing a
wrong; quashing the acquisition proceeding is not the
only mode of redress. To wit, it is ultimately a matter of
balancing the competing interests. Beyond this, it is
neither possible nor advisable to say. We hope and
trust that these considerations will be duly borne in
mind by the Courts while dealing with challenges to
acquisition proceedings.”
30. Applying the aforesaid observation to the fact
situation of the present case, we mould the reliefs as
prayed in this petition by granting the following reliefs
to the petitioner.
        We declare that the acquisition proceedings and
award are void ab initio in law, but we decline to quash
the same by moulding the reliefs by directing the opp.
parties to see that the compensation for the acquired
land of the petitioner is determined on the basis of the
present market value as on this date keeping in view
the observation of the Privy Council in the case of
Vyricherla Narayana Gajapatiraju V. Revenue
Divisional Officer, Vizagapatam (supra) and
determine the compensation and award shall be passed
within a period of four months from the date of receipt
of this judgment.
31. Since we are not interfering with the quashing of
the acquisition proceedings except by moulding the
relief to give compensation, it is also further directed to
the Development Authority to grant five contiguous
sites measuring 40 ft. x 60 ft. in the area in question to
the petitioner and his family members for which the
present rate of allotment shall be charged and that
amount shall be deducted from out of the

                                         4
             compensation that would be determined and payable to
             the petitioner. The said direction is issued by this
             Court following the directions issued by the apex Court
             in the case of Bondu Ramaswamy & Ors. V.
             Bangalore Development Authority & Ors., (2010) 7
             SCC 129.
             32. With the above declarations, observations and
             directions, the writ petition is disposed of. Rule issued,
             but no costs.”
4.           The various grounds taken in three Review Petitions are as
follows:-
5.           Review Petition No.224 of 2012 has been filed by the writ
petitioner on the following grounds:
       (a)   This Court has moulded the relief placing reliance in the case of
Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu Vs. The Motor and General Traders, AIR 1975 SC
1409 and Bondu Ramaswamy Vs. Bangalore Development Authority and
others, (2010) 7 SCC 129. These cases are decided on the peculiar facts and
only reiterated power of moulding. Even in the judgments relied upon
moulding of reliefs were necessitated by change of circumstances between
the date of decree and the date of appeal. In the case at hand, there is no
such change between filing of the writ petition and the judgment. Therefore,
the reasonings given to mould the relief are not applicable to the facts of the
case.
       (b)   Section 11 of the Land Acquisition Act is the only repository for
grant of compensation. The High Court under Article 226 could not have
exercised statutory power under Section 11 in the guise of moulding relief;

                                        5
      (c)     Once the Court held that the proceeding to be void ab initio, the
only relief available was to quash the acquisition proceeding;
      (d)     The consistent view of the Hon’ble Supreme Court is that
moulding of relief is made when the relief prayed for cannot be given. In the
instant case, since notification is vitiated, the only course was to quash the
proceeding;
      (e)     Whenever the Hon’ble Supreme Court moulded the relief in the
teeth of a statutory power, it did so under Article 142 of the Constitution;
      (f)     The finding of this Court in the judgment is that possession of
the land has not been taken from the owner of the land and what has been
taken by the Collector is only paper possession but not the physical
possession. Admittedly, after development of the land in Ac.2.93 decimals
where a park and roads have been built, Ac.6.93 decimals are available and
neither any third party interest has been created nor any development has
taken place. Therefore, moulding if at all would have been just and
reasonable, the same should have been done by making available Ac.6.93
decimals land to the petitioner and paying compensation for the rest;
      (g)     Moulding cannot be said to have been done in the guise of doing
substantial justice or for public purpose in view of the finding of this Court
that the proceedings stand vitiated and void ab initio;
      (h)     There is no concession by the petitioner before the Court to
mould the relief;

                                        6
        (i)   Mr.Y.Das, learned Senior Advocate placing reliance on the
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Om Prakash Gupta Vs.
Ranbir B.Goyal, 2002(2) SCC 256, submitted that the Court has power to
take note of subsequent events and mould the relief if the relief as claimed
originally has by reason of subsequent events become inappropriate and
cannot be granted.
6.            Further, placing reliance on the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of S.Nagaraj Vs. State of Karnataka, 1993
(Suppl.) 4 SCC 595, Mr.Das submitted that in exercise of plenary
jurisdiction, it is within the domain of this Court to pass appropriate orders
as prayed for by the Review petitioner to avoid injustice.
7.            Mr. Das further submitted that after 74th amendment to the
Constitution, under Article 243, urban planning including town planning,
regulation of land use and construction of building, planning for economic
and social development, roads and bridges vests exclusively with the
Municipality. By the time the judgment was delivered the CDA ceased to
have statutory power under Section 3 of the Orissa Development Authorities
Act. Therefore, the petitioner invokes the plenary jurisdiction of this Court as
it strikes the very root of the power.
8.            In the review petition bearing RVWPET No. 332 of 2012 filed by
the State, challenge has been made to the impugned judgment basically on
three grounds:

                                        7
       (a)   The L.A. Act provides sufficient remedy for the person affected
and the writ petitioner having not taken recourse to the provisions of the
said Act claiming compensation is debarred from enforcing such remedy
available under the said statute through the writ petition;
       (b)   The provisions of Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act, 1976
having not been considered to come to a conclusion as to whether the writ
petitioner can hold such an extent of vacant land within the urban
agglomeration area, petitioner is not entitled to get any relief.
       (c)   Twenty-two years of delay in filing the writ petition to enforce the
remedy has not been considered by this Court inasmuch as Limitation Act
does not create right, but bars the remedy after lapse of the statutory period.
9.           Cuttack Development Authority seeks review of the impugned
judgment on the following grounds:
       (a)   Belated challenge to the LA notifications under Section 4(1) and
Section 6 after lapse of 23 years had been wrongly entertained;
       (b)   Since the acquisition notifications were published in the year
1983 and 1984, the petitioner or his predecessor in interest had no locus
standi to prefer any objection under        Section 5-A, as their interest was
crystallized on 03.02.1991 on the basis of the judgment passed by this
Hon’ble Court in OJC No.2652 of 1987;
       (c)   The validity of the notifications under the LA Act which was the
subject matter of challenge in OJC No.2731 of 1988 disposed of on

                                        8
04.08.1994 had been ignored though copy of the said judgment had been
annexed to the counter affidavit.
10.          Mr.P.K.Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for CDA submitted
that judicial review is not akin to adjudication of a case on merit as an
appellate authority. At best, while exercising powers of review, this Court
may correct patent errors apparent on the face of the records, resulting in
miscarriage of justice or violation of principles of natural justice. Application
for review is by no means an appeal in disguise whereby a decision can be
re-adjudicated or reconsidered. The pre-requisites for maintaining the
application for review are to be strictly applied in the present case. There is
no accidental error or mistake. It is also not a case where the review
application has been filed on the ground of discovery of new matter which
the parties were not aware after exercise of due diligence.
11.          Mr.Mohanty placing reliance upon judgment of Haridas Das Vs.
Usharani Banik, (2006) 4 SCC 78, submitted that the grounds urged by the
writ petitioner in the Review Petition do not come within the prescribed limit,
namely, error apparent on the face of the record but are conscious
findings/directions. The judgment had been passed after full consideration
of the arguments made by the counsels and therefore this Court should not
be engaged to delve into the points advanced in the application for review.
12.          Now, let us examine whether the grounds taken in the three
review petitions for review of the impugned order/judgment are legally
sustainable.

                                       9
13.          In respect of the ground taken by the writ petitioner in review
petition with regard to the power of the High Court to mould relief, it may be
noted that in Dwarikanath Vs. IT Officer, AIR 1966 SC 81, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held that the power of High Court under Article 226 cannot
be equated to the English courts to issue prerogative writs and the High
Court has the wider power and can mould relief to meet the peculiar and
complicated requirements of this Country.
14.          The grounds taken by the writ petitioner that CDA has no
jurisdiction in view of Article 243 of the Constitution after 74th amendment
cannot be a ground for review as no such ground was taken in the Writ
Petition nor it was argued at the time of hearing of the Writ Petition.
15.          In the impugned order, this Court has not moulded the relief on
the concession of the petitioner. On the other hand, giving sufficient reasons
and relying upon the decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, more
particularly on the case of Ramniklal N.Bhutta and another (supra) this Court
moulded the relief. Therefore, this cannot be a ground for review.
16.          The ground taken by State and the C.D.A. in the review petition
with regard to delay and laches on the part of the petitioner in approaching
this Court in W.P.(C) No. 13185 of 2006 cannot be a valid ground for review.
Such a ground was not taken by the State before the Court either in the
counter or at the time of hearing of the writ petition. However, in the
impugned judgment this Court on the basis of the contentions of the C.D.A.
in this regard has formulated question no. (i) to the effect that “whether the

                                         10
petition is liable to be rejected solely on the ground of delay and laches”. This
question along with question No.(ii) has been dealt with in detail in
paragraphs 15 to 20 of the impugned judgment.
17.           Non-consideration of order/judgment dated 04.05.1994 cannot
be a ground for review of the impugned judgment because had the said
order/judgment dated 04.05.1994 passed in OJC No.2731 of 1988 been
taken into consideration, the relief granted in the impugned judgment would
not have been changed. This Court in its order dated 04.05.1994 passed in
OJC No.2731 of 1988 have not annulled the acquisition in question and
directed CDA to allot each of the petitioners in that case a plot of land in
category ‘C’ and ‘D’. In the impugned judgment dated 22.02.2012 this Court
was not inclined to quash the acquisition proceeding and directed to grant
five contiguous sites measuring 40 ft. x 60 ft. in the area in question to the
petitioner and his family members. Moreover, in the earlier writ petition, i.e.,
OJC No.2731 of 1988, the petitioner in the impugned judgment dated
22.02.2012 was not a party.
18.           It would be appropriate to note here that in view of the
provisions of Section 114 read with Order XLVII, Rule 1 of the CPC and law
laid down by the Privy Council and the Hon’ble Supreme Court in several
judgments some of which hereinafter referred to, the impugned order cannot
be reviewed on the grounds taken in these three Review Petitions.
19.           Section 114 read with Order XLVII, Rule 1, CPC prescribes the
limitations for entertaining a review petition. The limitations are that the party

                                        11
filing the application for review has discovered a new and important matter or
evidence after exercise of due diligence, which was not within his knowledge
or could not be produced by him at the time when the decree or order was
passed, or on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the
record or ‘for any other sufficient reason’. The aforesaid limitations are
prescribed in a crystal clear language.
              The expression ‘any other sufficient reason” contained in Order
XLVII, Rule 1, means ‘sufficient reason’ which is analogous to those specified
immediately to it in the provision of Order XLVII, Rule 1, CPC.
20.           In Chhajju Ram Vs. Neki & Ors., AIR 1922 PC 112, it was
held by the Privy Council that analogy must be discovered between two
grounds specified therein namely; (i) discovery of new and important matter
or evidence; and (ii) error apparent on the face of record, before entertaining
the review on any other sufficient ground.
21.           The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Haridas Das (supra), held that
a perusal of the Order XLVII, Rule 1 shows that review of a judgment or an
order could be sought: (a) from the discovery of new and important matter or
evidence which after exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge
of the     applicant; (b) such important matter or evidence could not be
produced by the applicant at the time when the decree was passed or order
made; (c) on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of record
or any other sufficient reason. Therefore, some mistake or error, if made
ground for review, it must be apparent on the face of record and if a party

                                       12
files an application on the ground of some other sufficient reason, it has to
satisfy that the said sufficient reason is analogous to other conditions
mentioned in the said rule i.e. discovery of new and important matter or
evidence which it could not discover with due diligence or it was not within
his knowledge and, thus, could not produce at the initial stage. Apparent
error on the face of record has been explained to include failure to apply the
law of limitation to the fact found by the Court or failure to consider a
particular provision of a statute or a part thereof or a statutory provision has
been applied though it was not in operation. Review is permissible, if there is
an error of procedure apparent on the face of the record e.g. the judgment is
delivered without notice to the parties, or judgment does not effectively deal
with or determine any important issue in the case though argued by the
parties. There may be merely a smoke-line demarcating an error simpliciter
from the error apparent on the face of record. But there cannot be a ground
for entertaining the review petition in the former case. “Sufficient reason”
may include disposal of a case without proper notice to the party aggrieved.
Thus, if a person comes and satisfies the Court that the matter has been
heard without serving a notice upon him, review is maintainable for the
“sufficient reason” though there may be no error apparent on the face of
record.
22.          In the case of Northern India Caterers (India) Ltd. –Vrs.- Lt.
Governor of Delhi, AIR 1980 SC674, it has been held that “a party is not
entitled to seek a review of a judgment delivered by the Court merely for the

                                      13
purpose of a rehearing and a fresh decision of the case. The normal principle
is that a judgment pronounced by the Court is final and departure from that
principle is justified only when circumstances of a substantial and
compelling character make it necessary to do so. Whatever may be the
nature of the proceeding, it is beyond dispute that a review proceeding
cannot be equated with the original hearing of the case and the finality of the
judgment delivered by the Court will not be reconsidered except where a
glaring omission or a patent mistake or a grave error has crept in earlier by
judicial fallibility”.
23.           In Haridas Das (supra) Hon’ble Supreme Court held that the
parameters of review are prescribed in Order XLVII, Rule 1 of the CPC. The
former part of the rule deals with a situation attributable to the applicant,
and the latter to a jural action which is manifestly incorrect or on which two
conclusions are not possible. Neither of them postulates a rehearing of the
dispute because a party had not highlighted all the aspects of the case or
could perhaps have argued them more forcefully and/or cited binding
precedents to the Court and thereby enjoyed a favourable verdict. This is
amply evident from the Explanation to Rule 1 of Order XLVII which states
that the fact that the decision on a question of law on which the judgment of
the Court is based has been reversed or modified by the subsequent decision
of a superior Court in any other case, shall not be a ground for review of
such judgment. Where the order in question is appealable, the aggrieved

                                        14
party has adequate and efficacious remedy and the Court should exercise
the power to review its order with the greatest circumspection.
24.          In    M/s.   Thungabhadra       Industries      Ltd.  –Vrs.-   The
Government      of    Andhra     Pradesh,    represented      by  the    Deputy
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, Anantapur, AIR 1964 SC 1372, the
Supreme Court held as follows:
                    “There is a distinction which is real, though it might
             not always be capable of exposition, between a mere
             erroneous decision and a decision which could be
             characterized as vitiated by “error apparent”. A review is
             by no means an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous
             decision is reheard and corrected, but lies only for patent
             error. Where without any elaborate argument one could
             point to the error and say here is a substantial point of law
             which stares one in the face and there could reasonably
             be no two opinions entertained about it, a clear case or
             error apparent on the face of the record would be made
             out.”
25.          Law is well-settled that power of review cannot be confused with
the appellate power. In Devaraju Pillai Vs. Sellayya Pillai, AIR 1987 SC
1160, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that if the party is aggrieved by a
judgment of a Court, the proper remedy for such party is to file an appeal
against that judgment. A remedy by way of an application for review is
entirely misconceived and if a Court entertained the application for review
then it has totally exceeded its jurisdiction in allowing the review merely
because it takes a different view on a construction of the document.
26.          In Delhi Administration Vs. Gurdip Singh Uban & Ors., AIR
2000 SC 3737, the Hon’ble Supreme Court deprecated the practice of filing
review application observing that review, by no means is an appeal in disguise

                                         15
and it cannot be entertained even if application has been filed for clarification,
modification or review of judgment and order finally passed for the reason that
a party cannot be permitted to circumvent or bypass the procedure prescribed
for hearing a review application.
27.            The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jain Studios Ltd., through its
President Vs. Shin Satellite Public Co. Ltd., AIR 2006 SC 2686, held that the
power of review cannot be confused with appellate power which enables a
superior Court to correct all errors committed by a subordinate Court. It is not
rehearing of an original matter. A repetition of old and overruled argument is not
enough to reopen concluded adjudications. The power of review can be exercised
with extreme care, caution and circumspection and only in exceptional cases.
Thus, it is the settled proposition of law that review lies when there is error
apparent on the face of record and such an error crept in inadvertently or
otherwise and it is in the interest of justice, such a mistake should be rectified.
28.            In any event, no case for review under Order XLVII, Rule 1, CPC is
made out. The well-known parameters of review, as indicated above, having not
been fulfilled, there is no scope for review. The review petitions are accordingly
dismissed.
                                                       ...............................
                                                         B.N.Mahapatra,J.
I. Mahanty,J.                 I agree.
                                                         ………….………….
                                                          I. Mahanty,J.
Orissa high Court, Cuttack.
The 26th February, 2014/ssd/ss/skj


