                         ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                                W.P.(C) No.1637 of 2006
      In the matter of an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of
      India.
                                        __________
      Union of India, represented through its
      Director General, Posts, Ministry of Communication,
      Department of Posts, Dak Bhawan,
      New Delhi – 110001 & others                         …           Petitioners
                                         -Versus-
      Sri Santosh Kumar Rout                              …         Opposite Party
              For petitioner    :     Mr. S.D.Das,
                                      Asst. Solicitor General of India
             For Opp. Party     :      M/s D.P.Dhalasamanta
                                        ------------
P R E S E N T:
                      THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE I.MAHANTY
                                           AND
                   THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE B.N. MAHAPATRA
                            Date of Judgment : 22.04.2014
B.N.Mahapatra, J.         In the present writ petition, challenge has been made to
      the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack (for short, ‘the
      Tribunal’) dated 01.04.2005 passed in O.A. No.53 of 2004 on the ground
      that the said order is illegal, arbitrary and contrary to the provisions of
      law.
      2.           Petitioners’ case in a nutshell is that the opposite party Sri
      Santosh Kumar Rout was appointed provisionally on 08.07.1997 as an
      E.D./GDS Packer, Aerodrome Area, PO: Bhubaneswar. On 10.06.1999, an

                                      2
order was passed by the Sr. Superintendent of Post Offices, Bhubaneswar
terminating his services with a direction that he would be entitled to claim
equivalent to the basic allowance plus D.A. for the period of notice at the
same rate he was drawing immediately before passing of the order.
Challenging the said order, opposite party filed O.A. bearing No.282 of 1999
praying therein to quash the order of termination. Before the Tribunal, the
respondent-Union of India filed a counter indicating the irregularities in the
selection process followed by Sub-divisional Inspector, Postal, South
Division, Bhubaneswar showing undue favour to the applicant by not
calling the names from the Employment Exchange. The public notice dated
24.07.1997 stated to have been issued to various authorities was, in fact,
not sent by registered post and there were other irregularities committed.
The opposite party being beneficiary of such irregular appointment, his
services were rightly terminated. Said O.A. No.282 of 1999 was allowed on
15.03.2000 quashing the order of termination. However, liberty was given
to the present petitioners to issue show cause notice against proposed
order of termination and only after considering the reply of the opposite
party to take a decision in the matter as deemed fit.       Pursuant to said
direction, opposite party was issued with notice dated 08.01.2004 to show
cause as to why his services as Gramin Dak Sevak Packer (previously called
as ED Mail Deliverer) in Aerodrome Area, PO: Bhubaneswar shall not be
terminated as his entry into the service was not found congenial to the
procedural Rules. On 21.01.2004, the opposite party filed his reply to the
said show cause notice. However, apprehending penal action, the opposite

                                       3
party filed O.A. No.53 of 2004 on 20.02.2004 challenging the said show
cause notice on the ground that he was duly selected and should not suffer
for no fault of his; secondly, show cause notice was issued belatedly and it
should have been issued within six months from the date of receipt of order
passed in O.A. No.282 of 1999; since show cause notice has not been
issued within six months, the respondent-petitioners are estopped from
issuing such notice thereafter.
             After hearing the parties, learned Tribunal allowed the Original
Application bearing OA No.53 of 2004. Hence, the present writ petition.
3.           Mr.S.D.Das, learned Assistant Solicitor General appearing for
Union of India submitted that the Tribunal has committed a jurisdictional
error in holding that the respondents (present petitioners) have taken
inconsistent view without application of mind. The impugned order has been
passed without appreciating various submissions of the present petitioners
on its proper perspective. Rather learned Tribunal has failed to appreciate
the counter filed in O.A. No.53 of 2004, which is in addition to the earlier
counter filed in OA No.282 of 1999. The order dated 30.06.1998 regularizing
the opposite party’s appointment was issued by the Sub-Divisional
Inspector, Postal in order to show undue favour to the opposite party on the
date he was relieved on account of transfer to Jatni Sub-Division under Puri
Division. The opposite party being the sole applicant for the post, that itself
shows that there is no notification by registered post. The finding of the
Tribunal that the opposite party cannot be found fault with in the matter of
selection is perverse. The Tribunal erroneously relied upon the judgment in

                                        4
OJC No. 5254 of 1988 as well as judgment of the Patna High Court. The
learned Tribunal should not have drawn adverse view for issuance of notice
after long lapse of time, as for such lapse and delay in issuance of notice by
the concerned Officer, he has been proceeded against and punished. In the
present case, scope of selection was not widened to select the most
meritorious candidate but it was confined to one application for one post.
Recruitment Rules mandates compulsory notification to the Employment
Exchange and if such candidates are found not suitable, then public
notification can be issued, but in the present case, the proof of dispatch by
registered post to the Employment Exchange and the public notifications are
not available in the selection file. Therefore, the whole selection is vitiated.
Thus, the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction, while quashing the show cause
notice prematurely before any final decision is taken.
4.            Mr. Dhalsamanta, learned counsel appearing for the opposite
party submitted that the Sub-Divisional Inspector, Postal started selection
process to fill up the post of Extra Departmental Packer (re-designated as
DGSMP), Aerodrome Area Sub-Post Office by sending requisition to the
Employment Exchange, Bhubaneswar to sponsor candidates for the said
post vide Memo No.A-73 dated 29.04.1998. As the Employment Exchange
did not sponsor candidates within 30 days from the date of issue of such
letter, public notification was issued vide Memo dated 03.06.1998, the copy
of which was sent by registered post to (i) SPM, Aerodrome Area S.O., (ii)
Sub-Post Master, Airport, NDTSO, Bhubaneswar, (iii) Block Development
Officer, Bhubaneswar Block         (iv) Tahasildar, Bhubaneswar, (v) SPM,

                                      5
Bhimatangi, Bhubaneswar, (vii) Officer in-charge of Aerodrome Area PS,
viii)  Executive  Officer,  BMC    and   (viii) Senior  Post   Master,   GPO,
Bhubaneswar. In response to the said public notice, the opposite party
submitted his candidature along with all relevant documents within the
stipulated period. The opposite party was initially appointed as ED Packer,
Aerodrome Area provisionally on 04.04.1998 which was made regular on
30.06.1998 on the basis of due procedure of selection for the post in
question. The impugned order passed by the Tribunal suffers from no
illegality and is based on judicial pronouncement. Judgment dated
08.07.2004 of the Delhi High Court is not applicable in case of opposite
party as the opposite party has been selected and appointed on the basis of
due procedure of selection for the post of GDSMP. Forty candidates were
sponsored for the post in question on 28.05.1998 by the Employment
Exchange on the basis of the requisition.        The petitioners have taken
inconsistent stands in their counter. The opposite party has not committed
any omission or commission insofar as selection and appointment to the
post in question is concerned. The opposite party was selected and
appointed through a regular selection process. Concluding his argument,
Mr. Dhalsamanta prays for dismissal of the writ petition.
5.           On the rival contentions of the parties, the only question arises
for consideration by this Court is whether the Tribunal is justified in
quashing the show cause notice and allowing OA No.53 of 2004.
6.           The real issue involved and to be adjudicated in the present
case is whether the appointment of opposite party as Extra-Departmental

                                      6
Packer by sub-Divisional Inspector is in accordance with the recruitment
process.
7.           Challenging the order of termination of services dated
10.06.1999, the opposite party filed O.A. No.282 of 1999 before the
Tribunal praying therein to quash the order of termination. The said O.A.
was disposed of vide order dated 15.03.2000 quashing the order of
termination dated 10.06.1999 with the following observation/direction:-
             “We, however, make it clear that in case the
             applicants have not been allowed to resume the post,
             they be reinstated and thereafter the respondents are
             at liberty to issue notices giving opportunity to the
             applicants to show cause, if any, against the
             proposed order of termination and after considering
             the show cause, if any, can take appropriate decision
             in the matter as deemed fit.”
8.           Pursuant to the above direction, the present petitioners issued
notice dated 08.01.2004 to show cause as to why services of the opposite
party as Gramin Dak Sevak Mail Packer, Aerodrome Area, Bhubaneswr
shall not be terminated, as his entry into the service is not found congenial
to the procedural rules and regulations as envisaged in EDA’s (Conduct &
Service) Rules, 1964. On 21.01.2004, the present opposite party filed reply
to the said show cause notice. While the said show cause reply was
pending for consideration, opposite party filed O.A. No.53 of 2004 on
19.02.2004 challenging show cause notice. Learned Tribunal vide order
dated 01.04.2005 allowed the said O.A. No.53 of 2004 quashing the notice
to show cause issued by the Inspector of Posts, Bhubaneswar, South
Division under Annexure-A/7 annexed to the O.A.

                                       7
             Now, the question arises as to whether pending consideration
of show cause reply learned Tribunal could entertain the second O.A. and
quash the show cause notice. Admittedly, in the present case, show cause
notice was issued to the opposite party pursuant to order dated
15.03.2000 passed by learned Tribunal in O.A. No.282 of 1999. It may be
pertinent to mention here that in the said O.A., the Tribunal further
directed that after considering show cause, if any, the petitioners can take
appropriate decision in the matter as deemed fit.
9.           In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the
learned Tribunal is not justified to entertain the second O.A. No.53 of 2004
and quash the show cause notice pending consideration of show cause
reply.
10.          Otherwise also, the order of the Tribunal is not sustainable in
law. The learned Tribunal has quashed the show cause notice on following
three grounds:-
       (i)   Petitioner-respondents took inconsistent stands;
       (ii)  Opposite party-applicant is in no way responsible in
             the matter of selection and appointment;
       (iii) Notice of termination was issued to opposite party-
             applicant   after  a   long  lapse   of  time  by  the
             respondents-petitioners;
11.          It is true that the petitioners have taken inconsistent stands
with regard to calling for the names from Employment Exchange, but the
fact remains that the Employment Exchange had sponsored the names of

                                       8
40 candidates vide letter dated 08.08.1997, which fact has not been
disputed by anybody. As per Methods of Recruitment, the candidates
sponsored by the Employment Exchange should have been considered first
and in case of non-availability of any eligible candidate, the vacancy
should have been notified in public notice.
12.          At this stage, it would be appropriate to know the relevant
methods of recruitment of Extra-Departmental Agents prescribed by the
Directorate, which are reproduced below.
             “(12) Recruitment       of    ED       Agents    through
             Employment         Exchange.—       The     question   of
             recruitment of ED Agents through Employment
             Exchange has been under consideration of the
             Government for some time past.
             (2)    It has now been decided that the employment of
             ED Agents should be made through Employment
             exchanges. For this purpose the concerned recruiting
             authority should send a requisition to the local
             employment exchange, having jurisdiction over the
             area, requesting nomination of suitable candidates for
             the post, having the prescribed qualifications, within a
             period of 30 days from the date of sending requisition
             to the Employment exchange for nomination of
             candidates to the concerned authority. While placing
             requisition on the employment exchange, the
             competent recruiting authority should make a special
             mention of the following points:-
                  xx                 xx                         xx
             5.     In case no nominations are received from the
             employment exchanges regarding the candidates as
             per requirements within the stipulated period of 30
             days or if any of the candidates sponsored by the
             Employment Exchange is not found suitable as per
             prescribed conditions of eligibility, it would be open to
             the competent recruiting authority to make selection
             from other applicants in accordance with the existing
             procedure.
             6.     The Heads of Circles will please issue
             appropriate instructions to all recruiting authorities in
             their jurisdiction and ensure compliance of the revised

                                       9
            procedure for recruitment to different categories of ED
            Agents.
            [D.G., P & T., Letter No.45-22/71-SPB. I/Pen., dated
            the 4th September, 1982]
            It was ordered above that ED Agents should be
            appointed through the employment exchange of the
            area. Several instances of nomination of only one
            candidate by the employment exchange have come to
            the notice of this Directorate. In such cases, the
            resultant selection process gets totally devoid of any
            element of completion. It has, therefore, been decided
            that in future sponsoring of at least three candidates
            by the employment exchange should be insisted upon.
            In case of any difficulty in this regard, the matter may
            be taken up with the Director of Employment
            Exchange of the State Government concerned.
            Normally they have instruction to send a panel of
            candidates not less than thrice the number of posts
            notified to them. In the event of the employment
            exchange failing to sponsor the minimum number of
            candidates, the vacancy should be notified through
            public advertisements and while making the final
            selection, the comparative merit of all the candidates,
            i.e., those who respond to the notification as also those
            sponsored by the employment exchange should be
            taken into consideration.
            Heads of Circles will please issue suitable instructions
            in this regard to their subordinate formations and
            ensure compliance of the above procedure for
            recruitment to different categories of ED Agents.
            [D.G. P & T., Letter No.43-233/84-Pen., dated the 1st
            May, 1986.]
            Whenever it is proposed to appoint an ED Agent due
            publicity should be given to this fact. This may be
            done by displaying a notice giving particulars of the
            appointment to be made and the allowances and other
            conditions attached to it at the concerned post office,
            the police station, the panchayat office and any other
            public place considered suitable.
            [D.G. P & T., Letter No.43-40/65-Pen., dated the 19th
            January, 1968"]
            The     Directorate  further   observed    that  the  method of
recruitment has to be scrupulously followed while making selection of Extra
Departmental Agents. The learned Tribunal nowhere held that the opposite

                                       10
party was appointed as ED/GDS Packer following the above procedure of
recruitment. On the other hand, the learned Tribunal allowed O.A. No.53 of
2004 on the ground that the opposite party is in no way responsible for his
selection and appointment.
13.           Law is well-settled that any appointment made in violation of
the mandatory provisions of the statute would be wholly illegal. Such
illegality cannot be cured by taking recourse to regularization. [State of H.P.
Vs. Suresh Kumar Verma, (1996) 7 SCC 562]. In the present case, if the
appointment of opposite party has been made in violation of mandatory
provisions of the statute, he has no right to continue in service. Merely
because long time was elapsed to issue show cause notice, the same could
not validate the irregular appointment, if any, of the opposite party. Long
continuance in service is of no consequence and equity, sympathy or
generosity has no place where the original appointment is not in accordance
with the recruitment process.
14.           In view of the above, the order of the Tribunal dated 01.04.2005
passed in O.A. No.53 of 2004 is set aside. The petitioner No.4-Sub-
Divisional     Inspector    (Postal),  Bhubaneswar       South    Sub-Division,
Bhubaneswar, who has issued the notice to opposite party to show cause
against proposed order of termination of service, is directed to consider the
show cause reply already filed by the opposite party in accordance with law
and pass a reasoned order without being influenced by any of the
observations made by the learned Tribunal in O.A. No.53 of 2004. Needless

                                        11
to say that if opposite party will be aggrieved by the order of petitioner No.4,
it would be open for him to approach the Central Administrative Tribunal
for appropriate relief, if so advised.
15.              In the result, the writ petition is allowed to the extent
indicated above.
                                                    .......…………………….
                                                     B.N.Mahapatra, J.
I. Mahanty, J.                 I agree.
                                                    ……..………………….
                                                        I.Mahanty, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated 22nd April, 2014/ss/skj/bks


