                 HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                 W.P.(C) Nos.6338 and 6386 of 2012
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                                 -------------
In W.P.(C) No.6338 of 2012
Assessing Officer-cum-Executive Engineer (Elect.),
NESCO, Baripada Electrical Division,
At/P.O. Baripada,
Dist: Mayurbhanj                                      …     Petitioner
                                -Versus-
Appellate Authority-cum-Dy. Electrical Inspector,
(T & D) Balasore and another                          …     Opp. Parties
            For Petitioner        :       Mr. S.C. Dash
            For Opp. Parties :            M/s. F.R. Mohapatra,
                                          M.K. Panda, R.K. Nayak &
                                          A.K. Moharana
                                                (For O.P.No.2)
                                  ------------
In W.P.(C) No.6386 of 2012
Samiran Singha, aged about 50 years,
S/o. Late Dayanidhi Singha,
At/P.O. Kosta, Dist: Mayurbhanj                       …     Petitioner
                                -Versus-
Executive Officer (Electrical),
NESCO, Baripada Electrical Division,
At/P.O. Baripada,
Dist: Mayurbhanj and another                          …     Opp. Parties
          For Petitioner          :       M/s. F.R. Mohapatra,
                                          M.K. Panda, R.K. Nayak &
                                          A.K. Moharana
         For Opp. Parties         :       Mr. S.C. Dash
                                          [For O.P. No.1]

                                              2
                                         -----------
 P R E S E N T:
                 THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.N.MAHAPATRA
                             Date of Judgement: 23.11.2012
B.N. Mahapatra, J.          Writ petition bearing W.P.(C) No.6338 of 2012 has
        been filed by the licensee-Assessing Officer-cum-Executive Engineer
        (Elect.) with a prayer to quash the order dated 23.03.2012 passed by the
        Appellate    Authority-cum-D.E.I.   (T&D),   Balasore  in Case   No.AAC
        01/2012 (Annexure-9) directing for reconnection of power supply to the
        premises of the consumer-petitioner within 48 hours without any cost.
        Further prayer is for a clarification that 50% statutory deposit as
        required under Section 127 (2) of the Electricity Act, 2003 for the
        purpose of maintaining the appeal neither confers any right on the
        consumer to demand for restoration of power supply nor does it
        empower the Appellate Authority to direct the licensee by an interim
        order for reconnection of power supply to the consumer’s premises. In
        the writ petition, though prayer has been made to quash order dated
        23.03.2012 passed in Case No.AAC 01 of 2012 under Annexure-9, no
        such order has been attached to the writ petition as Annexure-9.
        Annexure-8 is the last Annexure attached to the writ petition, which is a
        petition dated 26.03.2012. However, it is found that the order dated
        23.03.2012 has been annexed to the writ petition as Annexure-7. From
        the various arguments advanced by Mr. Das, learned counsel for the
        petitioner, it appears that the petitioner licensee has filed this writ

                                      3
petition to quash the order dated 23.03.2012 passed in Case No.AAC 01
of 2012 under Annexure-7 and not Annexure-9.
2.           Writ petition bearing W.P.(C) No.6386 of 2012 has been filed
by the consumer with a prayer to direct opposite party No.1-Executive
Engineer (Electrical), NESCO to restore power supply to the premises of
the petitioner and to dispose of the appeal within a stipulated period.
3.           Since both the writ petitions are interconnected, they are
disposed of by this common judgment.
4.           Petitioner’s case in W.P.(C) No.6338 of 2012 in a nut-shell is
that the petitioner is one of the electrical supply Engineers of the
Distribution-Licensee i.e. NESCO engaged in the business of retail
supply of electricity to various categories of consumers within the area of
supply. Opposite party No.2 Samiran Singha @ Singha, son of late
Dayanidhi Singha is a consumer of electricity under the petitioner-
company for a contract demand of 5KW under general purpose
commercial tariff to run lethe work/fabricating unit for installation of
welding machine upon execution of the agreement to that effect on
15.11.2010. Under the said agreement, the petitioner has undertaken to
abide rules and regulations as contemplated under OERC Distribution
(Condition of Supply) Code, 2004. During spot verification conducted by
the squad of NESCO on 04.02.2012, it was found that the said
consumer has committed theft of power supply unauthorizedly by way of
direct 3 phase hooking from the nearby L.T. Line through 2.5 mm sqr.
Current wires of red, blue and yellow colours for the purpose of running

                                     4
his fabricating industry. The said hooking wires were seized on the spot
after taking photographs and power supply was disconnected as per
Clauses-34 and 46 of OERC Supply Code, 2004 read with Section 135 of
the Electricity Act, 2003 and subsequently, on 07.02.2012, FIR was
lodged against the consumer for his availing power supply in such an
authorized manner. On the basis of spot verification report dated
04.02.2012, the present petitioner as Assessing Officer proceeded under
Section 126 of the Electricity Act, 2003 and assessed an amount of
Rs.1,69,928/- towards the provisional assessment vide his office letter
No.348 dated 08.02.2012 and served on the consumer inviting objection
fixing 16.02.2012 as the date for personal hearing in the matter. In
response to the said letter of provisional assessment the consumer filed
objection on 14.02.2012 admitting the actual fact of availing power
supply unauthorizedly in the manner as detected by the squad of the
licensee (NESCO). The Assessing Officer upon consideration of the reply
of the consumer-opposite party no.2 has passed the final assessment
order No.869 dated 06.03.2012 for an amount of Rs.1,56,474/-. Against
the said final assessment order dated 06.03.2012, the consumer
approached the present petitioner to allow him to deposit 50% of the
finally assessed amount towards the statutory deposit to prefer appeal
under Section 127 of the Electricity Act, 2003 to the Appellate Authority
and accordingly, he was allowed to deposit 50% of the finally assessed
amount for the purpose of preferring Appeal as provided under the
Statute. On 24.03.2012, the petitioner received interim order dated

                                       5
23.03.2012 passed by the appellate authority in Case No.AAC 01 of
2012, wherein the petitioner has been directed to revive power supply to
the premises of the consumer without any cost. On receipt of the said
interim order, the petitioner filed a petition on 26.03.2012 for vacation of
the said interim order as the same being without authority. The
appellate authority rejected the said petition of the petitioner vide order
dated 28.03.2012. Hence, the present writ petition.
5.           Mr. S.C. Dash, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted
that the interim order was passed by the appellate authority without
serving any notice of the appeal petition on the petitioner. Deposit of
50% of the finally assessed amount is only made for the purpose of
preferring and maintaining the appeal and in absence of any provision
for restoration of power supply by the appellate authority, it cannot
direct for restoration of power supply. Only remedy available for
restoration of power supply is to deposit the entire assessed amount as
required under 3rd proviso to Section 135(1A) of the Electricity Act, 2003.
The appellate authority has exceeded its jurisdiction by passing an ex
parte order for reconnection of power supply to the premises of the
consumer while exercising power under Section 127 of the Electricity
Act, 2003 without appreciating the meaning of Section 127(2) of the Act,
2003, which provides that 50% deposit out of the finally assessed
amount is required for the purpose of maintaining the appeal but it does
not confer any right on the consumer to get restoration of power supply.
The appellate authority is not authorised under any law to pass any

                                      6
interim order directing restoration of power supply. Therefore, the
interim order dated 23.03.2012 passed by the appellate authority is
liable to be set aside. The appellate authority has passed the impugned
order without hearing the petitioner which is violative of the principles of
natural justice. The appellate authority on 28.3.2012 in utter disregard
to the citations filed by the petitioner rejected the petition dated
26.03.2012 filed by the petitioner for vacation of interim order dated
23.03.2012. In support of his contention that the appellate authority has
no power to pass interim order, Mr.Dash, relied upon the decisions of
the Calcutta High Court in the cases of Kuban Sk. vs. State of West
Bengal and others, AIR 2011 (NOC) 124 (CAL) and Amit Sasmal vs. West
Bengal State Electricity Distribution Co. Ltd. & Anr., AIR 2011 (NOC) 126
(CAL). Concluding his argument, Mr. Dash prays to allow the writ
petition.
6.            On the contrary, Mr. F.R. Mohapatra, learned counsel
appearing for opposite party No.2-Samiran Singha in W.P.(C) No.6338 of
2012 and the petitioner in W.P.(C) No.6386 of 2012 submitted that the
authority has power to grant interim order as incidentally or ancillary to
its appellate jurisdiction. In support of his contention, relying upon the
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Income Tax
Officer, Cannanore vs. M.K. Mohammed Kunhi, AIR 1969 SC 430, Mr.
Mohapatra submitted that there is no infirmity or illegality in the order
passed by the appellate authority.

                                     7
7.            The only question that falls for consideration by this Court
is as to whether the appellate authority has incidental and ancillary
powers which it can exercise to make fully effective the express power
granted under Section 127 of the Act, 2003 and therefore the impugned
order dated 23.3.2012 passed by the appellate authority in Case No.AAC
01/2012 directing the licensee-petitioner to reconnect power supply to
the consumer’s premises is justified.
8.            Undisputed facts are that opposite party No.2 has been
finally assessed under Section 126 of the Electricity Act, 2003. Section
127 of the Act, 2003 provides that any person aggrieved by a final order
made under Section 126 may, within thirty days of the said order, prefer
an appeal. Section 127(2) of the Act, 2003 provides that no appeal
against an order of assessment under sub-section (1) shall be
entertained unless an amount equal to [half of the assessed amount] is
deposited in cash or by way of bank draft with the licensee and
documentary evidence of such deposit has been enclosed along with the
appeal.
9.            In the instant case, opposite party no.2 has filed an appeal
under Section 127 of the Act, 2003 and to maintain his appeal he has
deposited 50% of the assessed amount. The appellate authority has
passed the impugned order dated 23.03.2012 directing the licensee-
petitioner to reconnect power supply to the premises of the consumer-
opposite party No.2 within 48 hours without cost with a further direction
not to initiate any action against the consumer-opposite party no.2 for

                                    8
non-payment of balance 50% of the assessed amount till disposal of the
appeal by the appellate forum. Licensee-petitioner’s case is that under
Section 127 of the Act, 2003 no power is vested with the appellate
authority to pass any interim order, but despite the same, the appellate
authority has passed the impugned interim order. Therefore, interim
order directing restoration of power supply is illegal. The remedy
available to the consumer-opposite party No.2 is under 3rd proviso of
sub-section (1-A) of Section 135 which provides that on deposit or
payment of the assessed amount or electricity charges in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, without prejudice to the obligation to
lodge the complaint as referred to in the second proviso to that clause,
the licensee shall restore the supply line of electricity within forty-eight
hours of such deposit or payment. Mr. Dash, learned counsel for the
licensee-petitioner  submitted   that   only   remedy    available  to   the
consumer-opposite party No.2 in case of disconnection of power supply
under 3rd proviso to Section 135(1-A) of the Act, 2003 is to deposit the
payment of the assessment amount of the electricity charges. Therefore,
the interim order passed by the appellate authority is contrary to law.
10.          The consumer-petitioner’s case in W.P.(C) No.6386 of 2012
is that power supply to the premises of the petitioner has been
disconnected by exercising power under Section 135 of the Act, 2003 on
the very same day of verification i.e. on 04.02.2012 much prior to
passing of the final assessment order. It is further submitted that on the
date of disconnection of power supply i.e. the date of verification no

                                       9
demand has been raised by the petitioner-licensee. In any event, the
provision contained in 3rd proviso to sub-section (1-A) of Section 135 is
not adequate remedy available to the consumer-petitioner as the said
provision provides for payment of entire assessed amount, even if the
correctness of such assessment is challenged in the appeal. Therefore, it
was submitted that since there is no adequate remedy available under
the Act, 2003 for restoration of power, except making payment of the
entire assessed amount which was challenged before the appellate
authority, the said authority has power to grant the interim order as
incidentally or ancillary to its appellate jurisdiction.
11.          At this juncture, it is necessary to refer some of the
decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court which is relevant for our
purpose. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Matajog Dobey vs.
H.C. Bhari, AIR 1956 SC 44,
             “23. Where a power is conferred or a duty
             imposed by statute or otherwise, and there is
             nothing said expressly inhibiting the exercise of
             the power or the performance of the duty by any
             limitations or restrictions, it is reasonable to hold
             that it carries with it the power of doing all such
             acts or employing such means as are reasonably
             necessary for such execution……”
12.          The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Bidi, Bidi
Leaves & Tobacco Merchants' Association v. State of Bombay,
AIR 1962 SC 486, held as under:
             “20. “One of the first principles of law with regard
             to the effect of an enabling act”, observes Craies,
             “is that if a Legislature enables something to be
             done, it gives power at the same time by

                       10
necessary implication to do everything which is
indispensable for the purpose of carrying out the
purposes in view5”. The principle on which this
doctrine is based is contained in the legal maxim
“Quando lex aliquid concedit concedere videtur et
illud sine quo res ipsa ease non potest”. This
maxim has been thus translated by Broom thus:
“whoever grants a thing is deemed also to grant
that without which the grant itself would be of no
effect”. Dealing with this doctrine Pollock, C.B.,
observed in Michael Fenton and James Fraser v.
John Stephen Hampton6 “it becomes therefore all
important to consider the true import of this
maxim, and the extent to which it has been
applied. After the fullest research which I have
been able to bestow, I take the matter to stand
thus: Whenever anything is authorised, and
especially if, as matter of duty, required to be
done by law, and it is found impossible to do that
thing unless something else not authorised in
express terms be also done, then that something
will be supplied by necessary intendment”. This
doctrine can be invoked in cases “where an Act
confers a jurisdiction it also confers by implication
the power of doing all such acts, or employing
such means, as are essentially necessary to its
execution.” In other words, the doctrine of implied
powers can be legitimately invoked when it is
found that a duty has been imposed or a power
conferred on an authority by a statute and it is
further found that the duty cannot be discharged
or the power cannot be exercised at all unless
some auxiliary or incidental power is assumed to
exist. In such a case, in the absence of an implied
power the statute itself would become impossible
of compliance. The impossibility in question must
be of a general nature so that the performance of
duty or the exercise of power is rendered
impossible in all cases. It really means that the
statutory provision would become a dead-letter
and cannot be enforced unless a subsidiary power
is implied. This position in regard to the scope
and effect of the doctrine of implied powers is not
seriously in dispute before us. The parties are at
issue, however, on the question as to whether the
doctrine of implied powers can help to validate the
impugned clauses in the notification.”

                                      11
13.           The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of M.K. Mohammed
Kunhi (supra), held that the power to stay is a necessary corollary to the
power to entertain an appeal or revision. That even without an express
conferment, the appellate authority has the power to stay the
proceedings and the collection pending appeal, as incidental or ancillary
to its appellate jurisdiction.
14.           The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Sikri Vasu vs.
State of U.P. and others, (2008) 2 SCC 409, held as under:
              “18. It is well settled that when a power is given
              to an authority to do something it includes such
              incidental or implied powers which would
              ensure the proper doing of that thing. In other
              words, when any power is expressly granted by
              the statute, there is impliedly included in the
              grant, even without special mention, every power
              and every control the denial of which would
              render the grant itself ineffective. Thus where an
              Act confers jurisdiction it impliedly also grants
              the power of doing all such acts or employ such
              means as are essentially necessary for its
              execution.”
              “19. The reason for the rule (doctrine of implied
              power) is quite apparent. Many matters of minor
              details are omitted from legislation. As Crawford
              observes in his Statutory Construction (3rd Edn.,
              p. 267):
              “… If these details could not be inserted by
              implication, the drafting of legislation would be
              an interminable process and the legislative
              intent would likely be defeated by a most
              insignificant omission.”
15.           This Court in the case of Harendra Prasad Sahu vs.
Orissa Sales Tax Tribunal and others, (1996) 103 STC 333 (Ori), held
as under:

                                        12
               “4……. Tribunal has all the powers conferred
               expressly by the statute. Furthermore, being a
               judicial body, it has all those incidental and
               ancillary powers which are necessary to make
               fully effective the express grant of statutory
               powers. Certain powers are recognized as
               incidental and ancillary not because they are
               inherent in the Tribunal, nor because its
               jurisdiction is plenary, but because it is the
               legislative intent that the power which is expressly
               granted in the assigned field of jurisdiction is
               efficaciously and meangingfully exercised. The
               implied grant is of course limited by the express
               grant and therefore, it can only be such powers as
               are truly incidental and ancillary for doing all
               such acts or employing all such means as are
               reasonably necessary to make the grant effective.
               (See Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes,
               Eleventh Edition). A Division Bench of this Court
               in Smt. Aruna Kar v. Dr. Sarat Dash and Nachhi,
               (1973) 75 CLT 24 also dealt with these aspects.”
16.            In view of the above settled legal proposition, this Court is of
the view that the appellate authority while exercising power under
Section 127 of the Act, 2003 carries with it by necessary implication, the
authority to use or reasonable means to make such power effective by
way of passing any interim order. Such power is incidental and ancillary
to make the power granted under Section 127 of the Act, 2003 effective.
17.            The issue involved in this case can be looked at from a
different angle. In a case, where exorbitant amount is raised by an
illegal, arbitrary assessment and pursuant to such assessment, power
supply is disconnected for non-payment of the assessed amount but in
appeal, the said demand is substantially reduced or annuled, in that
case till the appeal is disposed of or entire assessed amount is paid no
power supply would be restored to consumer’s premises even though the

                                     13
consumer is not liable to pay such illegal demand. This is certainly not
the intention of legislature. Only in cases where the consumer does not
want to challenge the demand assessed before any higher forum, in that
case only 3rd proviso to Section 135 (1-A) has full application and unless
the consumer pays the entire assessed amount with reconnection
charges, power supply cannot be restored to his/her premises.
18.          For the reasons stated above, the decision of the Calcutta
High Court in the case of Kuban Sk. (supra) and in the case of Pradip
Haldar vs. The CESU Ltd. & Ors., AIR 2011 (NOC) 127 (CAL.) are of no
help to the petitioner.   In the said cases the learned Single Judge of
Calcutta High Court has not taken note of the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court hereinbefore referred to. Moreover, there is no detailed
discussion of the issue involved in the present case.
19.          Therefore,    the   impugned      order    dated  23.03.2012
(Annexure-7) passed by the Appellate Authority-cum-D.E.I. (T & D),
Balasore in Case No.AAC 01/2012 directing the licensee-petitioner to
reconnect power supply to the premises of opposite party No.2-Samiran
Singha and not to take any action against the said opposite party No.2
for non-payment of the balance 50% of the assessed amount till disposal
of the appeal is legal/valid and warrants no interference of this Court.
The interim order dated 09.04.2012 passed by this Court stands
vacated. The licensee-petitioner is directed to restore power supply to the
premises of opposite party No.2 forthwith without insisting any payment
towards the balance 50% of the assessed amount. The appellate

                                       14
authority is directed to dispose of the appeal pending before it within a
period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this
judgment after affording opportunity of hearing to the parties concerned.
20.            In the result, W.P.(C) No.6338 of 2012 filed by the Assessing
Officer-cum-Executive Engineer (Elect), NESCO is dismissed with the
aforesaid observations and direction. Consequentially, W.P.(C) No.6386
of 2012 is allowed to the extent indicated above.
               No order as to costs.
                                                  …….……………………
                                                  B.N. Mahapatra,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 23rd November, 2012/ss/skj.


