                 ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
W.P.(C)Nos.23504,27209,27184,27206,27208,25460,27211,27215,27217,
27218,27219,27220,27224,27226,26896,26897,26898,26699,27232,
27332,19985,20995,26776 and 27205 of 2011.
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
India.
                                  ----------------
In W.P.(C ) No.23504 of 2011
Ranjita Kahali                         …                Petitioner
                                      Versus
State of Orissa & others               …                Opposite parties
       For Petitioner          :       M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                       S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
       For Opp.parties 1 & 2   :       Advocate General
       For Opp.parties 3 to 7  :       M/s.Bijan Ray(Sr.Adv.),B.Mohanty,
                                       S.Mohanty. B.Moharana, A.K.Budhia
                                       and D.Chhotray.
In W.P.(C ) No.27209 of 2011
Surendranath Patnaik                   …                Petitioner
                                      Versus
State of Orissa & others               …                Opposite parties
       For Petitioner          :       M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                       S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
       For Opp.party no.3      :       M/s.B.R.Sarangi and S.N.Jena.

                                    2
In W.P.(C ) No.27184 of 2011
Jyotsna Mayee Samal              …                 Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others         …                 Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         :   M/s.Surjya Kanta Padhi,
                                  Prashanta Ku. Nayak,
                                  A.Mohapatra and S.Panigrahi.
      For Opp.parties        :   Advocate General.
In W.P.(C ) No.27206 of 2011
Bijay Kumar Pati                 …                 Petitioner
                                 Versus
State of Orissa & others         …                 Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         :   M/s.Bikram Pra. Das
                                  and S.K.Mishra.
      For Opp.parties        :   Advocate General.
In W.P.(C ) No.27208 of 2011
Tarachand Agrawal                …                 Petitioner
                                 Versus
State of Orissa & others         …                 Opposite parties

                                     3
       For Petitioner        :    M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                   S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
       For Opp.party no.3    :    M/s.Satya Ranjan Pati and
                                  D.Behuray.
In W.P.(C ) No.25460 of 2011
Tilottama Pradhan                 …                  Petitioner
                                  Versus
State of Orissa & others          …                  Opposite parties
       For Petitioner        :    M/s.Surjya Kanta Padhi,
                                   Prashanta Ku. Nayak and
                                  A.Mohapatra.
       For Opp.parties 1 & 2 :    Advocate General.
In W.P.(C ) No.27211 of 2011
Sushil Kumar Chand                …                  Petitioner
                                  Versus
State of Orissa & others          …                  Opposite parties
       For Petitioner        :    M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                   S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
       For Opp.party no.3    :    M/s.B.R.Sarangi and
                                  S.N.Jena.
In W.P.(C ) No.27215 of 2011
Kartikswar Parida            …                Petitioner
                             Versus
State of Orissa & others          …                  Opposite parties

                                     4
      For Petitioner         :    M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                   S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2  :    Addl. Government Advocate
      For Opp.parties 3 to 7 :    M/s.Manas Mahapatra,S.K.Routray,
                                  S.K.Mohanty,R.P.Kar, A.N.Ray,
                                  L.Mohapatra and S.Pattnaik.
In W.P.(C ) No.27217 of 2011
Sabita Satapathy & others               …            Petitioners
                             Versus
State of Orissa & others          …                  Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         :    M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                   S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2  :    Advocate General
In W.P.(C ) No.27218 of 2011
Basanta Behera & others                 …            Petitioners
                             Versus
State of Orissa & others          …                  Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         :    M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                   S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2  :    Advocate General
In W.P.(C ) No.27219 of 2011
Sk.Abdul Toyab               …                Petitioner
                             Versus
State of Orissa & others          …                  Opposite parties

                                      5
      For Petitioner          :    M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                    S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2   :    Advocate General
      For Opp.party no. 3     :    M/s.Niranjan Lenka,A.K.Otta,
                                   M.Mohapatra, Miss A.Behera,
                                   H.K.Mahanta and L.Sahu
In W.P.(C ) No.27220 of 2011
Basanta Kumar Sethy                …                 Petitioner
                              Versus
State of Orissa & others           …                 Opposite parties
      For Petitioner          :    M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                    S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2   :    Advocate General.
      For Opp.parties 3       :    M/s.Debendra Mohanta,R.Ray,
                                   Sandeep Rath.
In W.P.(C ) No.27224 of 2011
      Dasarathi Behera             …                 Petitioner
                                   Versus
      State of Orissa & others     …           Opposite parties
      For Petitioner          :    M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                    S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.party no.3      :    M/s.B.R.Sarangi and
                                   S.N.Jena.

                                  6
In W.P.(C ) No.27226 of 2011
Chandi Prasad Singh             …                 Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others        …                 Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         :  M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.party nos.3&4 :   M/s.Manas Ranjan Panda.
In W.P.(C ) No.26896 of 2011
Kanan Bihari Pahi               …          Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others        …                 Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         :  M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2  :  Advocate General.
In W.P.(C ) No.26897 of 2011
Birendranath Basha              …                 Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others        …                 Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         :  M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                                S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2  :  Advocate General.
      For Opp.parties 3 to 6 :  M/s.M.Mahapatra,S.D.Tripathy,
                                S.K.Routray, L.Mohapatra
                                S.Mohanty and S.Pattnaik

                                  7
In W.P.(C ) No.26898 of 2011
Raj Kishor Pradhan             …           Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others       …                  Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         : M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                               S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2  : Advocate General
In W.P.(C ) No.26699 of 2011
Bhabani Prasad Majhi           …                  Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others       …                  Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         : M/s.Pitambar Acharya, B.Bhadra.
                               S.Rath, B.K.Jena and S.Rout.
      For Opp.party no.3     : M/s.S.P.Misra(Sr.Adv.),N.Lenka,
                               S.Nandy, B.Mohanty,S.Misra and
                                S.Das.
In W.P.(C ) No.27232 of 2011
Bijaya Kumar Sahu              …                  Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others       …                  Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         : M/s.Bikram Pr. Das.
      For Opp.parties 3 & 5  : M/s.S.P.Misra (Sr.Adv.),
                               Satyaranjan Pati and
                                D. Dehury.

                                  8
In W.P.(C ) No.27332 of 2011
Prahallad Mohanty & others     …           Petitioners
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others       …           Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         : M/s.Gouranga B. Jena.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2  : Advocate General.
In W.P.(C ) No.19985 of 2011
Aswini Kumar Das               …                  Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others       …                  Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         : M/s.Ashok Ku. Mohapatra and
                               A.K.Mohapatra.
      For Opp.party no.4     : M/s.B.R.Sarangi and
                               S.N.Jena.
In W.P.(C ) No.20995 of 2011
Lalitendu Senapati             …                  Petitioner
                               Versus
State of Orissa & others       …                  Opposite parties
      For Petitioner         : M/s.Ashok Ku. Mohapatra,
                               A.K.Mohapatra,S.K.Padhi,
                                N.C.Rout,S.K.Mishra and T.Kumar.
      For Opp.parties 1 & 2  : Advocate General.

                                                               9
         In W.P.(C ) No.26776 of 2011
         Sanjeev Mishra                                   …                         Petitioner
                                                          Versus
         State of Orissa & others                          …                        Opposite parties
                 For Petitioner                    :       M/s.Santosh Ku.Pattnaik,
                                                            U.C.Mohanty,P.K.Pattnaik,
                                                            A.Pattanaik, S.P.Das and
                                                            S.Pattnaik
                 For Opp.parties 1 & 2             :       Advocate General.
         In W.P.(C ) No.27205 of 2011
         Bhagirathi Nanda and another                      …                        Petitioners
                                                           Versus
         State of Orissa & others                          …                        Opposite parties
                 For Petitioner                    :       M/s.Prafulla Ku.Rath,
                                                            P.K.Satapathy,R.N.Parija,
                                                            A.K.Rou,T.S.K.Pattnaik and
                                                            D.P.Pattnaik.
                 For Opp.parties 1 to3             :       Advocate General.
                                                  -------------
         PRESENT:
                                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE B.P.DAS
                                                               AND
                                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K.MISHRA
         ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Date of conclusion of hearing:23.11.2011: Date of judgment: 21.12.2011
         ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S.K.Mishra, J.            In this bunch of writ petitions the petitioners, office bearers of
         different Co-operative Societies, have assailed the vires of the Orissa Co-

                                          10
operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011(hereinafter referred to as “the
Amendment Act” for brevity).        They specifically assailed the provisions of
Section 2(g)(i) and    2(g)(ii) of Section 28 of the Amendment Act and the
administrative action pursuant thereto whereby the Registrar, Co-operative
Societies, opposite party no.2, has nominated persons other than the elected
members to constitute the Managing Committee of the respective Co-
operative Societies.
2.           It is not disputed that there are about seven thousand Co-
operative Societies in the whole of State of Orissa.       Various Co-operative
Societies were managed by the elected members and some cases the election
has been held very recently. In such backdrop the Orissa State Legislative
Assembly passed the Amendment Act whereby among other things it sought
to amend the provision of reservation for various backward communities. By
virtue of such an amendment, the management committees of all societies
were dissolved from the date of the notification of such amendment and the
management vested with the Registrar of the Co-operative Society. In order
to understand the various amending provision it is necessary to look into the
various amendment that has been carried out by virtue of the Amendment
Act.
3.           The Orissa Co-operative Societies Act, 1962 (hereinafter referred
to as the “Act” for brevity) at various point of time, has been amended by the
legislative assembly prior to the present Amendment Act.         As the matters
stood, Section 16 of the Act provided for the persons who may become

                                        11
members of a Co-operative Society.          Sub-section (1) provided for the
membership of a Co-operative Society. Clause (b) provided no person shall
be admitted as member of a Society other than a primary society, except the
following, namely:
               (i)    any Society
               (ii)   the State Government;
               (iii)  the Central Government;
               (iv)   any other person as may be prescribed; and.
               (v)    a Co-operative Society registered under the Orissa Self-
                      Help Co-operatives Act, 2001.
             Sub-section (1-a) provided that notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in any other provisions of this Act, and the rules or bye-
laws framed thereunder, the members of the Committee including the co-
opted members, if any, but excluding the members nominated or appointed
under Clause (ii) of Sub-section (1-b) of Section 28, Sub-section (1) of Section
31 and Sub-section (1) of Section 32, of the primary Societies affiliated to the
Central Society or an Apex Society shall be deemed to be the members of their
respective Central Society or, as the case may be, the Apex Society or both,
with effect from the date of commencement of the Orissa Co-operative
Societies (Amendment) Act, 1997 so long as they continue as member of the
Committees of Primary Societies. This section in effect provided for deeming
membership of the Central and Co-operative Societies to which the Primary
Societies have been affiliated. By virtue of Section 2 of the Amendment Act
the provision of sub-section (1-a) of Section 16 of the Act is omitted. Thereby

                                          12
the deeming provision regarding membership of the Central and Apex
Societies is deleted.
4.           Prior to the amendment Section 20 read as follows:
                    “20. Vote of members – Every member of a Society
                    shall have one vote in the affairs of the Society:
                    [Provided that –
                    (a)   [ ***]
                    (b)   Where two individuals have been admitted as
                          joint members, they shall have one vote
                          which may be exercised by any one of them;
                    (c)   Where the State Government of the Central
                          Government is a member of the Society, each
                          person nominated by or on behalf of such
                          Government on the Committee shall have one
                          vote;
                    (d)   Where there is an equality of votes at a
                          meeting on the affairs of the Society other
                          than    election   of   is    office-bearers   or
                          amendment of its Bye-Laws, the person
                          presiding over the meeting shall have a
                          second and deciding vote; and
                    (e)   Where     a    member    of    the    Society  is
                          simultaneously electing the President and the
                          member      of   the   Committee       from   his
                          constituency, he shall have one vote for

                                         13
                          electing the President and another for the
                          member.]
                     By virtue of an amendment after the proviso to Section 20
       the following has been added:
                          “Provided further that every member of an
                          Electoral College referred to    in Clause
                          (ii-a) of sub-section (1) of Section 28-A
                          shall have one vote in the matter of
                          election of the member of the Committee
                          of a Central and Apex Society.”
                    Thus,    by  virtue  of  this amendment      the  legislature
introduced the concept of Electoral College, which shall elect the committees
of Central and Apex Society.
5.            Section 28 of the principal Act provides the Society to have a
Committee. The provisions of the said section provide for the powers of the
Committee and also provide that there shall be a President and Vice President
for the Committee [sub-section (1-a)]. Sub-section (1-aa) provided that the
term of the Committee shall be four years from the date of assumption of the
office by the Committee. This sub-section is amended and instead of four
years the tenure is fixed at five years.
            Before amendment Sub-section (1-b) provided that the expiration of
the period of four years shall operate as dissolution of the Committee and
thereafter the members including the President and Vice President shall be
deemed to have        vacated the office and in case no       election has been
completed by the date of such dissolution the management of the Society
shall vest with the Registrar. By amendment          the legislature substituted

                                            14
four years by five years. This is in consonance with the amendment of sub-
section (1-aa).
6.              Section 4 of the Amendment Act introduced further changes of
Section 28 of the principal Act and in place of Clauses (b),(c),(d),(e),(f) and (g)
the new clauses were introduced.          Prior to the amendment Clauses (b), (c),
(d), (e), (f) and (g) of sub-section (2) of Section 28 of the Amendment Act read
follows:
                “(b)  In the case of a Large-sized Adivasi Multipurpose
                       Co-operative Society, two thirds of the total
                       number of    elected members of the Committee
                       shall be from among the members belonging to
                       the Scheduled Tribes, so however that the said
                       two third shall also include women members
                       numbering not less than one third of the total
                       number of such elected members.
                Provided that the offices of the President and Vice-
                President shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.
                Explanation - The principle for determining whether
                a society is a large sized Adivasi Multipurpose Co-
                operative Society or not shall be such as may be
                prescribed.
                (c)   In the case of a Primary Society other than Large-
                      sized    Adivasi     Multipurpose     Co-operative
                      Societies, two members each shall be from the
                      Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,
                      three from Other Backward Classes including
                      Socially and Educationally Backward Classes

                           15
     and two from Women members, so that among
     each of the said Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
     Tribes and     Other Backward Classes including
     Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of
     members, there shall be one woman.
(d)  In the case of a Central Society, two members
     each shall be from the Scheduled Castes and the
     Scheduled Tribes, three from Other Backward
     Classes including Socially and Educationally
     Backward      Classes   and    two   from   Women
     members, so that among each of the said
     Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
     Backward      Classes    including   Socially   and
     Educationally     Backward Classes of members
     there shall be one woman.
(e)  In the case of an Apex Society, three members
     each shall be from the Scheduled Casts and the
     Scheduled Tribes, four from other Backward
     Classes including Socially and Educationally
     Backward Classes and          three from Women
     members, so that among           each of the said
     Scheduled      Castes   and     Scheduled     Tribes
     members, there shall be one woman and among
     the Other Backward Classes including        Socially
     and Educationally Backward Classes members,
     there shall be two women.
Provided that, save as provided in the aforesaid
clauses there will be no bar for the members belonging
to the said reserved categories to contest the election
against the remaining seats in the Managing

                            16
Committee of the Primary, Central and Apex Co-
operative Societies.
(f)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this Sub-
     section - (i)   in the event   of the  seats in the
     Committee     reserved    for  Women,    Scheduled
     Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward
     Classes    remaining unfilled in any election of a
     Primary Central or Apex Society, the Committee
     of the Society shall co-opt., the required number
     of such categories of members from among the
     members of the Society or, where the required
     number of such categories of members is not
     available for such co-option, the Committee shall
     co-opt the required number of members from
     amongst the members of the Society belonging to
     any category to fill up such seats, and for the
     purpose of making such co-option, the vacancies
     in the unfilled seats reserved for the said
     categories shall not    invalidate the Constitution
     or functioning of the Committee, if otherwise it
     would be having a quorum.
     (ii)   the terms of office of every such co-opted
     member shall be co-terminus with the          other
     members of the Committee;
      (iii)  [***]
(g)  (i)    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
     contained in this Act, Rules and Bye-laws, the
     Committee(which shall include a preliminary
     Committee) of every Primary Society, Central
     Society and Apex Society existing immediately

                        17
before the date of commencement of the Orissa
Co-operative     Societies    (Amendment)Act,      2001
shall stand dissolved with        effect from the said
date and the members including            the President
and the Vice-President of every such Committee
shall be deemed to have vacated their offices on
that     date,   and where, on the date of such
commencement, the management of any such
society continues to vest in the Registrar, the
proceedings      or   actions    taken,    if any,   for
constitution of the Committee thereof shall stand
cancelled;
(ii)      the management of every society, the
Committee of which is so dissolved or which so
continues to vest in the Registrar, shall vest or,
as the case may be, shall so continue to vest in
the Registrar, and the Registrar or a Committee
nominated by him from amongst the members of
the society, or a member society affiliated to it or
a society affiliated to such member society, as far
as practicable representing in Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and
Women, shall manage the affairs of the society
and take all      or any policy decision including
admission of members in relation to the society
till the Committee is constituted in accordance
with the provisions of this act;
(iii)   every Society referred to in Sub-clause (ii)
shall amend its bye-laws as may be necessary, so
as    to   bring   them    in   conformity    with  the

                                            18
                   provisions of this Act as amended by the Orissa
                   Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2001
                   and    reconstitute    the    Committee    within   six
                   months from the date of commencement of the
                   said Act; and
                   (iv)  in the event of      any   Society failing to so
                   amend       its  bye-laws     and   reconstitute   the
                   Committee within        the period specified in sub-
                   clause    (iii), the  Registrar   shall  make     such
                   amendment and reconstitute the             Committee
                   within [seventy-five months] following the date of
                   expiry of the period so specified.”
7.           After the amendment clauses (b), (c),(d), (e), (f) and (g) of sub-
section (2) of Section 28 read as follows:
              “(b) In the case of a Large-sized Adivasi Multipurpose
                    Co-operative Society, in the total number of
                    elected members of the Committee, there shall
                    be representation from among the members
                    belonging to the Scheduled Tribes, which shall
                    be   proportional    to    the  ratio  between    the
                    members belonging to the Scheduled Tribes and
                    the total number of members of the said
                    Society, so however        that the said scheduled
                    Tribe representation shall also include woman
                    members whose number shall be proportional to
                    the    ratio    between     the  woman       members
                    belonging to the Scheduled Tribes and the total

                           19
      number of the members belonging to the said
      Scheduled Tribes. .
Provided that the offices of the President and Vice-
President shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes.
Explanation - The principle for determining whether
a society is a large sized Adivasi Multipurpose Co-
operative Society or not shall be such as may be
prescribed.
(c)  In the case of a Primary Society        other than
     Large-sized Adivasi Multipurpose Co-operative
     Society in the total number of elected members
     of the Committee, there shall be representation
     from among the members belonging to the
     Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the
     Other Backward Classes including Socially and
     Educationally Backward Classes and the Women
     which shall be proportional to the ratio between
     the members      belonging to each said category
     and the total number of members of the said
     society,  so   that  among     each  of   the  said
     Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other
     Backward     Classes   including    Socially   and
     Educationally Backward Classes of members,
     there shall be representation of woman which
     shall be proportional to the ratio between the
     woman members belonging to each said category
     and the total number         of members of that
     category.
(d)  In the case of a Central Society, in the total
     number of elected members of the Committee,

                         20
    there shall be representation from among the
    members belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
    Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes
    including  Socially and Educationally Backward
    Classes   and    the  Women     which   shall   be
    proportional to the ratio between the members
    belonging to each said category and the total
    number of members of the Electoral College
    referred to in clause (ii-a) of sub-section (1) of
    Section   28-A, so that among each of the said
    Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
    Other Backward Classes including Socially and
    Educationally Backward Classes of members,
    there shall be representation of woman which
    shall be proportional to the ratio   between the
    woman members belonging to each said category
    in the said     Electoral College and the total
    number of members       of that  category in that
    Electoral College.
(e) In the case of an Apex Society,      in the total
    number of elected members of the Committee,
    there shall be representation from among the
    members belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the
    Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes
    including  Socially and Educationally Backward
    Classes   and    the  Women     which   shall   be
    proportional to the ratio between the members
    belonging to each said category and the total
    number of members of the Electoral College
    referred to in clause (ii-a) of sub-section (1) of
    Section   28-A, so that among each of the said

                            21
      Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the
      Other Backward Classes including Socially and
      Educationally Backward Classes of members,
      there shall be representation of woman which
      shall be proportional to the ratio    between the
      woman members belonging to each said category
      in the said     Electoral College and the total
      number of members        of that  category in that
      Electoral College.
Provided that, save as provided in the aforesaid
clauses there will be no bar for the members belonging
to the said reserved categories to contest the election
against the remaining seats in the Managing
Committee of the Primary, Central and Apex Co-
operative Societies.
Provided further that there shall be at lest one
representation from each said reserved category, if
any.
(f)  Notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-
section –
(i)  in the event     of the    seats in the Committee
     reserved    for    Women,      Scheduled    Castes,
     Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes
     including   Socially and Educationally Backward
     Classes remain unfilled in any election of a
     Primary Central or Apex Society, the Committee of
     the Society shall co-opt., the required number of
     such categories of members from among the
     members of the Primary Society, or as the case
     may be from among the members of the Electoral
     College of the Central or Apex Society, and for the
     purpose of making such co-option, the vacancies

                              22
     in the     unfilled  seats reserved for      the   said
     categories shall not invalidate the Constitution or
     functioning of the Committee, if otherwise it
     would be having a quorum.
(ii) the terms of office of every such co-opted member
     shall be co-terminus with the other members of
     the Committee;
(f)   (i) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
      contained in this Act, Rules and Bye-laws, the
      Committee(which shall include a preliminary
      Committee) of every Primary Society, Central
      Society and Apex Society existing immediately
      before the date of commencement of the Orissa
      Co-operative     Societies  (Amendment)Act,      2011
      shall stand dissolved with     effect from the said
      date and the members including         the President
      and the Vice-President of every such Committee
      shall be deemed to have vacated their offices on
      that   date,     and where, on the date of such
      commencement, the management of any such
      society continues to vest in the Registrar, the
      proceedings      or  actions  taken,    if  any,   for
      constitution of the Committee thereof shall stand
      cancelled;
(ii)   the management of every society, the Committee
       of which is so dissolved or which so continues
       to vest in the Registrar, shall vest or, as the case
       may be, shall so continue to vest in the
       Registrar, and the Registrar or a Committee
       nominated by him from amongst the members of
       the society, or a member society affiliated to it or

                                          23
                    a society affiliated to such member society, as
                    far as practicable representing in Scheduled
                    Castes,   Scheduled     Tribes, Other   Backward
                    Classes and Women, shall manage the affairs of
                    the society and take all or any policy decision
                    including admission of members in relation to
                    the society till the Committee is constituted in
                    accordance with the provisions of this act;
             (iii)  every Society referred to in Sub-clause (ii) shall
                    amend its bye-laws, as may be necessary, so as
                    to bring them in conformity with the provisions
                    of this Act as amended by the Orissa Co-
                    operative Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011 and
                    reconstitute the Committee within six months
                    from the date of commencement of the said Act;
                    and
             (iv)   in the event of any Society failing to so amend
                    its bye-laws and reconstitute the Committee
                    within   the period specified in sub-clause (iii),
                    the Registrar shall make such amendment and
                    reconstitute the Committee within six months
                    following   the date of expiry of the period so
                    specified.”
                     In Section 28-A of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for
clause (ii), the following clauses shall be substituted namely:-
             (ii)                Other members of the Committee of
                    a Primary Society shall be elected in such
                    manner by and from among the General Body of

                                        24
                    members of the Society qualified for the purpose
                    organized into such different constituencies as
                    may be prescribed.
              (ii-a) Other members of the Committee of a Central
                    Society and an Apex Society shall be elected in
                    such manner by and from among the qualified
                    members of the Electoral College formed in such
                    manner     organized    into    such     different
                    constituencies as may be prescribed.”
8.    Thus the provision for reservation as it stood prior to amendment is
that the committee of an Apex Society shall constitute twenty one members
whereas the Committee of a Central Society will be fifteen members including
the President and Vice-President.      Similarly, the Committee of a Primary
Society shall consist of 15 members including the President and Vice-
President. There is no change in this number.      However, the legislature has
sought to amend the procedure of reservation of the members of the
Committee. Previously it was fixed in the sense for every primary society
there should be     two members each from Scheduled Caste and Scheduled
Tribe, three from Other Backward Classes and two Women members, so
that among each of the said Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and
Other Backward Classes there shall be one woman.
            In case of Central Society two members each from Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes, three from Other Backward Classes, two from
Women members, so that among each of the said Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, there shall be one woman.

                                          25
             In case of    Apex Society,       three members each from        the
Scheduled     Castes and    the Scheduled Tribes, four from Other Backward
Classes and three women members, so that among each of the said
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes categories,
there shall be two women.     This provision has been done away with. Instead
the legislature has introduced the concept of proportional representation.     In
other words in place of fixed number of members from Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes, the amending provision provides that the members
representing    the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward
Classes and women shall be proportional to the number of such persons in
the members of the society.
             This section also aimed at dissolving all the Committees existing
on the date of the Amendment Act came into force and the management of
the society vest with the Registrar, who was to manage the Co-operative
Society himself, or nominate a Committee from amongst the members of the
Co-operative Society or       affiliated   society, who shall be representing
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and women
to continue to manage the society.       There is also stipulation that the rule
shall be accordingly amended by         each  society within   six months failing
which     the Registrar shall make       such amendment       within six months
thereafter.
9.     Section 28-A of the principal Act provides for election of members of the
Committee. Sub-section (1) of clause (i) provides that the President of the

                                        26
Committee of every Society shall be indirectly elected, in the manner
prescribed, by and from among the members of the Committee.
      As the provision originally stood clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of Section
28-A provided that other members of the Committee shall be elected in the
prescribed manner and from among the General Body of members of the
Society qualified for the purpose so however that, where the membership of
the   Society is required to be organized into different      constituencies in
accordance with its Bye-laws, only the members belonging to any such
constituency    shall  elect  the  members    of  the     Committee     for  that
constituency. This provision has been substituted by the following:
              (ii)              Other members of the Committee of
                    a Primary Society shall be      elected in such
                    manner by and from among the General Body of
                    members of the Society qualified for the purpose
                    organized into such different constituencies as
                    may be prescribed.
              (ii-a)Other members of the Committee of a Central
                    Society and an Apex Society shall be elected in
                    such manner by and from among the qualified
                    members of the Electoral College formed in such
                    manner     organized    into    such     different
                    constituencies as may be prescribed.”
                    These amending provisions introduced that the members of
the Committee of Central Society and the Apex Society shall be elected by

                                           27
and from among the qualified members of the Electoral College formed in
such manner organized into different constituencies as may be prescribed.
Thus, the concept of Electoral College and its power of electing different
members of the Committee has been introduced.
10.           In assailing the constitutional validity of the Act as well as the
Administrative action, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners have
contended that the act is passed with mala fide intention, it is arbitrary and
that it is a colourable piece of legislation.        Learned counsel also have
submitted that Amendment Act              is in conflict with the provision   of
Constitution of India. The Statement and object of the said Act is to increase
the representation of the Weaker Section of the Society namely, Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes, but in effect it may
have the result of reducing the representation of these Weaker Sections. It is
further contended that the amendment is unworkable as the deeming
memberships have been deleted.       It is also contended that as the Act do not
define the Electoral College and same is left to the discretion of the State
Executive, it has resulted in excess delegation of the legislative function of
the     legislature and, therefore,      is invalid.    Learned counsel for the
petitioners also contend that the action of the Registrar in dissolving ninety
three societies out of seven thousand in a single day without following any
procedure or without proper exercise is arbitrary and is liable to be set aside.
Such an act is challenged on the ground of non-application of mind also.

                                         28
11.    Learned Advocate General, on the other hand, submitted that the
intention of legislature is irrelevant, if it has the competence to legislate on
the subject it has passed the legislation.     Colourable exercise of legislation
relates only to the competence of the legislature and it cannot be pressed
into service to decide an Act to be colourable piece of legislation depending
upon the intention of the legislature.     Secondly, it is submitted that malice
cannot imputed on legislature while legislating any Act. Learned Advocate
General also submitted that the Act was necessary in view of the fact that the
principle adopted by the State to give proportional representation to the
Weaker Sections instead of giving reservation by a fixed member. Negating
the contention of excessive delegation, it has been argued by the State that
there are parameters in the       Act itself to show that there     has been no
unbridled and unguided delegation of power to the executive and, therefore,
the Act should be held to be valid.
12.    Coming to the first contention of the Act being a colourable piece of
legislation, reliance has been placed by both the sides on K.C. Gajapati
Narayan Deo and others v. State of Orissa; A.I.R. 1953 S.C. 375, wherein
a constitution bench of the Supreme Court has examined the constitutional
validity of the Orissa Estate Abolition Act and laid down the principles when
an Act can be called a colourable piece of legislation. At paragraph-9 of the
judgment appearing at Page 379 the Hon’ble Supreme Court made it clear at
the outset that the doctrine of colourable legislation does not       involve any
question of ‘bona fides’ or ‘mala fides’ on the part of the legislature.      The

                                         29
whole doctrine resolves itself into the question of competency of a particular
legislature to enact a particular law. If the legislature is competent to pass a
particular law, the motives which impelled it to act are really irrelevant. On
the other hand, if the legislature lacks competency, the question of motive
does not arise at all.   A distinction, however, exists between a legislature
which is legally omnipotent like the British Parliament and the laws
promulgated by which could not be challenged on the ground of in
competency, and a legislature which enjoys only a limited or a qualified
jurisdiction.
              The Hon’ble Supreme Court further held in the said case that if
the constitution of a State divided the legislative powers amongst different
bodies, which have to act within their respective spheres marked out by
specific legislative entries, or if there are limitations on the legislative
authority in the     shape of fundamental rights, questions do arise as to
whether the legislature in a particular case has or has not, in respect to the
subject matter of the statute or in the method of enacting it, transgressed the
limits of its constitutional powers. Such transgression may be patent,
manifest or direct, but it may also be disguised, covert and indirect and it is
to this later class of cases that the expression “colourable legislation” has
been applied in certain judicial pronouncements. The idea conveyed by the
expression is that although     apparently a legislature in passing a statute
purported to act within the limits of its powers, yet in substance and in
reality it transgressed these powers, the transgression being veiled by what
appears, on proper examination, to be a mere pretence or disguise.

                                         30
              The Hon’ble Supreme Court further held that       in other words, it
is the substance of the Act that is material and not merely the form or
outward appearance, and if the subject matter in substance is something
which is beyond the powers of that legislature to legislate upon, the form in
which the law is clothed would not save it from condemnation. The legislature
cannot violate the constitutional prohibitions by employing an indirect
method.       In cases like these, the enquiry must always be as to the true
nature and character of the challenged legislation and it is the result of such
investigation and not the form alone that will determine as to whether or not
it relates to a subject which is within the powers of the legislative authority.
13.    Subsequently in Gullapalli Nageswara Rao and others v. Andhra
Pradesh State       Road Transport Corporation and another; A.I.R. 1959
Supreme Court       308, a constitutional Bench of the      Supreme Court      has
approved the principle enunciated in the case of       K.C. Gajapati Narayan
Deo (supra).      At page 316 in the last sub-paragraph of Paragraph-7 the
Supreme Court summarized the law on the subject. The Hon’ble Supreme
Court held that the legislature can only make laws within its legislative
competence. Its legislative field may be circumscribed by specific legislative
entries or limited by Fundamental Rights created by the Constitution. The
legislature cannot over-step the field of its competency, directly or indirectly.
The Court will scrutinize the law to ascertain whether the legislature by
device purports to make a law which, though in form appears to be within its

                                         31
sphere, in effect and substance, reaches beyond it.        If in fact, it has power to
make the law, its motives in making the law are irrelevant.
14.          The Hon’ble Supreme Court in State of Kerala                 Vs. Peoples
Union for Civil Liberties, Kerala State Unit; (2009)8 SCC 46 has examined
the concept of colourable legislation. The Hon’ble Supreme Court also quoted
with approval the aforesaid case of K.C. Gajapati Narayan Deo(supra) and
host other cases and has come to the following conclusions:-
             (a)  The substance of the impugned Act must be looked
                  at to determine whether it is in pith and substance
                  within a particular entry whatever its ancillary
                  effect may be.
             (b)  Where the encroachment is ostensibly ancillary but
                  in truth beyond the competence of the enacting
                  authority, the statute will be a colourable piece of
                  legislation  and   constitutionally     invalid.    If  the
                  statute is legislatively competent the enquiry into
                  the motive which persuaded the Parliament or the
                  State Legislature into passing the Act is irrelevant.
             (c)  Apart    from   passing    the     test    of   legislative
                  competency, the Act must be otherwise legally valid
                  and    would   also   have   to    pass     the   test   of
                  constitutionality in the sense that it cannot be in
                  violation of the provisions of the Constitution nor
                  can it operate extraterritorially.

                                          32
          Thereafter the Hon’ble Supreme Court has opined that doctrine of
colourable    legislation is strictly  confined to the    question of legislative
competence of the      State Legislature to enact a statute and whenever      the
rights conferred upon a class of persons including the protected class were
statutory in nature, they cannot be categorised as plainly constitutional
rights.   It is one thing to say that some rights are constitutional in
nature/origin being part of the expansive regime of Article 21, but it would
not be correct to raise the same to the exalted status of constitutional rights.
A right which primarily flows from a statute, cannot claim its constitutional
pedigree to become a constitutional threshold, against which constitutionality
of a statute can be tested. It is trite that a right which may be conferred by a
statute can also be taken away by another.
             In the aforesaid case the Hon’ble Supreme Court further held
that in the event of a statute being held within the ambit of the legislative
competence of the State Legislature, could be declared ultra vires only on the
premise that it is violative of the provisions of Part III of the Constitution of
India or any other provisions but not on the ground of colourable exercise of
power or mala fide on the part of the legislature.       The object, purpose or
design should be taken into consideration for the purpose of examining the
constitutionality     on the touchstone of the provisions of Part III of the
Constitution of India and not otherwise.
15.            In this light an examination of Articles 245 and 246 of the
Constitution of India reveal that Article 245 provides for extent of laws made
by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States. It provides that subject to

                                          33
the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament may make laws for the whole or
any part of the territory of India, and the Legislature of a State may make
laws for the whole or any part of the State.     Article 246, clause (1) provides
that notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament
has exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of the matters
enumerated in List I of the Seventh Schedule. Clause (2) of the said Article
provides that notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament and, subject
to clause (1), the Legislature of any State also, have power to make laws with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule
which is referred to as the Concurrent List. In Clause-3 of Article 246 the
legislature of the State has exclusive power to make laws for such State with
respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II, i.e. the State List. Entry
32 of the State list contains among others, Co-operative Societies.      Thus, the
State legislature is competent to legislate law relating to Co-operative
Societies.
            The other aspects of the contention raised by the learned counsels
whether it is violative of any provisions of the constitution or it breaches any
fundamental right as guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution of India is to
be considered. Firstly, it is argued that the Act is arbitrary in nature and,
therefore, is violative of Article 14 of the Indian Constitution.   It is trite that
anything arbitrary or without any reasonable basis is violative of the
principles enunciated in Article 14 of the Indian Constitution. In this
backdrop an examination of the statement and objects for which the Act has
been passed will show the reason for which the Act has been enacted. The

                                          34
statement of objects and reasons of the Act provides that the Government
as a matter of        policy,    is committed     to suitably    provide for the
representations to the weaker sections, namely, Schedule Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes including Socially and Educationally
Backward Classes and Women for their effective participation in the
management of the Co-operative Societies which functions, generally, in a
three tier structure with the Primary at the base level, the Central at the
middle and the Apex Societies at the top.
           It is further stated in the said statement of objects that the existing
provisions of deemed membership of the elected and co-opted members of
the Primaries, Central and Apex Societies, by virtue of which these members
can become members of the Central and            Apex Societies automatically, is
against the principle of voluntary membership in the Co-operative Societies.
So it is necessary to do away with the system of deemed membership , to
bring the provisions of the Act in harmony with the principle of voluntarism
in Cooperatives.
            It is further stated that the members of the Central and Apex
Societies which also include the deemed members, representing the Primary
Societies, constitute the voters of such Central and Apex Societies. Since the
deemed membership provision is proposed to be deleted, such Central and
Apex Societies need to        have Electoral Colleges     for elections to their
Committees in order to provide adequate and suitable representation to the
aforesaid weaker sections in such Central and Apex Societies.

                                          35
            It is further stated that as the term of the office of the Committee
of Management of the Cooperative Societies is four years where as that of the
elected bodies like the Panchayati Raj Institutions, Urban Local Bodies etc. is
five years.   In order to have uniformity, the terms office of the Committee of
Societies was proposed to be enhanced to five years.
            The existing provisions of the Orissa      Cooperative Societies Act,
1962 provides for caste-based reservation in the Committee of the Primary,
Central and Apex Societies with fixed number of seats reserved for each
categories of Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Other Backward Classes
including Socially and Educationally Backward Classes                and Women
irrespective of the number of members of such categories in the Society. In
order to have suitable and adequate representation of different categories of
weaker section of members in the Committee of Societies, it was proposed to
have representations of such categories on proportionate basis, i.e.,
proportional to their numbers in the Societies.
            The statement of objects further      reveals that    in view of the
proposed changes incorporating the policy of proportionate representation of
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Other Backward Classes including
Socially and Educationally Backward Classes and Women members in the
Committee of Primary, Central and Apex Societies, the Committees of all such
Cooperative Societies, which were contrary to the above policy, need to be
dissolved and the management of such societies vested with the Registrar of
Cooperative Societies who may manage the affairs by himself of nominate a
Committee with representation of Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Other

                                       36
Backward Classes including Socially and Educationally Backward Classes
and Women members of the Society or member of Society affiliated to it or a
Society affiliated to such member Society.
            Thus, it is stated with a view to having uniform and proper
representation of Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Other Backward Classes
including Socially and Educationally Backward Classes and Women to the
Committee of the Societies proportionate to their numbers in the Society, the
General Body of Members of the ‘Electoral College’ in the case of Central and
Apex Societies need to be organized into different constituencies as would be
required for the purpose. Hence changes were sought to be made            in the
existing provisions of the Act.
            The Act, therefore, was passed by the Legislature and it received
the assent of the Governor and then it was notified on 24th September, 2011
that   24th September, 2011 is the    date on which the Orissa Co-operative
Societies (Amendment) Act, 2011 came into force.
16.           Thus, keeping in view the aforesaid objective, it is to be decided
whether the object to be achieved is achievable by such an amendment.        Mr.
S.K.Padhi, learned Senior counsel for the petitioner in one of the cases,
argued that if such an amendment is enforced, then it will have an
anomalous impact on the representation in view of the fact that in certain
Societies the representation of the weaker sections may become insignificant.
In fact he has given the data regarding two Urban Cooperative Banks, which
are Primary Societies, viz., Cuttack Urban Cooperative Bank Ltd. and
Rourkela Urban Cooperative Bank Ltd. and demonstrated that the percentage

                                        37
of reservation of the weaker section has drastically reduced from the existing
reservation of fixed numbers.
              However, learned Advocate General submitted it was never the
intention of the Legislature to increase the reservation of seats in favour of
weaker sections. It is, as stated in the statement and object, to give adequate
and suitable representation to the weaker section of the society.   However by
picking one   or two cases, it cannot be taken as a general rule that in all
cases such a reservation by       proportional representation    of the weaker
section shall only    decrease. In certain cases, it may increase. So the
argument that the Amendment Act will in fact have a negative impact and
will not achieve the result, it is seeking to achieve is erroneous and cannot
be upheld.
17.          Mr. Pitambar Acharya, learned counsel for the petitioner, in
course of argument has submitted that the Act is unworkable in the sense
that the concept ‘deemed members’ has been deleted and, therefore, who
shall became the members of the Central and Apex Co-operative Societies.
This view is also erroneous in view of the fact the Amendment Act provides
for an Electoral College, which is to be constituted, as may be prescribed by
the Rules. Such     Electoral College will constitute members from whom the
members of the Central and Apex Co-operative Societies shall be elected.      It
is unacceptable that the amendment sought is unworkable and cannot be
implemented. We have already noticed that the intention of the Legislature in
enacting a particular statute on a subject, in which it has the competence, is

                                         38
irrelevant. Thus, the argument that the Amendment Act has been passed
with mala fide intention is of no avail to the petitioners.
18.          The other question that remains to be seen is whether the Act is
violative of any of the provisions of Part III of the Constitution of India. It is
submitted that in addition to violation of Article 14 it also violate Article 19(1)
(c) of the Constitution of India. Article 19(1)(c) provides for the fundamental
right to form associations and unions.
             In DHARAM DUTT AND OTHERS                V. UNION OF INDIA AND
OTHERS; (2004) 1 Supreme Court Cases 712, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
relying upon Maneka Gandhi V. Union of India and another; (1978) 1
SCC 248 and All India Bank Employees Association; AIR 1962 SC 171,
has held that a right to form associations or unions does not include within
its ken as a fundamental right a right to form associations or unions for
achieving a particular object or running a particular institution, the same
being    a concomitant or concomitant to a        concomitant of a fundamental
right, but not the fundamental right itself. The associations or unions of
citizens cannot further claim as a fundamental right that they must also be
able to achieve the purpose for which they have come into existence so that
any interference with such achievement by law shall be unconstitutional,
unless the same could be justified under Article 19(4) as being a restriction
imposed in the interest of public order or morality. At paragraph-28, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court further held that a right to form unions guaranteed
by Article 19(1)(c) does not carry with a fundamental right in the union so

                                        39
formed to achieve every object for which it was formed with the legal
consequence that any legislation not falling within clause (4) of Article 19
may in any way hamper the fulfilment of those objects, should be declared
unconstitutional and void. Thus, the rights guaranteed under Article 19(1)(c)
also do not include within its ambit the right to manage the Society in a
particular way. Hence, the Amendment Act, especially Section 28(2)(g)(ii),
cannot be said to be violating the Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution.
19.          The provisions of the Amendment Act have been criticized as
being arbitrary and, therefore, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of
India. Before examining the validity of an Act passed by the Legislation within
its competence, it is proper to take into account the various judicial
pronouncements and to examine the role of Court vis-à-vis the powers of
Legislature to enact any law.
             In Government of Andhra Pradesh Vs. Smt. P. Laxmi Devi;
(2008) 4 SCC 720, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that the Court must
always remember that invalidating a statute is a grave step, and must
therefore be taken in very rare and exceptional circumstances. The Hon’ble
Supreme Court further added while performing their duties, the Judges must
take care not to intrude upon the domain of the other branches of
Government. Full and free play must be permitted to that wide margin of
considerations which address themselves only to the practical judgment of a
legislative body. Legislation could be held unconstitutional only when those
who have the right to make laws have not merely made a mistake(in the sense

                                        40
of apparently breaching a constitutional provision) but have made a very clear
one, so clear that it is not open to rational question.   The judicial veto is to
be exercised only in cases that leave no room for reasonable doubt. This rule
recognizes that, having regard to the great, complex ever-unfolding exigencies
of Government, much of which will seem unconstitutional to one man, or
body of men, may reasonably not seem so to another; that the Constitution
often admits of different interpretations; that there is often a range of choice
and judgment; that in such case the Constitution does not impose upon the
legislature any one specific opinion, but leaves open this range of choice; and
that whatever choice is not clearly in violation of a constitutional provision is
valid even if the Court thinks it unwise or undesirable. The Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the said case quoted Prof. Thayer and held that a Court can declare
a statute to be unconstitutional not merely because it is possible to hold this
view, but only when that is the only possible view not open to rational
question.   In  other   words,  the   Court   can   declare  a   statute  to   be
unconstitutional only when there can be no manner of doubt that it is
flagrantly unconstitutional, and there is no way of avoiding such decision.
The philosophy behind this view is that there is broad separation of powers
under the Constitution, and the three organs of the State the legislature, the
executive and the judiciary, must respect each other and must not ordinarily
encroach into each other’s domain.     Also the judiciary must realize that the
legislature is a democratically elected body which expresses the will of the
people, and in a democracy this will is not to be lightly frustrated or
obstructed. At paragraph-44 the Hon’ble Supreme Court further held that if

                                         41
two views are possible, one making the statute constitutional and the other
making it unconstitutional, the former view must always be preferred.        Also
the Court must take very effort to uphold the constitutional validity of a
statute, even if that requires giving a strained construction or narrowing
down its scope.      Also it is none of the concern of the Court whether the
legislation in its opinion is wise or unwise.
            In STATE OF       A.P. AND OTHERS Vs. MCDOWELL & CO. AND
OTHERS; (1996) 3 Supreme Court Cases 709, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
held that the power of Parliament or for that matter, the State Legislatures
is restricted in two ways. A law made by the Parliament or the Legislature
can be struck down by Courts on two grounds and two grounds alone, viz.,
lack of legislative competence and violation of any of the fundamental rights
guaranteed in Part-III of the Constitution or of any other constitutional
provision. There is no third ground.       In other words, if an enactment is
challenged as violative of Article 14, it can be struck down only if it is found
that it is violative of the equality clause/equal protection clause enshrined
therein.   No enactment can be struck down by just saying that it is arbitrary
or unreasonable.      Some or other the constitutional infirmity has to be found
before invalidating an Act.      An enactment cannot be struck down on the
ground that Court thinks it unjustified. The Parliament and the Legislature
composed as they are of the representatives of the people, are supposed to
know and be aware of the needs of the people and what is good and bad for
them. The Court cannot sit in judgment over their wisdom.

                                         42
            Similar view has been expressed in Greater Bombay Co-operative
Bank Ltd. Vs. United Yarn Tex. Pvt. Ltd.; (2007) 6 SCC 236. The Hon’ble
Supreme Court in that case has held that the constitutional validity of an Act
can be challenged only on two grounds, viz., lack of legislative competence
and violation of any of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed in Part III of the
Constitution or of any other constitutional provision. There is no third ground
on    the basis of which the law made by the competent legislature can be
invalidated and that the ground of invalidation must necessarily fall within
the four corners of the aforementioned two grounds. In the said case, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court quoting State of Bihar & Ors. V. Bihar Distillery
Ltd. & Ors (1997) 2 SCC 453 held that the approach of the court, while
examining the challenge to the constitutionality of an enactment, is to start
with the presumption of constitutionality. The court should try to sustain its
validity to the extent possible. It should strike down the enactment only when
it is not possible to sustain it. The court should not approach the enactment
with a view to pick holes or to search for defects of drafting, much less
inexactitude of language employed.
            In Uadi Singh Dagar Vs. Union of India; (2007) 10 SCC 306, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that          the  validity  of  a statute would
ordinarily be tested keeping in view the social conditions as were existing on
the date of coming into force thereof. It is one thing to say that a law causes
hardship to a section of the people but it is another thing to say that the
same would be unconstitutional. It may be that with the passage of time, a
statute which was intra vires on the date of coming into force of the Act may

                                         43
be considered to be ultra vires.    However, for that there should be sufficient
materials which are either brought on record or of which the court can take
judicial notice.   The difficulty would arise where the materials brought on
record may provide for divergent views. In such a situation, the court will not
ordinarily exercise its power of judicial review over legislation.   The facts on
the basis whereof the Legislature of a State or the Parliament had chosen to
rely upon     should be the guiding factor. The Legislature can have several
choices or options to deal with a matter, and courts cannot say which choice
or option should have been preferred.
20.           In applying these principles to the present case, we find that the
proposal of proportionate representation of the weaker section of the people in
the committee constituted for management of the Co-operative Societies may
look unreasonable to some people, but in this regard though there are two
views possible, the view which is in favour of the constitutional validity of the
Act has to be adopted by the Court. It is well established that in this case,
the two grounds on which constitutional validity can be challenged, i.e. lack
of legislative competence and violation of any of the Fundamental Rights
provided in Part III or any other constitutional provision are singularly
lacking. This brings us to the submission that the legislature has abdicated
its legislative power to the executive by delegating the authority to frame rules
for the purpose of creating Electoral College. Some of the counsel called it
excessive delegation and, therefore, argued that the Act should be declared as
invalid.

                                         44
21.           It is argued that the expression “as may be prescribed” appearing
in the amended Section 28-A of sub-section (1) clause (ii) has left the
executive with a      unbridled   and uncanalized power to     frame   the rules
regarding the constitution of the Electoral College that would elect the
members      of the committee to manage       different  Central and Apex Co-
operative Societies. Our attention was drawn to Section 134 (1) of the Act
which vests the power with the State Government to make rules to carry out
the purpose of the Act. Sub-section (2) of Section 134 of the Act prescribes
that all rules made under this Section shall as soon as they are made be laid
before the State Legislature for a period of fourteen days        which may be
comprised in one or more sessions and shall be                subject to such
modifications as the Legislature may make therein during the said period.
This provision has been heavily relied upon by the State to counter the
argument that there has been excessive delegation of legislative power. It is
submitted that though the legislature has delegated the power to prescribe
Electoral College and its constituents etc. there are provisions within the Act
itself to control that power.
            Such question has been considered by the constitutional Bench of
the Supreme Court decision in Jyoti Pershad Vrs. Administration of U.T.
of Delhi; AIR 1961 SC 1602.        At paragraph-17, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
held that in the context of modern conditions and the variety and complexity
of the situations which present themselves for solution, it is not possible for
the Legislature to envisage in detail every possibility and make provision for
them. The Legislature, therefore, is forced to leave the authorities created by

                                         45
it an ample discretion limited, however, by the guidance afforded by the Act.
This is the ratio of delegated legislation, and is a process which has come to
stay and which one may be permitted to observe is not without its
advantages. So long, therefore, as the legislature indicates, in the operative
provisions of the statute with certainly, the policy and purpose of the
enactment, the mere fact that the legislation is skeletal, or the fact that a
discretion is left to those entrusted with administering the law, affords no
basis either for the contention that there has been an excessive delegation of
legislative power as to amount to an abdication of its functions, or that the
discretion vested is uncanalised and unguided as to amount a carte blanche
to discriminate.     The second is that if the power or discretion has been
conferred in a manner which is legal and constitutional, the fact that
parliament could possibly have made more detailed provisions, could
obviously not be a ground for invalidating the law.
            Thus, it is clear that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that if
the statute itself in the operative provisions has with certainty provided for
the policy and the purpose of enactment, the mere fact that the legislation is
skeletal, the delegated power of legislation cannot be called uncanalised and
unguided.
22.          In the present case the amendment has made it ample clear that
there   should    be   voluntarism   of  association  for  which   the  deemed
memberships have been deleted. Secondly, there is principle of proportional
representation of the     weaker sections.   The principal Act also provides for

                                         46
the Co-operative principles in Schedule II of the Act. These are the guidelines
with certainties within which the executive has to work while prescribing the
mode of constitution of the Electoral College.      Therefore though there has
been a delegation of the legislative function by the legislature on the
executive, it cannot be held that it is unbridled, or uncanalized, or unguided.
23.         As far as Section 134 of the Act is concerned, similar provision has
been examined by the Supreme Court in Quarry Owners’ Association Vrs.
State of Bihar and others; (2000) 8 SCC 655, wherein at paragraph-45 the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that Parliament through its wisdom, apart
from the above brought the concerned amendment also to keep a check on
the exercise of power by the State Government as delegate. The question is
whether mere lying of rules and notifications before the legislature can be
construed as a check on the State Government’s power. The Hon’ble Supreme
Court went on to add that where any document, rule or notification requires
placement before any House or when placed, the said House inherently gets
the jurisdiction over the same,      each member of the House, subject to its
procedure, gets the right to discuss the same, they may put questions to the
Ministry concerned.     Irrespective of the fact that such rules or notifications
may not be under the purview of its modification, such members may seek
explanation from such Ministry of their inaction, arbitrariness, transgressing
limits of their statutory orbits on any such other matter. Short of modification
power it has a right even to condemn the Ministry.          The Supreme Court
thereafter held that no doubt, in the case where the house is entrusted with

                                        47
power to annul, modify or approve any rule, it plays a positive role and has
full control over it, but even where the matter is merely placed before any
House, its positive control over the executive makes even mere laying to play
a very vital and forceful role which keeps a check over the State Government
concerned.
24.          In the case at hand, the situation is still better in the sense that
not only the rule has to be placed before the legislature as soon as they are
made, but also the legislature has the power to modify the rules. Therefore, it
cannot be said that delegation of      legislative power to the executive has
resulted in abdication      of the powers of the legislative assembly and,
therefore, should be declared invalid.
25.          Viewed in a different angle, it is seen that the power has been
delegated to the executive itself, who is responsible for bringing in the
Amendment Act to the floor of the legislation.         In a similar matter the
Supreme Court in Arun Tewari and others v. Zila             Mansavi Shikshak
Sangh and others; AIR 1998 SUPREME COURT 331 has held that the power
to frame   these criteria and procedure is not delegated to any subordinate
authority. The very authority which framed the original Rules is delegated
the power to frame special rules prescribing criteria and procedure in specific
circumstances in consultation with the General administration Department.
The fact that the power of delegation is to be exercised by the State
Government itself is a safeguard against the abuse of this power of
delegation.

                                       48
26.            Similar view has been taken in Quarry Owners’ Association
(supra),  the Hon’ble Supreme Court       has held that    in a  Parliamentary
democracy every act of the Stat Government        is accountable to its people
through State Legislature which itself is an additional factor which keeps
the State Government under check not to act arbitrarily or unreasonably.
When a policy is clearly laid down in a statute with reference to the minor
minerals with main object under the Act being for its conservation and
development, coupled with various other provisions to the Act guiding it,
checking it and controlling it then how such delegation could be said to be
unbridled. Delegation coupled with a policy direction is good.
27.         Thus, in view of the aforesaid discussion, we come to the
conclusion that there has been no excessive delegation giving unbridled,
uncanalized    and   unguided    power   on  the    executive,  and   therefore,
Amendment Act cannot be declared invalid. Thus, we come to the conclusion
that there has been no such excessive delegation of power.
28.         This brings us to the residual question whether the provisions
of the Amendment Act dissolving all the existing committees of the Co-
operative Societies and vesting the same on opposite party no.2 has to be
termed as unconstitutional because of it violating the rights of the     elected
members to continue. It is contended that as per the provisions of the Act,
the elected office bearers were to continue for four years and by this Act the
bodies   have been dissolved and thereby their rights have been infringed.

                                          49
From the discussions in the preceding paragraph, it is clear that only when a
fundamental right is breached an Act can be said to be unconstitutional. The
Act cannot be held to be invalid on the ground that it breaches the right of a
class of person or individuals which has been conferred by a statute.         In
the afore quoted case of State of Kerala Vs. Peoples Union (supra), the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that it is trite that a right conferred by a
statute can also be taken away by another.          The principle is the stream
cannot rise higher than the source.
29.         Similar amendment was made in the year 2001 which led to the
dissolution of elected committees of Co-operative Societies. The provision was
challenged as unconstitutional in Gurupada Nanda and others Vrs. State
of Orissa and others; 93 (2002) CLT 729. A division Bench of this Court has
upheld the constitutional validity of such an Act by holding thus:-
              “Dissolution of the elected committees of management
              prior to expiry of their term by the impugned
              amendment cannot be construed as undemocratic and
              unconstitutional as the members of such committees
              were elected to their respective offices and were
              holding such offices by virtue of the provisions of the
              Act.    Their term or tenure can be cut short by the
              provisions of the Act as well. Dissolution was the only
              choice left with the law makers for immediately
              providing representation to the weaker sections in the
              Managing      Committees      of  Co-operative   Societies.
              Therefore, it cannot be said that the amended clauses
              (g) (i) and (g) (ii) of Section 28(2) of the Act are ultra

                                          50
               vires. There has been no violation of any provisions of
               the Act or the Constitution by brining about the
               amendment in question. The amendment was passed
               by the State Legislature and was assented to by the
               Governor”.
             The Division Bench has relied upon an earlier reported case, i.e.
Pradip Kumar Moharathi V. State of Orissa; 84 (1997) CLT 135. Since on
two earlier occasions, this Court has held similar provisions to be
constitutionally    valid, we follow the same by adopting the principle          of
judicial discipline. We do not find any reason for differing with the earlier view
taken by this Court.
 30.         Lastly it has been contended by the learned counsel for the
petitioners that the action of opposite party no.2 appointing various persons
as President, Vice-President and Members of the Managing Committee in hot
haste on 24.9.2011 on the day the Amendment Act came into force is without
application   of mind and without following the proper procedure.        Learned
counsel for the opposite parties, in this regard, submits that the bill was
passed on 27.8.2011 which was pending before the Governor of Orissa till
22nd September for his assent.     It is further stated that the Registrar being
a responsible officer having the assistance of subordinate officers throughout
the State, was required to meet an emergent situation of managing the
Societies and as such the action of the Registrar in notifying the committee
immediately after the publication of the notification cannot be termed to have
been done in hot haste without application of mind as the Registrar was to

                                              51
get himself ready for management for such huge number of                     Societies
immediately after coming into force of the Act.         Hence he took a prompt and
emergent action in constituting the            Committees, otherwise it would have
been difficult to manage all the Societies resulting in complete breaking
down of the administrative functioning of the Societies.
31.           It is noted here that during          course of hearing    one file was
produced before the Court which relates to the nomination of the President,
Vice-President      and other     Members of the Committee        of the   Urban Co-
operative Bank Ltd., Cuttack. It was noticed that no noting from the sub-
ordinate staff, namely, Deputy Registrar-in-charge of that area suggesting the
name of the private opposite parties was there. Simply the office put up a
note which was acted upon by the Registrar.              In other words, there was
completely lack of any kind of exercise which would have indicated that there
was an application of mind for nominating the President, Vice-President and
other Members of Co-operative Societies. It is stated at the bar, similar is the
situation in respect of nomination of President, Vice-President            and other
Members of the other Co-operative Societies also.
32.    It is well settled that the Court cannot sit in judgment over an action of
the administration of the executive. The scope of judicial review is limited to
three grounds; (i) unreasonableness, which can more appropriately be called
irrationality, (ii) illegality and (iii) procedural impropriety. Only on these three
grounds an executive action can be struck down by the Court. An
examination of the case in hand reveals that when the legislature passed a

                                         52
law dissolving various Committees of all the Co-operative Societies of the
State and vested the management thereof on the Registrar or any Committee
nominated by him. It was further specified in the Act, namely, sub-clause (ii)
of Clause (g) of    sub-section (2) of Section   28 that the Registrar was to
manage the Society himself or to nominate a Committee from amongst the
Members of the Society, or a member society affiliated to it or a Society
affiliated to such members society, as far as practicable representing the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Women to
manage the affairs of the Society and take all or any policy decision including
admission of members in relation to the Society till the Committee is
constituted in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
33.          It is neither the case of the opposite parties nor any materials
has been produced before this Court to        show that he has taken care to
constitute such a Committees with respect to every Co-operative Society, for
which he has nominated,          any person representing Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Women. It appears that he
has mechanically passed orders in almost all cases. Out of this bunch in all
the cases the Registrar        has nominated persons,       who have become
unsuccessful in the last election except the case of the Orissa State Co-
operative Bank Ltd., which is the only case where opposite party no.2 has
nominated the      elected President.   No reason has been assigned why the
opposite party no.2 has not taken into consideration the names of those
persons, who were elected in the last election and were continuing as such.
This defies all reasons and, therefore, the order passed by     opposite party

                                        53
no.2 is tainted with mala fide and is irrational. Therefore, it has to be struck
down by this Court.
34.          Therefore, in striking down nominations made by O.P.No.2 in all
these cases, this Court orders that the Committee elected last shall officiate
as office bearers     and    Directors of the Co-operative Societies.       They
shall continue to function as care taker Committee till the next election, but
their power shall be restricted in the sense that they cannot take any major
policy decision, but can induct new Members, without prior approval of the
Registrar. It is further directed that the State Government shall promulgate
the rules defining the Electoral College within a period of three months from
today and place the same before the Assembly in its next sitting and hold the
elections of all the Co-operative Societies within a period of six months from
today.
35.          These writ petitions are allowed in part with the above
observations. The Amendment Act is held to be intra vires but the action of
opposite party no.2 by nominating the committees of the Co-operative
Societies which are the subject matter of these writ petitions are declared to
be unsustainable and the Notifications dated 24th September, 2011 are
quashed. No costs.
                                                       .…..….…………..
                                                         S.K.Mishra,J

                                      54
            B.P.Das, J.    I agree.
                                         .….….…………
                                           B.P.Das,J
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated 21st. December, 2011/A.K.Behera


