                    ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                                        O.J.C. No.9423 of 2001
                In the matter of an application under Article 226 & 227 of
                                        the Constitution of India
                                                         ----------
      Bharati Nayak                                                        …        Petitioner
                                     Versus
      The Collector, Rayagada,
      and others                                                           …       Opposite parties
      For petitioner                                 :       M/s. D.P. Dhal, K. Dash,
                                                             B.B.Mishra, P.K.Routray,
                                                             S.K.Tripathy, & A.K.Swain
      For Opposite party Nos.1 & 2                    :      Mr. K.K. Mishra,
                                                             Additional Government Advocate
      For Opposite party Nos.3 to 5                  :       None appears.
            PRESENT :
              THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                             Date of hearing & Judgment                   :: 05.12.2016
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biswanath Rath, J.            This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner
            assailing the impugned order passed by the Collector, Rayagada in
            O.S.A.T.I.P. Review Case No.161/99 as appearing at Annexure-3 to
            this petition. It is alleged that in spite of satisfaction of the conditions
            under the Regulation-3 (iii) of the amended Regulation-II, 1956, the

                                    2
reviewing authority illegally initiated a suo-motu proceeding and in a
mechanical approach decided the matter against the petitioner.
2.            Mr. K.K. Mishra, learned Additional Government
Advocate on the other hand, submitted that there has been due
application of mind by the revisional authority and the revisional
authority after taking all aspects into consideration has passed the
order restoring the land in favour of the tribe person. It is also
contended that for the reasons assigned therein, there is no scope for
interfering in the impugned order
3.            Considering the rival contentions of the parties, this
Court finds, the proceeding was initiated in exercise of power under
the Regulation-(3-a) (i) of the Orissa Scheduled Areas Transfer of
Immovable Property (by scheduled tribes) Amendment Regulation,
1956 and considering the rival contention therein, the revisional Court
following a letter of instruction entered into examination of the matter
involving a sell of property from a Scheduled Tribe to a non-
Scheduled Tribe taking into consideration four points indicated at
page 12 of the impugned order and taking into consideration the
materials available on record. In entering into the area of examination,
the reviewing authority on the premises of some discrepancies
indicated at page 14 of the brief, reviewed the transaction between the
parties and directed for restoration of the matter. Going through the
area of examination adopted by the reviewing authority as well as
through the findings on the irregularities and having seen the
application for permission at the instance of the Scheduled Tribe
involving O.S.A.T.I.P. Case No.149/95 as well as the permission

                                    3
order involving the same, this Court finds while seeking permission
for sell of the land to a private opposite party, the Scheduled Tribe
person had not only a clear indication of the reasons for sell but had
also a categoric statement that after sell of the disputed land the tribe
would still have Ac.11.50 cents of land with him. An enquiry was
conducted looking to the request of the petitioner at appropriate level.
The enquiry also revealed the genuineness of the requirement for sell
and observed that there is compliance of provisions contained in
Regulation 3 of the Regulation-II, 1956. Further, the value prevailing
the area has also been taken into consideration after examination of
the particular aspects at the relevant point of time. The R.I. also
recommended for grant of permission. Basing on the R.I’s report,
permission was granted and the sale was effected entering into
registered deed. This Court finds, the sell is based on the permission
granted by the competent authority taking into consideration all the
required aspect. This Court nowhere finds any observation as to
violation of the provision contained in Regulation 3(iii) of
Regulation-II of 1956 and in absence of which, interference in such
transactions is improper. Further, this Court finds, the private opposite
party still remained with Ac.11.50 cents of land after the sell was
effected in the year 1995, which is clearly in terms of the statutory
requirement. The observation of the Revenue Authority remains
contrary to the provision contained in Regulation-II, 1956 and
therefore, the impugned order remains unsustainable. Thus, while
allowing this writ petition, this Court sets aside the impugned order so
far it relates to O.S.A.T.I.P. Review Case No.161/99.

                                  4
4.    The writ petition stands disposed of. Parties to bear their own
cost.
                                             ……………………..
                                             Biswanath Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 5th December, 2016/ mkr, secy.


