                             ORISSA HIGH COURT : C U T T A C K
                                    C.M.P. NO.206 OF 2017
          In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
                                 Constitution of India.
       Minati Mohapatra                                 : Petitioner
                                  -Versus-
       Niraj Kumar Das                                  : Opp. Party
              For petitioner        :   M/s.P.K.Satpathy, K.C.Panda &
                                        P.K.Jena
              For O.P.              :   M/s.A.R.Dash, P.K.Ray, S.K.Nanda,
                                        B.Mohapatra, K.S.Sahu, L.D.Achari &
                                        G.Chaitanya
       PRESENT:-
              THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH
            Date of hearing : 05.09.2017       : Judgment : 09.10.2017
Biswanath Rath, J.          This Civil Misc. Petition involves a challenge to
       the judgment dated 8.2.2017 passed in F.A.O. No.168/2016, vide
       Annexure-1.
       2.                   Short background involved in the case is that the
       opposite party, as plaintiff filed C.S. No.1428/2016 before the Civil
       Judge    (Jr.Divn.),   Balasore  for  permanent     injunction seeking
       direction to restrain the defendant, the petitioner from alienating
       the suit land in favour of others except the plaintiff during the
       agreement period from 12.5.2016 to 12.5.2018. Fact reveals that

                                   2
the   plaintiff-opposite  party   offered    the   defendant-petitioner
Rs.90.00 lakh as consideration money for purchasing the suit land.
The defendant-petitioner having agreed with the purchase value of
the suit land received Rs.50.00 lakh as advance consideration
money from the plaintiff-petitioner and both parties entered into an
agreement for sale in respect of the suit land with condition that
both the parties will execute and register the sale deed within two
years on payment of balance consideration of Rs.40.00 lakh.
Accordingly, an agreement indicating the above was executed
between the parties on 12.5.2016. It is on the premises that the
defendant-petitioner was trying to alienate the suit land after
execution of the agreement to the outsider on refusal of the disposal
of the same in favour of the plaintiff-opposite party, the plaintiff was
compelled to file the suit for permanent injunction. Along with the
suit the plaintiff-opposite party also filed an application under
Order 39 Rules-1 & 2 of C.P.C. and prayed for temporary injunction
against the defendant-petitioner restraining the defendant from
alienating the suit land at least till expiry of the agreement period.
This application was disposed of on contest with an order of refusal
by the trial court after observing that the defendant is in
continuous possession of the disputed property. This order was
challenged by the plaintiff-opposite party in F.A.O. No.168/2016
against the order dated 20.12.2016 passed in I.A. No.1/2016

                                   3
arising out of C.S. No.1428/610 of 2016-I. Learned District Judge,
Balasore after hearing both sides though refused to grant injunction
but considering the fact of pendency of another suit bearing C.S.
No.116/2017 involving a relief for specific performance of contract
between the same parties directed both the parties to maintain
status quo over the disputed property till disposal of the suit.
3.                 Assailing the impugned judgment, Sri Satapathy,
learned counsel representing the defendant-petitioner contended
that a suit for permanent injunction without any ancillary or
consequential relief is not maintainable. The plaintiff having relied
on an unregistered agreement for sale following the provision
contained in Section 17(1)(f) of the Registration Act, 1908 requiring
registration of any such instrument, the claim of the plaintiff on the
basis of such unregistered document remains un-sustainable. Sri
Satapathy also claimed that the lower appellate court giving
emphasis on the payment of Rs.50.00 lakh as advance on the basis
of forged agreement remains erroneous for the payment of such
huge amount opposed to the provision of Income Tax Act. Finding of
the appellate court also opposes the settled position of law holding
the agreement for sale does not create right, title and interest in
favour of a party. Sri Satapathy next contended that since the
appellate court has a clear finding with regard to possession in
favour of the defendant-petitioner, there is no question granting any

                                   4
sort of interim protection. Further for the possibility of suitable
compensation to the plaintiff, the defendant’s right over the
disputed property could not be interfered with.
4.                  Sri Satapathy, learned counsel for the defendant-
petitioner also refers some decisions in M/s.East End Infotech Pvt.
Ltd. & others vrs. M/s.Esskay Machinery Pvt. Ltd. reported in
2006 (Suppl.-II) OLR-486, Smt. Kanakalata Panda vrs. Ashok
Kumar Sinha reported in 2015 (Supp.-II) OLR-848, Meghmala &
others vrs. G.Narasimha Reddy & others reported in 2010 (II)
OLR (SC) 778, Smt. Laxmi Dei & another vrs. Shyam Sunder
Hans & others reported in 2005 (I) CLR-27, Delhi Motor
Company vrs. U.A. Basrurkar reported in AIR 1968 SC 794 and
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. vrs. Sriman Narayan &
another reported in AIR 2002 SC 2598.
5.                 Sri Dash, learned counsel for the plaintiff-
opposite party, on the other hand, while opposing each of the
submissions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner,
submitted that for the availability of the signature of the defendant
not only over the revenue stamp but on each page of the body of the
agreement endorsing the disclosures as well as receipt of amount of
Rs.50.00 lakh with further assurance to execute the sale deed
within two years, there exist a determination on the entering into
the agreement between the parties. Further finding the negative

                                   5
attitude of the defendant in the matter of transfer of land and
constant attempt to do away with the property filed a suit bearing
C.S. No.116/2017 for specific performance of contract. The suit is
not in a position to be taken up for no posting of the Judicial
Officer, for which the plaintiff is unable to move an interim
application there. Sri Dash, learned counsel for the plaintiff-
opposite party also contended that for the defendant’s flat denial to
the fact of payment of money, entering into the agreement until a
final outcome in the suit, status quo in respect of the property is
the only desired order. Referring to the observations made in the
impugned order, Sri Das further contended that there is no
infirmity in the impugned order leaving any scope for this Court to
interfere with the same.
6.                  Considering the rival contentions of the parties,
this Court finds, the plaintiff has admittedly two suits pending
before two authorities ; C.S. No.1428/610 of 2016-I is for
permanent injunction restricting the defendant from selling away
the   property   to  anybody   else   than   the   plaintiff and    C.S.
No.116/2017 also at the instance of the plaintiff for specific
performance of contract involving the very same agreement. Looking
to the stand taken by the plaintiff, this Court finds, the plaintiff had
an impediment in moving the application for interim protection in
C.S. No.116/2017 for non-functioning of the Senior Civil Judge,

                                  6
Balasore    and   compelling  the   plaintiff to  move    the   Interim
Application under Order 39 Rules-1 & 2 of C.P.C. involving the suit
for permanent injunction. These are all developments appear to be
taken place in the first part of the year 2017, as it involves C.S.
No.116/2017.
7.                 Now perusing the order passed by the trial court
involving I.A. No.1/2016, this Court finds, the trial court taking into
consideration the case of both sides, finding the possession of the
disputed property with the defendant and referring to certain
decisions indicated therein refused to grant injunction in favour of
the plaintiff after observing that the plaintiff without claiming
recovery of possession is not entitled to any interim protection. The
trial court has also observed that there being no suit for
performance of contract and the suit at hand being only for
permanent injunction leaves no scope for granting restrain order
against the defendant. This order was passed by the trial court on
20.12.2016. The subsequent suit at the instance of the plaintiff-
opposite party appears to have been filed in 2017, may be an
outcome of finding defect to get an interim protection in absence of
a claim for specific performance of contract. The appellate court
while dealing with the matter even though confirmed each of the
finding of the Tribunal but for filing of the suit for specific

                                   7
performance of contract in the meantime directed both the parties
to maintain status quo involving the disputed property.
8.                  The absence of the court in dealing with the
subsequent     suit  being  the   only  impediment   and    as  such
impediment is a temporary impediment, the appellate court could
have permitted the opposite party to move application for injunction
in the other suit having a broader scope for consideration. However
considering that the opposite party is already in enjoyment of a
status quo order granted by the lower appellate court, this Court for
the observations made herein above permits the opposite party to
move the trial court dealing with C.S. No.116/2017 for grant of
injunction within two weeks and the interim application, if any, filed
be disposed of within four weeks thereafter and the status quo
order granted by the lower appellate court shall continue for these
six weeks.
9.                  Under the circumstance, the Civil Misc. Petition
stands disposed of with modification of the impugned order to the
extent indicated herein above. No cost.
                                           …………………………
                                           Biswanath Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 9th October, 2017/mkr, secy.


