                                  ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                                              O.J.C No.3657 of 1995
    (In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
    India).
                                                                         ----------
    Harful Agrawal                                      …          …        …                         Petitioner
                                                                        -Versus-
    Tribikram Behera (since dead),
    his L.Rs-Tamal Behera & Others …                               …         …                        Opp. Parties
    For Petitioner                                           :    M/s.S.Mohanty,Sr.Advocate,
                                                                  S.C.Samantray,N.C.Sahoo &
                                                                  S.P.Panda.
                  .
    For Opp. Party Nos.1 (a) & 1(b)                          :    M/s.U.K.Samal, C.D.Sahoo, B.R.Barik,
                                                                  S.Naik, S.P.Patra, A.K.Parida,
                                                                   N.K.Sahoo & M.R.Mohapatra
    For Opp. party Nos.2 to 4                                :      Mr.S.Das,
                                                                    Additional Government Advocate.
     P R E S E N T:
                        THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH
          ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Date of Hearing: 01.9.2016                         Date of Judgment: 14.9.2016.
          ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biswanath Rath,J.                     This Writ Petition has been filed assailing the order
          dated 28.01.1994 passed by the Collector, Balangir in O.L.R. Revision
          Case No.35 of 1986, more particularly challenging the application of the
          provisions of O.L.R. Act on the homestead land situates within the area of
          Notified Area Council, Titilagarh.
          2.        Short back ground involved in the case is that petitioner had
          purchased the disputed land measuring an area A0.17 decimals
          corresponding to plot No.901/1188 in Khata No.53 vide registered sale

                                   2
deed dated 15.01.1974 for a consideration of Rs.5000/- . Petitioner had
obtained a plan for construction of Textile Mill on the purchased land and
got the plan approved by the Executive Officer, N.A.C, Titilagarh in the
year 1974. Petitioner started a Power Loom establishment through the
constructed Textile Mill. This land was recorded as GHARABARI-2 in the
year 1976 basing on the report dated 29.11.1975 of the Settlement Amin.
After long gap of ten years of the purchase, the Opp. Party No.1 initiated
a proceeding under Section 23 of the O.L.R. Act before the Revenue
Officer, Titilagarh challenging the transfer of land as illegal for having
taken place without prior permission of the Revenue Officer as the case
land originally belonged to a Scheduled Caste person and sold to the
person outside the caste. The case was registered as RMC Case No.8/35
of 1984. The petitioner field show cause contending therein that the Opp.
Party No.01 is not a Scheduled Caste person and the land in dispute is a
house site in urban area resulting the provision of O.L.R Act has no
application. RMC Case No.8/35 of 1984 was disposed of in favour of Opp.
Party No.1 holding transfer of land without obtaining permission from the
competent authority, as void.      The order being challenged in O.L.R
Appeal No.20 of 1986, the Additional District Magistrate, Balangir allowed
the appeal observing that the provision of O.L.R. Act has no application
as the land in dispute being homestead under urban area. The appeal
order being assailed in revision vide O.L.R. Revision No.35 of 1986, the
Collector Balangir allowed the revision in favour of Opp. Party No.1
reversing the order passed by the appellate authority and thereby
confirming the order passed by the original authority – (Revenue Officer) .
On being aggrieved by the revisional order, thereby confirming the original
order, Mr. Sahoo, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the
disputed land being situated within the urban area and for change of
status of the land to GHARABARI, the provision of O.L.R Act had no
application. The original authority as well as the revisional authority
having failed to understand the above legal aspect, committed illegality

                                    3
and both the orders passed by the original authority as well as revisional
authority are not sustainable in the eye of law.
3.       Mr. Samal, learned counsel for the Opp. Party No.1 in opposition to
the submissions of Mr. Sahoo, learned counsel for the petitioner
contended that the provision contained in Section 23 of the O.L.R. Act is
not only restricted to non-urban lands but the Act has also its application
to the scheduled areas. Since entire Titilagarh is coming under the
scheduled area, the Act has the application over the disputed land.
Similarly there is also no exclusion of the provision from the homestead
land. Looking to the provision of Section 23 of the O.L.R. Act, 1960, it is
only to be seen as to if any transaction concerning the land belonging to
Scheduled Caste has been made in contravention of Section 22 of the Act
without obtaining the permission of the competent authority for sale. No
permission having been obtained prior to sale, being effected between the
parties, the sale transaction is void and the provision of Section 23 of the
Act is very much attracted to the present case. In the premises, Mr.
Samal, learned counsel for the Opp. Party No. 1 contended that neither
the original authority nor the revisional authority have committed any
illegality or impropriety in passing the impugned orders. Therefore, the
impugned order does not suffer.
4.       Mr. S.Das, learned Additional Government Advocate on the other hand
while supporting the stand taken by Mr. Samal, learned counsel for the Opp.
party No. 1 also contended that as the provision of Sections 22 and 23 of the
O.L.R. Act are applicable to the present case, there is no illegality or
impropriety in the impugned order, leaving any scope for interfering in the
impugned order.
5.       Leaving aside the admitted facts that the land situates within the area
of Notified Area Council, Titilagarh, the petitioner had purchased the disputed
land measuring an area A0.17 decimals corresponding to plot No.901/1188 in
Khata No.53 vide registered sale dead dated 15.01.1974 from the Opp. party
No.1, the plan for the construction of Textile Mill of the petitioner was
approved by the Executive Officer, Titilagarh NAC in the year 1974, final

                                    4
settlement record of the year 1976 reflects the land as GHARABARI-2 and
that the petitioner is running a Power Loom establishment over the
constructed area and that the petitioner has lost in the original case as well
as in the revision case , this court finds the moot question to be considered
here is as to whether the sale of land by virtue of registered sale deed and for
the status of land being GHARABARI, the provision of sections 22 and 23 of
the O.L.R. Act have any application to the present case or not .
6.     Sections 22 and 23 of the O.L.R. Act read as follows:
                        “22. Restriction on alienation of land by
                              Scheduled Tribes –
                        (1) Any transfer of a holding or part thereof
                 by a raiyat, belonging to a Scheduled Tribe shall
                 be void except where it is in favour of –
                        (a) a person belonging to a Scheduled Tribe
                        or ;
                        (b) a person not belonging to a Scheduled
                 Tribe when such transfer is made with the
                 previous permission in writing of the Revenue
                 Officer :
                        Provided that in case of a transfer by sale,
                 the Revenue Officer shall not grant such
                 permission unless he is satisfied that a purchaser
                 belonging to a Scheduled Tribe willing to pay the
                 market price for the land is not available, and in
                 case of a gift unless he is satisfied about the bona
                 fides thereof.
                         (2) The State Government may having
                 regard to the law and custom applicable to any
                 area prior to the date of commencement of this Act
                 by notification direct that the restrictions provided
                 in subsection (1) shall not apply to lands situated
                 in such area or belonging to any particular tribe
                 throughout the State or in any part of it.
                         (3) Except with the written permission of the
                 Revenue Officer, no such holding shall be sold in
                 execution of a decree to any person not belonging
                 to a Scheduled Tribe.
                         (4) Not withstanding anything contained in
                 any other law for the time being in force where any
                 document required to be registered under the
                 provisions of clause (a) to clause (e) of sub-section
                 (1) of section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908
                 purports to effect transfer of a holding or part
                 thereof by a raiyat belonging to a Scheduled Tribe
                 in favour of a person not belonging to a Scheduled
                 Tribe, no registering officer appointed under that

                   5
Act shall register any such document, unless such
document is accompanied by the written
permission of the Revenue Officer for such
transfer.
      (5) The provisions contained in sub-sections
(1) to (4) shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the
transfer of a holding or part thereof of a raiyat
belonging to the Scheduled Caste.
       (6) Nothing in this section shall apply –
          (a) to any sale in execution of a money
decree passed, or to any transfer by way of
mortgage executed, in favour of any scheduled
bank or in favour of any bank to which the Orissa
Co-operative Societies Act, 1962 applies; and
          (b) to any transfer by a member of a
Scheduled Tribe within a Scheduled Area.
23. Effect of transfer in contravention of
      Section 22 –
      (1)In the case of any transfer in
contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1)
of section 22 the Revenue Officer on his own
information or on, the application of any person
interested in the land may issue notice in the
prescribed manner calling upon the transferor and
transferee to show cause why the transfer should
not be declared invalid.
       (2) After holding such inquiry as the
Revenue Officer deems fit and after hearing the
persons interested, he may declare such transfer
to be invalid and impose on the transferee a
penalty of an amount not exceeding two hundred
rupees per acre of the land so transferred for each
year or any part thereof during which the
possession is continued in pursuance of the
transfer which has been declared to be invalid and
may also order such portion of the penalty as he
deems fit, to be paid to the transferor or his heir.
      (3) On a declaration being made under sub-
section (2) the Revenue Officer suo motu or on the
application of any person interested cause
restoration of the property to the transferor or his
heirs and for the purpose may take such steps as
may be necessary for compliance with the said
order or preventing any breach of peace ;
         Provided that if the Revenue Officer is of
the opinion that the restoration of the property is
not reasonably practicable, he shall record his
reasons there for and shall, subject to the control
of the Government, settle the said property with
another member of a Scheduled Tribe or in the
absence of any such member, with any other

                                    6
                 person in accordance with the provisions
                 contained in the Orissa Government Land
                 Settlement Act, 1962.
       Reading of both the above provisions together with definition of
agricultural land vide Section 2(1) and Section 2(12) leaves no doubt that
the provisions of Sections 22 & 23 of the O.L.R. Act are applicable to both
agricultural as well as homestead provided the land comes under the
Schedule area. In the case at hand, there is no dispute that the land is
coming within the Schedule area.
7.     Now coming to examine, if the sale between the petitioner and Opp.
party No.1 on 15.01.1974 is hit by the provisions of O.L.R. Act. Section 22 of
the O.L.R. Act restricts alienation of land belonging to Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribe in the schedule area without prior permission being obtained
from the competent authority applying provision of Section 22 of the O.L.R.
Act. From and on the introduction of Section 22 of the Act, the sale involved
in the present case having taken place on15.01.1974 and having been made
without obtaining prior permission of the competent authority, the transaction
becomes void.
8.     Now looking to the fact that basing on the sale, not only the status of
the land has been changed in the mean time to that of homestead
(Gharabari) but the petitioner has also in the meantime obtained plan
approval from the Executive Officer, Titlagarh N.A.C for construction of
Textile Mill over the disputed site and after construction is over, the petitioner
running a Power Loom establishment thereon that too after investing a huge
amount, it is now to be considered as to whether an eviction at this stage is
permissible ?
9.     Faced with similar situation in the matter of the land belonging to
Scheduled Tribe and for the developments taken place in between, the
Hon’ble Apex Court in a case between Amarendra Pratap Singh -vrs- Tej
Bahadur Prajapati and others, reported in AIR-2004 (SC) -3782 came to
hold that claim of right by way of adverse possession in respect of the land
belonging to Scheduled Tribe, is not sustainable. But coming to the question

                                      7
of appropriate relief i.e. to be granted to the land owner, keeping in view the
developments taken place in between with the consent of the parties
particularly the land owner, the Hon’ble Apex Court directed for an
investigation by the trial court to find out the portion of land in occupation by a
non-scheduled tribe person and upon investigation, may pass a decree for
awarding suitable compensation in lieu of demolition            and restoration of
possession.
10.      Keeping in view the decision of the Hon’ble           Apex Court in the
aforesaid case and as this Court in the present case finds that the petitioner
has already made a lot of developments over the disputed land that too with
the consent of the actual land owner and further with the approval of the
public authority instead of asking for restoration of possession, this Court
directs the original authority (Revenue Officer,Titlagarh) to conduct an
enquiry through its agency to ascertain the actual occupation of the land by a
person belonging to general caste           by virtue    of sale over which the
construction of the Textile Mill has been made and taking into consideration
the present market price of the land prevailing in the locality, to pass an
order to grant appropriate compensation to the Opp. party No.1. The entire
exercise is directed to be completed within a period of three months from the
date of communication of this judgment.
11.      Writ petition stands allowed with the observation and direction made
hereinabove. Parties to bear their respective cost.
                                                …………………………….
                                               BISWANATH RATH,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 14th day of September, 2016/BKB


