                         ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                                         W.P. (C) No. 11255 of 2005
            An application under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
            India.
                                                         ----------
            Sukei Kuanr & others                                           …        Petitioners
                                              Versus
            The Chief Executive Officer (C.E.O)
            Western Electricity Supply Company Ltd.
            Corporate Office, at-Burla,
            Dist.-Sambalpur & another                                      …       Opposite Parties
                     For Petitioners            :        Mr. Dhananjaya Mund.
                     For Opp. Parties           :        Mr. B.K. Nayak,
                                                         M/s. Prakash Ku. Mohanty,
                                                         S.K. Sahoo, M. Das.
                                                         ----------
            PRESENT :
              THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
            Date of hearing:               14 .11 .2014            Date of Judgment : 16.11.2014
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biswanath Rath, J.            By filing this writ petition petitioners claim for
            compensation of Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees Three Lakhs) with interest on
            account of the death of the deceased by electrocution which is to be
            paid by the opposite parties for their negligence in maintaining the
            electric line in the locality.

                                     2
(2)          The case of the petitioners is that Kirtan Kuanr, the
deceased had gone to attend the call of nature to the land of one
Balakrishna Hans towards the Sub-station side being located on the
last part of the village and accidentally came in contact with live
electric wire being disconnected from the sub-station and laying on
the ground. It is alleged that due to heavy impact of electric shock, the
deceased fell down and sustained grievous burning injuries on his legs
and other vital parts of his body and died at the spot on 16.01.2005.
Immediately after the incident occurred a F.I.R. was lodged at
Turekela Police Station on 16.01.2005 itself. On lodging of F.I.R. an
U.D. Case was registered by the Turekela Police Station as P.S. U.D
Case No.01/05 and investigation was taken up. On police requisition
the dead body of the deceased was sent for post-mortem to the C.H.C.,
Kantabanji. The doctor who conducted the post-mortem submitted the
post-mortem report vide Annexure-2 indicating that the death has
occurred due to burns resulting from electrocution.
(3)          Similarly, an inquest report is also submitted by the local
Police vide Annexure-3 clearly indicates that the death of the
deceased was due to electrocution. Final form was also submitted in
U.D. Case No.01/05 vide Annexure-4 with conclusion that the death
has occurred due to electrocution. The petitioners claimed that the
death has caused due to negligence of the opposite parties. They have
further claimed that the deceased was working as a Daily labourer and
was earning Rs.2,500/- (Rupees Two thousand five hundred only) per
month at the time of his death with a contribution of Rs.1,500/-

                                    3
(Rupees One thousand five hundred only) towards the maintenance of
the petitioners and the deceased was 40 (forty) years old at the time of
death.
              The petitioners i.e. the claimants by filing this writ
petition have claimed a sum of Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees three lakhs
only) as fair and equitable compensation alongwith interest as
admissible.
(4)           Per contra, the opposite parties have filed their joint
counter inter-alia contending therein that the writ petition suffers on
account of non-joinder of proper party vis-à-vis the opposite party
No.2 is not a necessary party to the litigation. The opposite party in
filing the counter, further contended that though a case vide U.D. Case
No.01/05 was instituted involving the incident, inquest report, post-
mortem report, final form even though indicated the death occurred on
account of electrocution, there is no negligence on the part of the
opposite parties. They claimed that the plea on the allegation of
negligence and poor standard of maintenance of the line were all out
and out false. The opposite parties disputed the claim of the
petitioners regarding the negligence by the opposite parties in absence
of any fact finding report to the said effect. The opposite parties also
disputed the claim of the petitioners as the legal heirs of the deceased
as well as the claim of the petitioners with regard to the earnings of
the deceased. It is on these premises; the opposite parties claimed for
dismissal of the writ petition on the ground of being involved with
disputed question of facts.

                                    4
(5)           In filing the writ petition the petitioners have not only
categorically submitted that the death of the deceased was on account
of negligence on the part of the opposite parties, they have also
referred to many documents such as the F.I.R., Inquest Report, Post-
mortem Report as well as the Final Form, all these documents very
cogently indicate that the reason of death of the deceased was on
account of electrocution. The opposite parties even though disputed
the death of the deceased but have failed in bringing any document to
the contrary.
              Similarly, the disputes of the opposite parties are that the
petitioners are the legal heirs of the deceased, who has died on
account of electrocution. It appears to be a formal denial. If the
opposite parties disputed the fact of petitioners being the legal heirs of
the deceased then it was incumbent upon the opposite parties to
establish the contrary in absence of which the denial of the opposite
parties has no leg to stand. There is specific indication with regard to
death of the deceased on account of electrocution. F.I.R. and
registration of U.D. Case also involved the Department. Nothing
prevented the department to have its internal inquiry to find out as to
whether there is negligence in their duty or not. This writ petition was
also filed in the year 2005 and there is no such inquiry at the instance
of the opposite parties as on date to find out whether such an incident
had taken place due to their negligence or not. The opposite parties
being a public authority must act with all fairness. So far as the
dispute raised by the opposite parties that the writ petition suffers on
account of non-joinder of the proper parties. Perusal of the records it

                                      5
is made clear that even though the petitioners have not made a proper
party at opposite party No.2 but they have made opposite party No.1
who is the ultimate head of the department owning the electricity line
in the locality. In such view of the matter the plea of the opposite
parties on the maintainability of the writ petition cannot be sustained.
(6)           On perusal of the counter I also do not find any serious
attempt by the opposite parties to de-establish the claim of the
petitioners. The death aspect is also admitted by both the parties.
(7)           Before stepping into decide the issue of compensation, it
is necessary to first go to the meaning of “negligence” which is the
main limb of the case and decide whether the opposite party No.1 is
negligent or not it runs as follows:-
              According to Black’s Law dictionary 6th edition the term
“negligence” has been defined as
                     “the omission to do something which a reasonable
              man, guided by those ordinary considerations which
              ordinarily regulate human affairs, would do, or the doing of
              something which a reasonable and prudent man would not
              do”
According to the American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language,
4th Edition
              “Failure to exercise the degree of care considered reasonable
    under the circumstances, resulting in an unintended injury to another
    party.”

                                        6
According to the Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
               The fact or the character of being negligent or neglectful;
deficiency in or lack of care, exactness, or application; the omitting to do,
or a habit of omitting to do, things which ought to be done, or the doing of
such things without sufficient attention and care; carelessness; heedless
disregard of some duty.
               Specifically, in law, the failure to exercise that degree of care
which the law requires for the protection of those interests of other persons
which may be injuriously affected by the want of such care.
               In Advanced Law Lexicon               of   3rd  Edition   2009,
negligence has been defined as follows:
                      “Negligence” is not an affirmative word, it is a
              negative word; it is the absence of such care, skill and
              diligence as it was the duty of the person to bring to the
              performance of the work, which he is said not to have
              performed.” Negligence may consist as well in not doing the
              thing which ought not to be done as in doing that which ought
              not to be done when in either case it has caused loss and
              damage to another. Negligence is “the absence of proper care,
              caution and diligence; of such care, caution and diligence, as
              under the circumstances reasonable and ordinary prudence
              would require to be exercised”.
               In the case of Donoghue v Stevens [1932] AC 562, Lord
Atkin stated that;
               'You must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions
which you can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure your
neighbour'.
              This is the establishment of a general duty of care.

                                     7
            Now coming to know the meaning of the negligence as
            enumerated by the Hon’ble Apex Court through many of
            its judgments which runs as follows :-
            In     Malay     Kumar       Ganguly        v.   Dr.Sukumar
Mukherjee, (2009) 9 SCC 221= AIR 2010 SC 1162, the apex
Court considering the meaning of “negligence‟, held as follows:
            “Negligence is breach of duty caused by omission to do
            something which a reasonable man, guided by those
            considerations which ordinarily regulate conduct of human
            affairs would do, or doing something which a prudent and
            reasonable man would not do. Negligence means either
            subjectively a careless state of mind, or objectively careless
            conduct. It is not an absolute term but is a relative one; it is
            rather a comparative term. In determining whether negligence
            exists in a particular case, all the attending and surrounding
            facts and circumstances have to be taken into account.
            Negligence is strictly nonfeasance and not malfeasance. It is
            omission to do what the law requires, or failure to do anything
            in a manner prescribed by law. It is the act which can be
            treated as negligence without any proof as to the surrounding
            circumstances, because it is in violation of statute or
            ordinance or is contrary to dictates of ordinary prudence.
      In Jacob Mathew (supra) the apex Court considering the
meaning of “negligence”, held as follows:
            “The jurisprudential concept of negligence defies any precise
            definition. In current forensic speech, negligence has three
            meanings. They are : (i) a state of mind, in which it is

                                   8
          opposed to intention; (ii)careless conduct; and (iii) the breach
          of a duty to take care that is imposed by either common or
          statute law. All three meanings are applicable in different
          circumstances but any one of them does not necessarily
          exclude the other meanings.”
          In M.S.Grewal v. Deep Chand Sood, (2001) 8 SCC
151 = 2001 SCC (Cri) 1426, the apex Court in para 14 stated as
follows :
          “Negligence in common parlance means and implies “failure
          to exercise due care, expected of a reasonable prudent
          person”. It is a breach of duty and negligence in law ranging
          from inadvertence to shameful disregard of the safety of
          others. In most instances, it is caused by heedlessness or
          inadvertence, by which the negligent party is unaware of the
          results which may follow from his act. Negligence is thus a
          breach of duty or lack of proper care in doing something, in
          short, it is want of attention and doing of something which a
          prudent and a reasonable man would not do. Though
          sometimes the word “inadvertence” stands and is used as a
          synonym to negligence, but in effect negligence represents a
          state of the mind which, is much more serious in nature than
          mere inadvertence. There is thus existing a differentiation
          between the two expressions- whereas inadvertence is a
          milder form of negligence, “negligence” by itself means and
          implies a state of mind where there is no regard for duty or
          the supposed care and attention which one ought to bestow.”

                                    9
             In Poonam Verma v. Ashwin Patel, (1996) 4 SCC
332, „negligence‟ has been dealt with by the apex Court which has
stated thus:
           10 “Negligence as a tort is the breach of a duty caused by
           omission to do something which a reasonable man would
           do, or doing something which a prudent and reasonable
           man would not do. The definition involves the following
           constituents:
             (1) a legal duty to exercise due care;
             (2) breach of the duty; and
             (3) consequential damages.”
             It is now necessary to notice the provisions contained in
section 91 & 92 of the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 which runs as
follows :-
             “91. Safety and protective devices.-(1) Every
             overhead line erected over any part of street or
             other public place or in any factory or mine or on
             any consumers’ premises shall be protected with a
             device approved by the Inspector for rendering the
             line electrically harmless in case it breaks.
             (2)    An Inspector may by notice in writing require
             the owner of any such overhead line wherever it
             may be erected to protect it in the manner specified
             in sub-rule (1).
             (3)    The owner of every high and extra-high
             voltage overhead line shall make adequate
             arrangements to the satisfaction of the Inspector to
             prevent unauthorized persons from ascending any
             of the supports of such overhead lines which can be
             easily climbed upon without the help of a ladder or
             special    appliances.     Rails,   reinforced   cement
             concrete poles and pre-stressed cement concrete
             poles without steps, tubular poles, wooden supports
             without steps, [sections and channels shall be
             deemed as supports which cannot be easily climbed
             upon for the purpose of this rule.]

                                    10
              92.    Protection against lightening.-(1) The owner
              of every overhead line [sub-station or generating
              station] which is so exposed as to be liable to injury
              from lightning shall adopt efficient means for
              diverting to earth any electrical surges due to
              lightening.
              [(2) The earthing lead for any lightening arrestor
              shall not pass through any iron or steep pipe, but
              shall be taken as directly as possible from the
              In view of definition of negligence and under the ruling
of the Hon’ble Apex Court referred to hereinabove, and under the
provisions contained at Rule 91 & 92 of the Indian Electricity Rules,
1956 it is now to be considered as to whether there is any negligence
on the part of the Electric Supply Company or not.
(8)           From the pleadings as narrated herein above, there is no
dispute that the deceased had come in contact with a live electric wire.
There is also no dispute that there was an incident in the particular
area, as a consequence of which the deceased died. The documents
vide Annexures-1 to 4 clearly establish the death occurred on account
of electrocution. In absence of any internal inquiry at the time of
incident or at least by the time of filing of the writ petition, it appears
that the attempt of the opposite parties is only to cover up their
latches. In view of the above narrated facts, definition of negligence
and the provision contended in the Indian Electricity Rules 1956 and
the rulings of the Hon’ble Apex Court narrated hereinabove. I find the
opposite party No.1 is negligent in its duty and the death of the
deceased is an outcome of such negligence of the opposite party No.1.
“Now coming to the question of the compensation, the facts in the

                                    11
writ petition reveals that the petitioners have claimed that the
deceased was a labourer and he was earning Rs.2,500/- (Rupees Two
thousand five hundred only) per month at the time of his death and out
of which income he was contributing Rs.1,500/- (Rupees Fifteen
hundred only) per month to his family. Even though the opposite
parties have made a denial to the earning of the deceased but they
have not brought any material to establish to the contrary. Further
looking to the minimum income of a person per day at the relevant
point of the time being not less than Rs.100/- (Rupees one hundred
only) a day. I do not find any unjustified claim made by the petitioners
with regard to wage component of the deceased. The opposite parties
have also very casually disputed the age of the deceased. On perusal
of the cause title I find the age of the mother of the deceased was 60
years whereas the wife of the deceased was 38 years at the time of
cause of action. This being the position, the claim of the petitioners
regarding age of the deceased as 40 (forty) years cannot be
disbelieved. Taking into consideration, the life expectancy of a person
in this country to be at the minimum 65 years. The petitioners are
entitled to get the minimum 20 (twenty) multiplier and taking into
Rs.100/- (Rupees one hundred only) per day income of the deceased,
the whole compensation would have been much more, but considering
the claim of the petitioners in the writ petition limited to Rs.3,00,000/-
(Rupees Three Lakhs), I am confining the compensation to
Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees Three Lakhs) which amount be paid to the
petitioners alongwith interest @8% per annum from the date of filing
of the writ petition.

                                 12
            The    compensation    amount    alongwith    interest be
calculated within a period of four weeks from the date of judgment
and the total dues be released in favour of the petitioners within a
period of two weeks thereafter.
(9)         The writ petition succeeds to the extent directed
hereinabove. However, there shall be no order as to cost.
                                             ……………………..
                                              Biswanath Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 20th day of November, 2014.


