                     ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                                        O.J.C. No.10193 of 2001
                 In the matter of an application under Article 226 & 227 of
                                         the Constitution of India
                                                          ----------
      Sri Challapati Surya Rao                                              …        Petitioner
                                      Versus
      Mordika Bana and others                                               …       Opposite parties
      For petitioner                                  :       M/s. A.K. Nanda, M.K. Pathy,
                                                              S.K. Bhanjadeo
      For Opposite party No.3                          :      Mr. S. Mishra,
                                                              Learned Additional Standing Advocate
      For Opposite party No.4                         :       None appears.
             PRESENT :
               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH
             ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Date of hearing & Judgment                   :: 17.11.2016
             ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biswanath Rath, J.             This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner assailing the
             impugned order under Annexure-3.
             2.       Brief fact involved in this case is that the opposite party No.1 being
             a Scheduled Tribe applied permission for selling of a portion of their land
             measuring Ac.1.77 cents of Plot No.314, Khata No.30 following the
             provision in Section 3(1) of the Regulation-II, 1956. A transfer permission
             proceeding was initiated vide OSATIP Case No.75/95. Being directed, an
             enquiry was conducted by the Revenue Inspector and a consequential report
             was submitted favouring grant of permission as available at Annexure-2.

                                       2
Depending upon the report, the Tahasildar also granted necessary
permission by his order dated 1.7.1995 as available at Annexure-2.
3.      It is alleged that based on the permission granted by the competent
authority, the petitioner and the private opposite party entered into a sale
deed involving the disputed land. The sale deed was also registered
accordingly. Almost after a gap of five years, a suo motu proceeding was
initiated by the Collector taking aid of Section 3(a)(i) of the Regulation-II,
1956 for restoration of land in favour of the Scheduled Tribe person under
alleged involvement of illegal transfer. The proceeding was registered as
OSATIP Review Case No.108/99. This proceeding was decided on contest
against the petitioner holding that there has been violation of the provisions
contained in Section 3(1) of the Regulation-II, 1956.
4.      Looking to the application at the instance of the private opposite and
further report submitted by the R.I. after due inquiry and for the permission
order granted by the Tahasildar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
submitted that there has been absolutely no violation of condition attached
to the Section 3(i) of the Regulation-II, 1956 and the Reviewing Authority
has totally failed in appreciating the developments taken place and the
observations made by the different authorities involving Section 3(i)
proceeding and thereby, arrived at a wrong and erroneous impugned order.
5.      Learned Additional Government Advocate strongly disputing the
objections raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
purpose of the Statute is to protect the interest of the Tribe people and since
the Reviewing Authority has come to a conclusion that there has been
violation of provision contained in Section 3 of the Regulation-II, 1956, the
impugned order leaves no scope for interference. It is further alleged that
looking to the conditions contained in Section 3(III) of the Regulation-II,
1956, it appears that there is no proper enquiry conducted by the Revenue

                                           3
Inspector and further, this aspect has not been properly dealt by the
Tahasildar while granting permission.
6.      Considering the rival contentions of the parties, this Court finds
there is no dispute that the opposite party No.1 applied for permission for
sell of the disputed land following the provision contained in Section 3(I) of
the Regulation-II, 1956. Looking to the request made therein, it appears that
the private opposite party had desired to sale only to the extent of Ac.1.77
of land of Plot No.314, Khata No.30 out of a total land under their custody
extending to Ac.6.99 decimals. Considering the provision contained in
Section 3(I) of the Regulation-II, 1956 an enquiry was conducted by the
then R.I. as appearing at Annexure-2. After making necessary enquiry the
R.I. under Clause (III) has submitted as follows :
                                “3) Village Description of the land wet or
                         dry area the rent payable of the land to be
                         transferred (Boundaries also be furnished, the
                         total area of the lad held by the applicant on the
                         date of application). The no. of his family
                         members dependant on him and other service,
                         if ay:-
                                Bodo Matakabadi, Khata no.19/33. Plot
                         no.114 Paddy-I Ac.1-28. Rate of rent:5-25 per
                         acre. The total area held by the applicant Ac.3-
                         53. The total family members held by the
                         applicant: two (wife and husband) The
                         applicant is a issue less person. He has no other
                         services of income.”
7.      Section 3 of the Regulation-II, 1956 reads as follows:
                        “3. Transfer of immovable property by a
               member of the Scheduled Tribe-(1) [Notwithstanding
               anything contained in any law for the time being in force
               any transfer of immovable property by a member of a
               Scheduled Tribe, except by way of mortgage executed in
               favour of any public financial institution for securing a loan
               granted by such institution for any agricultural purpose,
               shall be absolutely null and void and of no force or effect
               whatsoever, unless such transfer is made in favour of
               another member of a Scheduled Tribe:

                                          4
              Provide that –
       (i)     Nothing in this sub-section shall be construed as to permit
               any member of a Scheduled Tribe or his successors-in-
               interest to transfer any immovable property which was
               settled with such member of Scheduled Tribe by or under
               any authority of the State or the Central Government or
               under any law for the time being in force;
       (ii)    In execution of any decree for realization of the mortgage
               money, no property mortgaged as aforesaid shall be sold
               in favour of any person not being a member of a
               Scheduled Tribe; and
       (iii)   A member of a Scheduled Tribe shall not transfer any land
               if the total extent of his land remaining after the transfer
               will be reduced to less than two acres in case of irrigated
               land or five acres in case of unirrigated land.
                       xx                     xx                    xx”
       Coming to consider the allegation raised by the State that there has
been violation of the provision contained in Section 3 of Regulation-II,
1956 and from reading of the Section 3 of Regulation (II) of 1956, it
appears that the provision permits for sale of land of a Tribe under specific
contingency. Looking to the order of permission granted by the Tahasildar,
this Court finds the Tahasildar had taken all care in the matter of
compliance of Sub-Section (III) of Section-3 of Regulation-II, 1956 and
thereafter, made a categoric observation that after sale of Ac.1.77 cents of
Plot No.314, Khata No.30, the opposite parties will still have Ac.6.99
decimals of land with them.
8.     From the above and after going through the provisions contained in
Sub-Section-(III) of Section 3 of Regulation-II, 1956, this Court finds there
is no force in the submission of the learned State Counsel and on the other
hand, for the R.I. report and the observations in the Tahasildar’s
permission, this Court finds there was no infirmity in the grant of
permission. Consequently, this Court finds there is no illegality in the
transaction thereby.

                                        5
9.     Considering the rival contentions of the parties and for the
observation made hereinabove, this Court finds the Reviewing Authority
even though indicated the illegalities but failed in applying his mind in
terms of the provision contained in Section 3 of the Regulation-II, 1956 and
therefore, has failed in appreciating the requirement of the Section-3 of the
Regulation-II, 1956. Accordingly, this Court finds the impugned order
under Annexure-3 is not sustainable in the eye of law and therefore, while
setting aside the impugned order under Annexure-3, this Court allows this
writ petition.
       Parties to bear their respective costs.
                                                   ……………………..
                                                   Biswanath Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 17th day of November, 2016/Ayas


