                               ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                                  W.P.(C) No.2587 of 2015
          In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
          Constitution of India.
                                             ----------
          Smt. Punam Parida                      … …        …                 Petitioner
                                            -versus-
          Sukanti Subudhi & others             …        …   …              Opp. Parties
                For Petitioner                 :    M/s. S.K.Pratap & G.C.Paikaray.
                For Opp.Party no.1               :  M/s.S.R.Pati & S.K.Mishra.
                For Opp.Party nos.2 & 3          :  Sri K.K.Mishra, Addl.Govt.Advocate.
                For Opp.Party nos.4 to 6          : None.
                                 Date of Hearing:       05.07.2017
                                 Date of Judgment: 28.07.2017
          P R E S E N T:
                   THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH
Biswanath Rath,J.   This writ petition involves a challenge to the order dated
          13.01.2015 passed by the District Judge, Khurda in the Election Petition
          No.43 of 2014 in exercise of power under the Orissa Municipal Corporation
          Act, 2003.
          2.      Short background involved in the case is that the election petition
          was filed under Section 88 of the Orissa Municipal Corporation Act, 2003
          by the present petitioner-the unsuccessful candidate, challenging the
          acceptance of nomination paper of the return candidate-opposite party
          no.1 contesting for the post of Corporator from Ward No.18 of

                                     2
Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation.            Facts further reveal that the
petitioner and the opposite party no.1 both filed nomination papers for the
post of Corporator for Ward No.18 of Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation
being reserved for women belonging to other backward caste. Petitioner,
the unsuccessful candidate filing election petition alleged that the opposite
party no.1 the successful candidate filed her nomination paper before the
Election Officer stating her name as Sukanti Subudhi, Wife of Gouranga
Subudhi     of   Village-Pandara,     Post-Garh    Gopinath   Prasad,   P.S.-
Mancheswar, District-Khurda. She again repeated           same particulars in
the form of affidavit, required to be filed accompanied with the nomination
paper enclosing therein the certificate issued by the particular School in
support of her educational qualification,       identity and also age.    The
transfer certificate accompanied therein appears to have been obtained
from S.N. High School, situated in Patia, Bhubaneswar, District-Khurda
where the student name has been described as Dhadi Jena, daughter of
late Panu Jena of        Village/Post-Patia, P.S.-Chandrasekharpur, District-
Khurda and her date of leaving the School was shown as 31.05.1988
while she was prosecuting her study in Class-X, whereas the affidavit
enclosing the transfer certificate described the candidate passing the
examination in the year 1998. Petitioner, therefore, alleged that there is
complete difference between the name of the candidate disclosed in the
nomination paper, the affidavit appended thereto and the name indicated in
the transfer certificate appended in support of the educational qualification
of the opposite party no.1. There is also a great difference between the
date of leaving the School and the affidavit indicating therein that       the

                                     3
private opposite party no.1 had left School in the year 1988 and 1998
respectively.    For these serious discrepancies, the petitioner raised the
election dispute and claimed that there has been illegal acceptance of the
nomination of the opposite party no.1.         It is in the above premises,
petitioner claimed that the election for the post of Corporator of Ward
No.18 of Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation may be held to be invalid
and there may be a direction for fresh election.
3.      Opposite party no.1 i.e. the elected Corporator on her appearance
while seriously objecting the claim of the present petitioner in filing the
election dispute contended that the election petition was not maintainable in
the eye of law as there is no cause of action to file the same. While refuting
the allegations made in the election dispute, the opposite party no.1 stated
that she had not suppressed anything in filing the nomination for the post of
Corporator from    Ward No.18 in as much as Dhadi Jena and              Sukanti
Subudhi are one and single person. She further claimed that Dhadi is the
nick name of Sukanti and as a matter of ordinary practice, during admission
in the School, her parents entered her nick name in the School record
resulting discrepancy in the School records.          It is thus claimed that
discrepancy, if any, is not a serious one.    Further, for the evidence laid by
the opposite party no.1 in the trial proceeding taking note of the indication in
the voter list of Bhubaneswar Assembly Constituency, the opposite party
no.1 has been able to establish that Dhadi and Sukanti are one.             This
aspect having been properly understood and accepted by the trial court, the
opposite party no.1 claimed that there is no infirmity in the order of the

                                      4
Election Tribunal leaving no scope for interference by this Court in the order
vide Annexure-1.
4.            Upon completion of pleading, the Tribunal framed the following
issues:
         (i)    Whether the Election Petition is maintainable?
          (ii) Whether there is cause of action to file the election petition?.
          (iii) Whether the nomination and affidavit filed by opposite party
                 no.1 are false and forged?
          (iv) Whether there is corrupt practice adopted so as to declare
                  the election of opposite party no.1 as null and void?
          (v) To what other relief(s), the petitioner is entitled?
                Both the parties entering into evidence, the election petitioner
examined one witness, the contesting opposite party also examined one
wetness. While the election petitioner exhibited documents vide Ext.1 to
Ext.3, the contesting opposite party exhibited only one document marked
as Ext.A. Looking to the pleading, hearing the submissions of the parties
and also scan of the evidence led by both the parties, answering the issue
nos.3 and 4 in favour of the contesting opposite party therein, the election
Tribunal dismissed the election petition for being devoid of merit.
5.            Assailing the impugned order,         learned counsel for the
petitioner, the unsuccessful candidate reiterating the stand already taken
in the election petition and the submission during hearing of the Election
Proceeding contended that for the great discrepancy so far as name of the
candidate in the nomination paper, the affidavit accompanying therein and
the transfer certificate produced therein, the Election Officer has failed to

                                    5
exercise his power under Rule 28(2) of the Orissa Municipal Corporation
(Division of City into Wards, Reservation of Seats, and Conduct of
Election) Rules, 2003. No material produced or any evidence for the first
time adduced during the trial in an attempt to regularize the defect in the
nomination paper to cover up the discrepancy in the certificate
accompanies the nomination could have been entertained and the trial
should have been concluded on the basis of materials attached along with
the nomination paper. For there being no disclosure regarding difference
in the nomination paper and in the certificate enclosed at the time of filing
of nomination, all such attempts become irrelevant. Learned counsel for
the petitioner thus alleged that the trial court has failed appreciating all the
above and as such, the impugned order remains unsustainable.
6.       In his opposition, the contesting opposite party no.1-the successful
candidate contended that the defects pointed out during trial involving the
disclosure of name in the nomination paper, affidavit accompanied therein
and the certificate produced was purely mechanical and claimed that
even though the opposite party no.1 did not have any disclosure in the
nomination paper or in the affidavit accompanied therein on the
discrepancy in the transfer certificate, but she having been able to satisfy
her claim by giving sufficient evidence during the trial, she could be able to
justify her stand involving the discrepancy and for the materials available
during the trial, the Election Tribunal had no other option than to accept
the claim of the opposite party no.1 therein and the Election Tribunal
thereby rightly dismissed the election petition.          Further, the election
petitioner having not raised any such objection at the time of scrutiny of

                                    6
nomination paper before the Election Officer, the Election Officer had no
alternate than to accept the nomination paper. Further, for the clarification
made during the evidence in the trial, the opposite party no.1 claimed
there remains no doubt that Sukanti Subudhi and Dhadi Jena are one,
therefore, the claim that there has been false           information in the
nomination paper as well as in the affidavit accompanying the nomination
paper was not justified. The opposite party no.1 further claimed that once
the nomination paper is accepted and election is conducted, there is no
scope for adjudicating the dispute involved herein. To justify her stand,
the petitioner has taken reliance of the decisions in the cases of Laxman
Siddappa v. Kattimani Chandappa Jampanna, AIR 1968 Supreme
Court 292, Santosh Yadav v. Narendra Singh, AIR 2002 Supreme Court
241,   Harsh Kumar v. Bhagawan Sahai Rawat & others, AIR 2003
Supreme Court 3693, Harikrishna Lal v. Babu Lal Marandi, AIR 2004
SC 1067, Ram Sukh v. Dinesh Aggarwal, (2009) 10 SCC 541 and in the
case of Mangani Lal Mandal v. Bishnu Deo Bhandari                  (2012) 3
Supreme Court Cases 314,
7.           Considering the rival contention of the parties, the pleadings
available all through and the evidence available on record, this Court finds
there is no dispute that the petitioner and the opposite party no.1 were the
candidates for the post of Corporator from Ward No.18 of the
Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation. There is also no dispute that the
nomination paper belonging to the opposite party no.1 described the name
of the candidate in the nomination paper as Smt.Sukanti Subudhi. The
affidavit accompanying therein also discloses the name of the candidate

                                     7
as Sukanti Subudhi. But the transfer certificate so accompanied was in
response to the requirement of information under Clause no.5 (c) in the
Format of affidavit at Annexure-3 to the nomination paper, as a matter of
disclosure of educational qualification, at the time of filing of nomination
paper as appearing at condition No.5(c) of the Information on filing of
nomination paper available at page 34 of the writ petition. Further, looking
to the Clause-5 available at page 47 of the writ petition again in annexure-
3, appears to be as a part of the nomination paper ensures the disclosures
in consonance with the certificate so annexed. For the conditions indicated
therein, this Court finds the filing of document pertaining to educational
qualification and disclosure of the particulars of the candidate filing
nomination paper required under Clause-5 of the affidavit Format at both
page 34 and 47 this Court finds the filing of the transfer certificate is not an
empty formality rather it had a great relevancy in filing of the nomination
paper.
     Under the circumstance, this Court finds the discrepancy pointed out
particularly on the discrepancy in the disclosure of the name of the
candidate at different places is serious one. There being great difference
found, the nomination paper itself was invalid and should have been
rejected at the time of scrutiny itself.
         Further, looking to the power of the Officer as envisaged under
Rule 2003, this Court observes that in absence of any clarification on the
discrepancies taken place during the filing of nomination, the returning
officers are not empowered to make understanding of their own while
involving in scrutiny of the nomination paper. On the other hand, for the

                                      8
power lying with the Election Officer, the Election Officer while exercising
power under Rule 28 (2) of the Orissa Municipal Corporation (Division of
City into Wards, Reservation of Seats, and Conduct of Election) Rules,
2003     should have suo motu raised the doubt and depending on the
clarification at the time of scrutiny, the Election Officer ought to have taken
a decision depending on the availability of further facts. In absence of
any clarification to that effect, at the time of scrutiny, the Election Officer
should have rejected the nomination of the private opposite party at that
point itself. What happened here is the Election Officer appears to have
either not noticed the serious discrepancy indicated hereinabove or
illegally accepted the nomination in spite of it’s noticing such great
discrepancy. Thus, it appears, the acceptance of the nomination of
opposite party no.1      is not only contrary to the materials available on
record but also on failure of exercise of power by the Election Officer
under Rule 28 (2) of the Orissa Municipal Corporation (Division of City
into Wards, Reservation of Seats, and Conduct of Election) Rules, 2003.
     This Court further observes that since the dispute involves illegal
acceptance of nomination paper, the power of the Election Tribunal is
confined to examine the issue involved only taking into consideration the
materials available on record at the time of scrutiny of nomination paper
and not going beyond that. The materials produced in connection with the
difference occurred so far as the name of the candidate in the nomination
paper, affidavit and the certificate to clarify the discrepancy being
produced only in the trial of the election dispute become immaterial and
irrelevant. Thus, this Court observes the Election Tribunal acceded its

                                        9
power in taking into consideration a material appearing at Ext.2/g also
available as part of Annexure-4 to the writ petition at page 67 of the writ
petition obtained through the Public Information Officer on 22.1.2014 much
after the filing of nomination on 20.12.2013 and also subsequent to the
scrutiny of the nomination paper and even election taking place.
Impugned judgment being based on such extraneous documents is not
sustainable in the eye of law.
8.          This Court considered the citations shown by the learned counsel
for the opposite party no.1 but for the clear difference in the fact situation
involving the case at hand, this Court finds, none of the decision has any
application to the case at hand.
9.         Under the circumstance, this Court interfering in the impugned
judgment, sets aside the judgment vide Annexure-1 and as the opposite
party no.1’s election to the post of Corporator for Ward No.18 of
Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation is declared as bad, considering that
the particular ward will have no elected representative, this Court directs
for fresh election to the post of Corporator for the Ward No.18 of
Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation be held within two months hence.
        In the result, writ petition succeeds but in the circumstances, no cost.
                                                   ………………………………
                                                      Biswanath Rath, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 28th day of July,2017/sks


