                            ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                                     O.J.C. No.14034 of 1999
           In the matter of an application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
                                               ----------
           Pagal Behera & others                     … …        …               Petitioners
                                               -versus-
           Umesh Rout & others                  …        …    …               Opp. Parties
                 For Petitioners                :    M/s. N.C.Pati, A.K.Mohapattra,
                                                           S.Mishra, S.Tripathy,
                                                           P.K.Mallik, A.Das, A.K.Das &
                                                           M.R.Dash.
                 For Opp.Parties                  : Mr. P.K.Nanda.
                                                           (O.P.Nos.1,3, 4 to 5)
                                                    Sri K.K.Mishra,
                                                    Additional Government Advocate.
                                   Date of Hearing:      12.01.2017
                                   Date of Judgment:      30.01.2017
           P R E S E N T:
                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE BISWANATH RATH
Biswanath Rath,J.   This writ petition has been filed assailing the orders under Annexure-
           4 and 5 passed by the appellate authority as well as the revisional authority
           in exercise of power under Orissa Consolidation of Holdings and Prevention
           of Fragmentation of Land Act, 1972(hereinafter for short called as “the Act”).
           2.       Short background involved in the case is that filing Objection Case
           No.625 of 1982, objector Umesh Rout, present opposite party no.1 against
           Pagal Behera, Sunamani Behera and Kulamani Behera applied for deletion
           of name of present petitioners, the opposite parties therein, discarding the
           entry of forcible possession in their favour in Column Nos.31 and 32 of the

                                      2
Land Register         in respect of sabik plot no.2611, Ac.0.230 decimals
corresponding to hal plot no.2674 of hal khata No.31 recorded as bari under
the premises that they have purchased it. The present petitioners also filed
Objection Case No.561 of 1982 to record the above suit land in their favour
considering their long possession since 1929. Both the proceedings were
heard together. The objectors in satisfying their claim pleaded that case land
being a jagir land and Jagirdar being a service holder, the Jagirdar is a tenant
at rest and he can be evicted by any time by ex-intermediary. When
Jagirdar’s right is precarious one,       Pagal Behera and his relations’ right
becomes more precarious and they have no right in the eye of law. The
Jagirdar’s name has been found in ‘D’ Register having not been proved,
there has been no proving of Jagirdar as intermediary. Hence the status of
the Behera family becomes uncertain. Further, claim of Behera family for
having their occupancy right over the disputed property remaining contrary to
the provision of Section 236 of the Orissa Tenancy Act. Behera Family had
also no right over the property and they can at best be said to be the raiyat
and the right of a raiyat being not hereditable and the so called raiyat having
died, their sons have no right, title, interest of possession over any portion of
the case land and further title on the plea of adverse possession also not
justified. It is claimed by the claimants therein that after vesting of estate, the
State Government became the owner of the case land. The Jagirdar applied
to the Tahasildar, Kendrapara for settlement and the Tahasildar in Vesting
Misc. Case No.11022/13002 of 63-64 settled the case land in favour of
Krushna Moharana and others and the rent was collected from them and
then they duly sold the disputed land to Banamali Rout with appropriate
consideration money. Possession was also delivered to him on 12.10.1971

                                     3
and after death of Banamali Rout, his sons and grandsons were paying rent
to the Tahasildar. Occupancy tenant having not contested the claim in the pr
oceeding under Section 8-A (4) of the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, his right
in whatever manner has been extinguished. Therefore, the fact of possession
and the claim based thereon in the Consolidation Proceeding becomes
immaterial. Behera Family, the opposite parties in objection Case No.625 of
1982 and the objectors in Objection Case No.561 of 1982 on the other hand
claimed that Maddox report reveals that homestead land includes bari. The
homestead embrace not merely the structures building but includes also
adjacent buildings curtails, garden, courtyards, orchards and all that is
necessary for       convenient occupation of the house. The Maddox report
Bhag or Dhulibhag means literally “sharing of the dust”, a rent in kind is equal
to half of the produce including bye products. Dhulibhaga interest noted in
the Khatians means a tenant who pays kind rent and therefore, they have
acquired the right of occupancy under Section 236 of the Orissa Tenancy Act
and the interest of raiyat not touched by the Orissa Estates Abolition Act.
         It is further pleaded by the Behera family that the tenants having not
been evicted by the ex-intermediaries and the exercise of the Jagirdar since
recognized, the possession of the recorded tenants and their heirs in Yadast
No.1103, they have a strong case and thus contended that since the order in
the O.E.A. proceeding in favour of Jagirdars is invalid for the defective in the
proceeding like service of notice etc, the orders having passed by the O.E.A.
authority has no bearing against the Behera family.
3.       Considering the rival contention of the two sets of objectors under
the premises that the Behera Family cannot be declared as           Occupancy
Tenant as in the decision of the Collector in the O.E.A. Proceeding declaring

                                      4
the Maharanas as raiyats on the land and the settlement was made in their
favour in Vesting Misc. Case No.11022/13002 of 63-64. The rent having
been paid to the Government after settlement is over, the sale transaction
between Maharanas and Banamali Rout since valid, right of the Banamali
Rout lies with the objectors i.e. the present opposite parties. It is also held by
the Consolidation Officer that defect in the O.E.A. proceeding cannot be gone
into by the authorities under the OCH & PFL Act. It is under the premises,
the Consolidation Officer held that the opposite parties claim for possession
on the basis of payment of rent cannot override the claim of the opposite
parties whose possession is also disclosed by virtue of the entry in the
yadast and      consequently       though declared the title in favour of the
petitioners i.e. the present opposite parties but declared the possession in
favour of the present petitioners and issued        consequential direction for
necessary correction in the record-of-right.
4.       Being aggrieved by the order passed by the Consolidation Officer in
Objection Case No.625 of 1982          disposed of along with Objection Case
No.561 of 1982 at the instance of Pagal Behera and others, Umesh Rout and
others, the objectors in Objection Case No.625 of 1982 preferred an appeal
under Section 12 of the Act vide Appeal Case No.105 of 1983.
Simultaneously, an appeal was also preferred by Pagal Behera and Family
bearing Appeal Case No.118 of 1983 . Both the appeals were heard together
and the appellate authority on the basis of settlement of land in favour of the
heirs of the recorded Jagirdar in the O.E.A. proceeding in Vesting Misc. Case
No.11022/13002 of 63-64 and further finding that the subsequent land
owners having assessed to rent and paying rent and finding that the sale of
the disputed land by the successors of the Jagirdars in favour of Rout &

                                     5
family by virtue of a Registered Sale Deed in the year 1971 while confirming
the finding of right over the disputed land in favour of the Rout family,
declared by the Consolidation Officer, held the directions so far it relates to
recording note of possession in the record-of-right       by the Consolidation
Officer be illegal and under the circumstance while allowing the Appeal Case
No.105 of 1983 at the instance of the Rout & family dismissed the Appeal
Case No.118 of 1983 at the instance of the Pagal Behera & Family and
directed     Assistant Consolidation Officer to prepare the record-of-right
exclusively in the name of Rout & family. Pagal Behera & family preferred
Consolidation Revision Case No.1450 of 1989 /1202 of 1984.                While
delivering to interfere in the view of the appellate authority, the
Commissioner, Consolidation dismissed the revision. Resulting to present
writ petition.
5.        Assailing the impugned order, Sri N.C.Pati, learned counsel
appearing for the Pagal Behera & family, the present petitioners submitted
that the order of the O.E.A. Collector is without jurisdiction as the right of
tenant has not been touched on the introduction of the O.E.A. Act. It is only
the intermediary interest, which has been abolished. Further, Behera family
being recorded as Dhulibhag tenant thereby meaning stitiban (occupancy)
tenants on vesting of the property, the tenancy right of the Behera family was
well protected under the provision of Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act. There
has been illegal decision of the O.E.A. authority in     clear ignorance of the
case of the Occupancy Tenants and the order of the O.E.A. authority since
without jurisdiction, has no application to the present case. It is claimed that
1929 record-of-right showing possession of Behera family as Dhuliubhag
tenants and final record-of-right of Major Settlement Operation being

                                      6
prepared in presence of the successors of Jagirdars, the O.E.A. proceeding
was misconceived and being void, could not have weighed in the mind of the
consolidation authorities.   It is further urged that      from the certified copy
granted involving Vesting Misc. Case No.11022/13002 of 63-64 applied by
Kalpataru Rout find, the proceeding has the following deficiencies:
        (a)    the copy form has been written in different inks;
        (b)    some portion of the application has been torne
               away and tampered;
        (c)    in public notice Schedules written has been cut
               and another sheet of paper is attached without
               the signature of concerned Clerk or the Officer;
        (d)    The year of printing of the Application Form has
               been cut out;
        (e)    2nd and 3rd line of the Form have been tampered
               by inserting other names which found not to be
               genuine;
        (f)    the case was started on 20.10.63 but it is not
               understand how the public notice was served on
               21.10.63. The       date    of   notice No. has been
               tampered.     The     land    particulars given in the
               notice is other      than    the    village-Nuahat and
               subsequently cutting is marked;
        (g)    Apparently     there    is some    manipulation in the
               case record;

                                      7
         (h)    no case register is available in office Almirah for
                verification.
         Referring to the defects indicated hereinabove, Sri Pati, learned
counsel appearing for the petitioners urged that there was no proceeding at
all and fabricated documents have been created. Further referring to the
proceeding under Section 8-A (2) of the O.E.A Act, Sri Pati, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioners contended that mandatory provision in as much
as giving public notice     inviting objections in such proceeding having not
been followed, settlement if any therein, becomes bad and the public notice
purported to have been issued neither shows the number nor the area of the
case and ultimately contended that the note of possession in favour of the
petitioners could not have been ignored under any circumstance.
Establishing his claim that the decision of the O.E.A. authority is void, Sri Pati
learned counsel referring to decisions in the case of Kiran Singh and others
v. Chaman Paswan and others,             A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 340, in the case of
Kumar Bimal Chandra Sinha (deceased) and after him his legal
representatives and others v. State of Orissa and others, A.I.R.1962
Supreme Court 1912, in the case of Mangulu Jal and Ors v. Bhagaban Rai
and Ors, A.I.R.     1975 Ori      219, paragraph-20 therein,   , in the case of
Radhika Bewa & Radha Dei and others v. Panchanan Sahu & others,
(1987) 64 CLT 523,         in the case of State of Orissa and others v.
Brundaban Sharma and another,1995 Supp (3) Supreme Court Cases 249
contended that there has been no proper adjudication of the issues involved
in the matter and the impugned orders herein being contrary to the settled
position of law, the aforesaid decisions ought to be interfered and set aside.

                                    8
6.        Sri Prasanna Kumar Nanda, learned counsel appearing for the
contesting opposite parties on the other hand seriously objecting the
contentions raised by Sri Pati, learned counsel for the petitioners, submitted
that it is a case in one hand the petitioners claim their right over the property
by virtue of note of possessions versus case claimed by the present private
opposite parties on the basis of the decisions passed by the competent
authority under the O.E.A. Act and consequential assessment of rent as well
as a valid sale deed in favour of the private opposite parties by the true
owner of the land. Further, the rent receipts having clearly establishing that
the private opposite parties are in possession, Sri Nanda, learned counsel
appearing for Private opposite parties contended that not only none of the
decisions cited by Sri Pati, learned counsel       has any application to the
present case but Consolidation Authority in view of the settled position of law
are also bound by the decisions of the Revenue Authorities, particularly the
order, passed by the authorities under the Orissa Estates Abolition Act and
consequently claimed that neither the appellate authority nor the revisional
authority have committed any illegality and thus, prayed for not interfering in
the impugned orders and to dismiss the writ petition.
7.        Sri K.K.Mishra, learned Additional Government Advocate          on the
other hand supporting the stands taken by Sri Nanda, learned counsel
appearing for the private opposite parties submitted that the role of the
Consolidation Authority being confined to preparation of record-of-right and
the correction, if any, thereon are bound by the decisions of the Revenue
Authority and for their consisting view holding that the opposite parties are
rightful owners of the properties and declaring the possession in favour of the

                                      9
private opposite parties on the basis of rent receipts have not committed any
illegality leaving any scope for interfering in the same.
8.        Considering the rival contentions of the parties, after carefully
examining the judgments passed by the competent authorities and
enclosures herein, this Court finds on one hand the petitioners are calming
right over the disputed property on the premises that the interest of the
raiyats has not been       touched on the introduction of the Orissa Estates
Abolition Act and they being       tenants under the Jagirdar with Dhulibhag
interest and remaining in the possession of the said suit land, acquired right
of occupancy under Section 236 of the Orissa Tenancy Act. Further, their
right has also not taken away on introduction of the Orissa Estates Abolition
Act.     Further, the right of the tenants having not been evicted by ex-
intermediary and the successors of Jagirdar having recognized, the
possession of the recorded tenants and their heirs in the Yadast No.1103,
the rights vested to them cannot be taken away in the garb of the proceeding
under Section 8-A of the O.E.A. Act, an attempt clandestinely designed
behind the back of the petitioners. Further, for the defects crept in the O.E.A.
proceeding in the matter of no proper notice to the Jagirdars as well as the
persons admittedly in possession as found by the consolidation officer, such
decision cannot have a binding effect on the petitioners. Whereas the claim
of the private opposite parties is based on claim that there is no material to
establish that Jagirdar is an intermediary, consequently Aparti Behera’s
status was uncertain. Further, the claim of right of the petitioners ultimately
under the Orissa Tenancy Act is not sustainable for not involving a dwelling
house on the case land and even          assuming that the Behera family had a
raiyat right, the right of a raiyat being not hereditable, their sons have no

                                     10
right, title, interest and possession over any portion of the case land and no
plea for adverse possession is also entertainable in such contingency. For
the declaration in favour of the Jagirdar in the O.E.A. proceeding settling the
land in favour of Krushna Moharana and rent having been collected from
them by the government and further such land having been transferred by
virtue of sale deed and possession having been delivered in favour of the
private opposite parties, a clear right accrued in favour of the private opposite
parties.
9.         Scan of the record leaves no doubt that the disputed land remained
under classification as ‘bari’ in the sabik record. The note of dhulibhag in the
rent column also indicates that fruits of bari was shared between Jagirdar
and bhag tenants and for having no introduction in the sabik record that the
case land was used as residential purpose and further in the evidence of
Sekh Kala and Hara Barik admitting that the residential house of the
petitioner adjoins the disputed land, the plea of the petitioner taking shelter of
Section 236 of the Orissa Tenancy Act is not applicable to the present case.
Further, from column no.4 of the record-of-right vide Annexure-1, it appears
Hadi Maharana etc., were jagirdars with a note of possession in favour of
Aparti Behera etc., upon payment of rent as dhulibhag. The yadast under
Annexure-2 clearly discloses that the land under Annexure-1 is remaining
under the possession of Aparti Behera, Gopi Behera and Balaram Behera
and subsequently their legal heirs. Thereafter, bebandobast record was
prepared indicating the land in possession of these Behera family as tenants
with payment of dhulibhag. The note of possession under Annexure-1 and
the note of possession under Annexure-2 have never been challenged and
these two records at least clearly establish when Hadi Maharana remains as

                                     11
Jagirdar, the Behera Family remains as tenants. This right of the present
petitioners have never been challenged in any of the proceeding except the
private opposite parties taking the plea of development through a O.E.A.
proceeding under Section 8-A of the Act and thereafter a sale deed between
the persons settled in O.E.A. Act and the predecessors of the opposite
parties. For the admitted position that not only Behera family remained as
tenant, rent by way of Dhulibhag, their name very much appearing in the
record-of-right as well in the yadast       in coming into effect of the Orissa
Estates Abolition Act. whether the right of such tenants have been affected
or not and whereas a proceeding under Section 8-A of the Act was
maintainable at the instance of the Jagirdar claiming to be the tenants over
the disputed property, be it stated here that there is also no dispute that at
many occasions the private opposite parties have also admitted that the
present petitioners to be raiyats. Following the provision under Section 2 of
the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, Government is empowered to publish
notification inviting certain properties vested in the State thereby declaring
that the interest of intermediaries or a class of intermediary in whole or part of
the estate vested in the State free from all encumbrances. This Court here
observes the Jagirdar involved in the case at hand is a class of intermediary
and for the intention of the O.E.A. Act such land was deserved to be vested
in the State except the interest expressly saved by or under the provision of
the said Act. The definition of intermediary defined in Clause-h of Section 2
under the O.E.A. Act reads as hereunder:
                 (h) ‘Intermediary’ with reference to any estate means
             proprietor, sub-proprietor, landlord, land-holder, malguzar,
             thikadar, gaontia, tenure-holder, under-tenure-holder and

                                    12
            includes an inamdar, a jagirdar, zamindar, Illaquedar,
            Khorposhdar,      Parganadar,    Sarbarakar     and     Maufidar
            including the Ruler of an Indian State merged with the State
            of Orissa and all other holders or owners of interest in land
            between the raiyat and the State;
                Definition of intermediary clearly includes Jagirdar and
being an intermediary has lost all his title over the land on coming into
operation of the O.E.A. Act.
10.             In the case of Kiran Singh & others vrs. Chaman Paswan &
others reported in AIR 1954 SC 340 in paragraph-6 Hon’ble apex Court
held as follows:-
            “6. The answer to these contentions must depend on what
            the position in law is when a Court entertains a suit or an
            appeal over which it has no jurisdiction, and what the effect
            of section 11 of the Suits Valuation Act is on that position. It
            is a fundamental principle well-established that a decree
            passed by a Court without jurisdiction is a nullity, & that its
            invalidity could be set up whenever and wherever it is
            sought to be enforced or relied upon, even at the stage of
            execution and even in collateral proceedings. A defect of
            jurisdiction, whether it is pecuniary or territorial, or whether
            it is in respect of the subject-matter of the action, strikes at
            the very authority of the Court to pass any decree, and such
            a defect cannot be cured even by consent of parties. If the
            question now under consideration fell to be determined only
            on the application of general principles governing the

                                     13
             matter, there can be no doubt that the District Court of
             Monghyr was ‘coram non judice’, and that its judgment and
             decree would be nullities. The question is what is the effect
             of section 11 of the Suits Valuation Act on this position.
                Similarly, in the case of Kumar Bimal Chandra Sinha
  (deceased) & after him his legal representatives & others vrs. State of
  Orissa & others AIR 1962 SC 1912, a Constitutional Bench of Hon’ble
  apex Court in paragraph-9 categorically held by virtue of notification under
  Section 3 of the O.E.A. Act Rayati interest did not vest.
         From the above, it becomes clear that a decree passed by a court
without jurisdiction is a nullity and that its invalidity can be set up whenever
and wherever it is sought to be enforced or relied upon. It also becomes clear
that the Rayati interest did not vest in the State.
11.             In view of the above, there remains no doubt that the Jagirdar
involved in the record-of-right under Annexure-1 and the Yadast under
Annexure-2 i.e. Maharana Family were performing as intermediary over the
disputed property, on the coming into operation of the Orissa Estates
Abolition Act and for the provisions contained therein, the Jagirdar had
already lost his right over the property and the petitioners being continuing as
tenants under the Jagirdar with provision of rent of Dhuli Jhada, their right
was being protected under Section 8 of the Orissa Estates Abolition Act. As
relevant, this Court takes note of the provision contained in Section 8 of the
Orissa Estates Abolition Act.
         8. Continuity of tenure of tenants – (1) Any person who
         immediately before the date of vesting of an estate in the
         State Government was in possession of any holding as a

                                      14
         tenant under an Intermediary shall, on and from the date
         of vesting, be deemed to be a tenant of the State
         Government and such person shall hold the land in the
         same rights and subject to the same restrictions and
         liabilities as he was entitled or subject to, immediately
         before the date of vesting.
         (2) Any person holding land in a village for service as a
         village servant by whatever name called, shall be deemed
         to hold it under the State Government subject to such
         terms and conditions as he was entitled         or subject to,
         immediately before the date of vesting.
                   (3) Any person who immediately before the date of
         vesting held land under an Intermediary on favourable
         terms for personal service rendered by him to such
         Intermediary shall, from the date of vesting, be discharged
         from the conditions of such service and the land may be
         settled with him in such manner and under such terms and
         conditions as may be prescribed :
                   [Provided that nothing in sub-section (3) shall apply
         to a trust estate which is vested in the state on or after the
         date of coming into force of the Orissa Estates Abolition
         (Amendment) Act, 1970.]
         The provision referred to hereinabove, leave no doubt that the
petitioners’ right was protected under Section 8 of the Orissa Estates
Abolition Act and as a consequence, this Court finds the proceeding under
Section 8-A of the O.E.A. Act by the Maharana family once remaining as

                                         15
Jagirdars in the terms of intermediary was not maintainable and thus,           any
order passed in any such proceeding was void. This Court finds force in the
submission of Sri Pati in this regard and holds the order obtained by the
Jagirdar in the Section 8-A proceeding becomes void. This Court further
observes that any transaction taking aid of such void order also becomes null
and void.
12.                   For the reasons indicated hereinabove and the law of the land
discussed herein above, this Court finds the orders impugned under
Annexures-4 and 5 as bad in law and hence, this Court sets aside both. As a
consequence, this Court while interfering in the order at Annexure-3, allows
the claim involving Objection Case No.561 of 1982 at the instance of the
present petitioners and dismisses the claim vide Objection Case No.625 of
1982 and further directs the Assistant Consolidation Officer to correct the
record-of-right showing the petitioners as owners of the land with absolute
possession.
            The writ petition succeeds. In the circumstance there is no order as
to cost.
                                                 ………………………………
                                                   Biswanath Rath,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 30th day of January,2017/sks


