                           ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                     WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No.871 OF 2014
         In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
         Constitution of India.
                                  -----------------------
         Santosh Kumar Sahoo                              ………      Petitioner
                                        - versus -
         State of Odisha and others                       ………      Opp. Parties
                For Petitioner  :       M/s. G.K.Mishra & A.K.Saa
                 For Opp.Parties:       M/s.Amiya Kumar Mishra, A.K.Sharma,
                                        M.K.Dash, P.K.Dash, & S.Mishra
                                                          (Opp.Party nos.2 & 3)
                                        Mr. B.Senapati, Addl.Govt. Advocate
         PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
             Date of hearing: 19.02.2015     |  Date of Judgment: 03.03.2015
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.      The grievance of the petitioner, who is working as
         „Kantawala‟ in the office of the Civil Supplies Officer-cum-District
         Manager, Odisha State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd., Cuttack, is that
         though he has been continuing for more than 18 years on daily wage
         basis and has been extended with the benefit of time scale of pay,
         grade pay like ad hoc employees along with medical allowance, but has
         been deprived of consequential benefits like increment, T.A., Leave
         Salary, House Rent etc. by the discriminatory disposition of the

                                      2
authorities by creating one day artificial break in every 44 days of
service, pursuant to by order dated 3.1.2013 in Annexure-1, thereby
escaping the statutory obligation of opening his service book.
2.            The short fact of the case, in hand, is that petitioner has
been working as „Kantawala‟ in the office of the Civil Supplies Officer-
cum-District Manager, Odisha State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd.,
Cuttack, (hereinafter to be referred to as “the Corporation”, in short)
for more than 18 years on daily wage basis, but by order dated
3.1.2013 in Annexure-1, the opposite party no.3 has upgraded the
status of daily wage employees of the Corporation to that of ad hoc
status and allowed such ad hoc employees to continue for a period of
44 days with one day break after each spell of service. By upgrading
the status of daily wage employees to the status of ad hoc employees,
the petitioner has been extended with the monthly medical allowance
of Rs.500/-, but has been deprived of consequential legal benefits like
increment, T.A., Leave Salary, House Rent etc. by the discriminatory
disposition of the authorities by creating one day artificial break in
every 44 days of his service, consequently escaping the statutory
obligation of opening his service book, whereas persons similarly
situated who have been engaged on ad hoc status initially, have been
allowed to continue “until further orders” or till a regular recruitment is
done whichever is earlier by granting all the consequential benefits
admissible to the post held by them. Pursuant to the decision taken by

                                      3
the Board of Directors in their 156th meeting held on 30.3.2012 and
consequential approval of the Government in FS & CW Department
communicated vide letter No.17199 dated 2.11.2012 and corrigendum
issued vide No.19942 dated 19.12.2012, 98 employees of the opposite
party-Corporation working on daily wage basis have been upgraded to
the ad hoc status and extended the benefit of Orissa Revised Scales of
Pay Rules,2008 with effect from 1.4.2012. It is made clear that the
order does not confer any right for claiming the benefit of regular
employees of the Corporation. The admissibility of D.A. will be
communicated later after receipt of approval from the Government.
Pursuant to such letter dated 20.12.2012 in Annexure-3, the list of 98
persons have been prepared and benefit has been extended to them.
The Government also approved the extension of such benefit to 239
daily wage employees of the Corporation including the petitioner by its
corrigendum dated 19.12.2012, but the Corporation has modified the
order to the effect that there shall be one day artificial break in every
44 days in case of such employees including the petitioner vide letter
dated 2.11.2013 in Annexure-5. Issuance of such letter creates an
artificial discrimination between the same class of people i.e., allowing
one group of people to continue in service “until further orders” status
and another group of people of the same status on 44 days basis with
one day break. The petitioner being aggrieved has approached this

                                       4
Court by filing the present writ petition challenging such discriminatory
action of the opposite parties 3 and 4.
3.            Mr.G.K.Mishra,    learned    counsel   for  the   petitioner
submitted that the opposite party-Corporation has allowed one group
of ad hoc employees to continue in the status of “until further orders”
and another group on 44 days basis with one day break, which creates
discrimination amongst the same group of people working in the same
working condition, thereby it violates Article 14 of the Constitution. He
further submitted that the persons, who are continuing on “until
further orders” status, have been allowed to get the benefits of annual
increment, T.A., Leave Salary, House Rent etc., but the group of
people who continue on 44 days basis with one day break are being
deprived of getting such benefits though they have been given the
benefit of time scale of pay, grade pay etc. like ad hoc employees
continuing on “until further orders” status. Such action of the
authorities being arbitrary, unreasonable and discriminatory one, he
seeks for interference of this Court.
4.            Mr.A.K.Mishra, learned counsel for opposite party nos.2
and 3 while refuting such allegations, justifies the stand taken by the
Corporation with reference to the pleadings ma de in the counter
affidavit and admits the fact that the post held by the petitioner has
been upgraded to ad hoc status and he has been granted with the

                                      5
benefit of time scale of pay and grade pay like ad hoc employees, but
he has been allowed to continue on 44 days basis with one day break
after each spell of service. It is admitted that the persons who are
continuing on ad hoc basis on 44 days basis with one day break are
not getting the annual increments and other benefits admissible to the
regular employees whereas similar ad hoc employees, who have been
allowed to continue on “until further orders” status even though have
been initially engaged on daily wage basis, they have been extended
with the benefit of regular employees and allowed to legal benefits like
annual increments, T.A., house rent etc. It is stated that the petitioner
does not stand on the same footing as that of Sri Niranjan Satpathy,
which has been referred to in Annexure-2 and to justify the same, it is
stated that Sri Satpathy has been engaged as Junior Typist on ad hoc
basis and has been allowed the time scale of pay from the date of his
initial engagement and his service has been renewed after each spell of
44 days of service. Sri Satpathy who was availing the time scale
benefit, was allowed to continue as such “until further orders” basis
with effect from 11.03.1997, whereas the petitioner was initially
engaged on daily wage basis. So, the condition of initial appointment
of the petitioner is different from that of Sri Satpathy and therefore,
the petitioner has been engaged on 44 days basis with break of one
day. But by virtue of the decision dated 21.10.2010 in Annexure-A/3,
the Government have decided that the ad hoc employees can be

                                       6
appointed at the minimum of the revised scale of pay attached to the
post with grade pay under the Orissa Revised Scales of Pay Rules,
2008 with prospective effect without any arrear benefit. Pursuant to
the letter dated 21.10.2010, benefits have been extended to the
petitioner by upgrading the daily wage status to ad hoc status with
effect from 1.4.2012 and engaging for a period of 44 days with one
day break with renewal of service after each spell of 44 days, which is
well within the competence of the authority. Therefore, the claim made
by the petitioner should not be granted by this Court.
5.              Considering the contentions raised by the learned counsel
for the parties and after going through the records, it appears that
admittedly the petitioner was initially engaged on daily wage basis and
due to upgradation of ad hoc status, the petitioner is continuing on 44
days having with one day break after each spell of service pursuant to
Annexure-1. But similarly situated persons who have been initially
engaged on daily wage basis and thereafter granted the time scale of
pay, have been allowed to continue “until further orders” with benefits
like, annual increment, T.A., leave salary, house rent allowance etc. In
view of such position, the opposite parties 3 and 4 have created an
artificial classification amongst the same group of people working in
the same working condition by creating a discrimination by allowing a
group of daily wage employees upgraded to that of ad hoc status to
continue for a period of 44 days with one day break after each spell of

                                        7
service vis-à-vis daily wage employees allowed to receive the time
scale of pay to continue in service with “until further orders” status
extending all the benefits applicable to the regular employees, such as
increment, T.A., Leave Salary, House Rent etc. Such action of the
authorities is in gross violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of
India. That apart, no justifiable reasons have been ascribed for giving
such spell appointment of 44 days with one day break nor has any
reasons been shown in any of the documents nor is there any pleading
to that effect in the counter affidavit filed by the Corporation. The daily
wage employees have been upgraded to ad hoc status and they have
been allowed to continue in service on 44 days basis with one day
break, thereby depriving them of all the benefit of annual increment,
T.A., Leave Salary, House Rent etc. admissible to the similarly situated
employees working in the same working condition with “until further
orders” status. Therefore, the very action of the authorities depriving
the benefits admissible to the petitioner is wholly arbitrary and suffers
from vice of discrimination.
6.            Similar question came up for consideration by the apex
Court in Sri Rabinarayan Mohapatra v. State of Orissa and
others, AIR 1991 SC 1286 wherein appointment of teachers on ad hoc
basis on 89 days basis with one day break was under challenge. The
apex Court held that the practice of adhocism by giving appointment
on 89 days basis with one day break suffers from the vice of

                                       8
discrimination. The ratio of the said judgment has been followed in
plethora of judgments by the apex Court and this Court. Therefore, the
question of spell appointment having been deprecated by the apex
Court by holding that the same suffers from the vice of discrimination,
the same remains no more res integra.
7.            Applying the said principle to the present context, the
action of the opposite party-Corporation upgrading the daily wage
employees to the status of ad hoc employee extending the benefit of
time scale of pay and grade pay, but allowing them to continue in
service for 44 days with artificial break of one day spell, suffers from
vice of discrimination and violates Article 14 of the Constitution of
India. Therefore, such action of the opposite party-Corporation is not
sustainable in the eye of law and is hereby quashed. Accordingly, the
opposite party-Corporation is directed to allow the petitioner to
continue in service like that of other employees with “until further
orders” status enabling him to get all the consequential legal benefits
like increment, T.A., Leave Salary, House Rent etc. with statutory
obligation to open the service book. Such benefits be extended to the
petitioner from the date his juniors have been extended such benefits
without creating artificial break of one day break after each 44 days
spell.

                                      9
8.            With the aforesaid observation and direction, the writ
petition stands disposed of. No cost.
                                        ……………………………..
                                          Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 3rd March, 2015/PKSahoo


