            ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
             W.P.(C) Nos. 14077 & 14078 of 2007
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                              ----------
In W.P.(C) No. 14077 of 2007
Nalini Pradhan and others                  ………         Petitioners
                              -versus-
Chief Executive Officer, CESCO and        ………         Opp.Parties
Others.
         For Petitioners    :   M/s. J. Katikia, S.P. Sovani,
                                S. Patra.
        For Opp.Parties   :    M/s. Bibhudhendra Dash
                               Mr. P.K. Mohanty (O.P.2)
In W.P.(C) No. 14078 of 2007
Dhani Dei@Khamari and others               ………         Petitioners
                              -versus-
Chief Executive Officer, CESCO and        ………         Opp.Parties
Others.
         For Petitioners    :   M/s. J. Katikia, S.P. Sovani,
                                S. Patra.
        For Opp.Parties   :    M/s. Bibhudhendra Dash
                               Mr. P.K. Mohanty (O.P.2)
PRESENT:
       THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
   Date of hearing: 03.12.2013| Date of judgment : 07.01.2014

                                              2
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.      In both the writ petitions, since common questions
         of fact and law are involved, they were heard together and are
         disposed of by this common judgment.
                         In both the writ petitions the legal heirs of the
         deceased     Surendra   Pradhan   and    Nityananda    Khamari have
         approached this Court assailing the non-grant of compensation for
         their death due to electrocution.
         2.              The fact of the case in hand is that on 17.5.2003
         when the deceased Surendra Pradhan had been to his paddy field
         to   spread   manure    along   with   his   brother-in-law, namely,
         Nityananda Khamari, suddenly he came in contact with a live
         electric wire which was lying on the ground. Immediately after
         getting in touch with the said electric wire, Surendra Pradhan fell
         on the ground with a loud cry and sometime thereafter his body
         became still. Nityananda Khamari, who was driving the bullock cart,
         jumped off the cart and ran towards deceased Surendra Pradhan
         with a purpose to save him. But when Nityananda touched the body
         of Surendra, he fell down on the ground and died due to
         electrocution. Thereafter, the younger daughter of Surendra, who
         was accompanying both the deceased, ran home and reported her
         family members about the incident. On getting information, the co-
         villagers of the deceased rushed to the spot and found that both
         the deceased persons have died due to coming in contact with a
         live electric wire, which had fallen on the ground. Thereafter the

                                     3
villagers brought the dead bodies to the Govt. Hospital and after
examining the bodies, doctor referred them to the upgraded
Primary Health Centre, Tangi where both were declared dead. Upon
getting information, the Officer-in-Charge, Tangi Police Station
arrived and registered Tangi P.S. U.D. Case No. 7 of 2003. The
Officer-in-Charge, Tangi Police Station sent the bodies of the
deceased Surendra Pradhan and Nityananda Khamari to Khurda
Govt. Hospital for post mortem. After port mortem, the dead bodies
were handed over to the family members for cremation. Due to the
lackadaisical attitude of opposite party nos. 1 and 2, co-villagers
resorted to strike and delayed the cremation of the dead bodies
and also held „Rasta-rok‟ on the main road leading to Bhusandapur.
The Tahasildar, Tangi and Officer-in-Charge, Tangi Police Station
requested the villagers to remove the road block and allow
cremation of dead bodies with the assurance of the CESCO
authorities to pay Rs.2000/- each towards funeral expenses of the
victim, but the protesters did not pay any heed to any assurance.
However, the Sub-Collector, Khurda-opposite party no.4 came to
the spot and announced ex-gratia payment of Rs.5000/- for each of
the bereaved families and promised to take urgent steps for
disbursement    of  the  regular   compensation.    Basing  on   such
assurance, the „Rasta-rok‟ was withdrawn and the dead bodies
were carried to the respective villages for cremation. Since no steps
were taken either by opposite party nos. 3 and 4 or by opposite

                                      4
party nos. 1 and 2 for payment of compensation, the petitioner
no.1 filed representation before the authorities praying therein for
early payment of necessary compensation. Not only she made
representation but also she met personally opposite party nos. 1
and 2 on several occasion, but no action has been taken for
disbursing the compensation amount to the petitioners, who are
spending their days in agony after the sad demise of Surendra
Pradhan, who was the only earning member of the family. Copies of
the said representations are attached to the writ petition as
Annexure-2 series.
3.               Pursuant to the notice, opposite party nos. 1 and 2
have filed their counter affidavit stating, inter alia, that the factum
of the death of Surendra Pradhan and Nityananda Khamari have
been admitted on the date of occurrence due to electrocution. They
have also admitted the cause of death as declared by the doctor
and also admitted the registration of U.D. Case No. 7 of 2003
before Tangi Police Station. It is further admitted that there was
„Rasta-rok‟ by the local people and due to announcement of
extratia payment of Rs.5000/- to each of the victims by the Sub-
Collector, Khurda, the „Rasta-rok‟ was withdrawn. But at the same
time, it is stated in the counter affidavit filed by the opposite party
no.2 that there is no cause of action to file a case against him as
the place of death is not coming under the Electrical Division of
opposite party no.2 and he has no knowledge about the incident

                                     5
and nobody approached him for the compensation as stated.
Further it is stated that he is no way connected with the death,
therefore due to non-joinder of proper parties, the writ petition has
to be dismissed. Apart from the same, an objection was raised with
regard to the limitation because, the incident was of the year 2003
and the writ petition has been filed in the year 2007. Therefore, in
view of Section 82 of the Limitation Act and Section 1 A Note 15.2
of the Fatal Accident Act, the writ petition having been filed after
more than three years, is barred by limitation.
4.             The petitioners have filed rejoinder affidavit stating
that once the opposite party nos. 1 and 2 have admitted the death
of the deceased, they are obliged to pay the compensation. It is
further stated that instead of mentioning Executive Engineer,
Balugaon, it has been wrongly reflected as Executive Engineer,
Khurda but the same has been corrected by filing a Misc. Case and
the Executive Engineer, Balugoan has been impleaded as opposite
party no.2 to the writ petition. It is stated that after death of her
husband (the present petitioner no.1) petitioner no.1 was mentally
upset for which she could not approach the authorities on 7.7.2003
to register the representation and on 02.04.2004 but when no
action was taken by the authorities, the present writ petition
(W.P.(C) No.14077 of 2007) was filed. Therefore, the stand taken
by the authorities that the writ petition has been filed at a belated

                                     6
stage and the petitioners are not entitled to get the compensation
is absolutely misconceived.
5.              Mr. J. Katikia, learned counsel for the petitioners
raises a specific contention that if the death has been caused due
to electrocution and for that U.D. Case No. 7 of 2003 has been
registered   and   such   occurrence   has  happened    due   to  the
negligence of the authorities as they had not taken care of the live
electric wire which had snapped and touched the ground and they
had not taken any precautionary measure, thereby the legal heirs
of the deceased are entitled to get compensation. More so, the
death due to electrocution, is not disputed in view of the fact
mentioned in Annexure-3 and the F.I.R. submitted in U.D./G.R.
Case No.42 of 2003 pending in the court of the learned Sub-
Divisional Magistrate, Khurda and the subsequent post mortem
report, where it is opined by the Sub-Assistant Surgeon that the
cause of death of the deceased was due to ventricular fibrillation as
a result of electrocution and the time of death is within 6 to 12
hours and such report has been furnished on 17.5.2003. So far as
the contention raised that the claim is barred by limitation, Mr.
Katikia, learned counsel states that the same is not barred by
limitation.
6.              Mr. Dash, learned counsel for the opposite party
no.2 specifically referring to Section 3 of the Fatal Accident Act
urges that since the limitation provided in this Act is one year but

                                     7
two years thereafter the petitioners have approached this Court
ventilating their grievance in the year 2007, the claim is barred by
limitation. Hence, the claim is not entertainable.
7.              It is the admitted case of the parties that Surendra
Pradhan and Nityananda Khamari have died in coming in contact
with a live electric wire, which had touched the ground. In view of
the materials available on record, more particularly, the F.I.R.
lodged before the Tangi Police Station and registered as U.D. Case
No. 7 of 2003, which has been corroborated by the post mortem
report submitted by the doctor under Annexure-3, it is conclusively
proved that the death is due to electrocution and it is due to the
negligence on the part of the authorities. It is tell-tale in view of
the fact that once a live electric wire has snapped and touched the
ground, a duty is cast on the opposite party nos. 1 and 2 to either
disconnect the power supply or to take necessary steps so as to
prevent the fatal accident. As it reveals, no precaution has been
taken by the opposite party nos. 1 and 2 to disconnect power
supply but on the other hand, they became callous in their own
attitude, causing death of two valuable lives at an early age putting
the entire family in distress doll-dom and now their families are
struggling for their existence having lost their only earning member
of the family and their economic condition has been deteriorating
day by day and callousness of the opposite parties is perpetuating

                                      8
because of non payment of compensation, which is admissible to
the petitioners in accordance with law.
8.              So far as the contention of the opposite parties that
the claim is barred by limitation and the petitioners are not entitled
to get compensation is concerned, the same is absolutely based on
a misconceived notion. Mr. Katikia, learned counsel for the
petitioners   relies  upon    the   judgments   in  Collector   Land
Acquisition, Anantnag and another v. Mst. Katiji and others,
AIR 1987 SC 1353 and in The Madras Port Trust v. Hymanshu
International, AIR 1979 SC 1144 and states that in view of the
judgments cited above, refusal to grant compensation on the
ground of limitation is absolutely not sustainable.
9.              In Collector Land Acquisition, Anantnag and
another v. Mst. Katiji and others, AIR 1987 SC 1353, it is
specifically held that if sufficient cause has been shown, the court
should adopt a liberal approach in the matter of condonation of
delay. It is further stated that when substantial justice and
technical considerations are pitted against each other, cause of
substantial justice deserves to be preferred for the other side
cannot claim to have vested right in injustice being done because
of a non-deliberate delay.
10.             In   The    Madras     Port   Trust  v.   Hymanshu
International, AIR 1979 SC 1144, it is held by the apex Court that

                                      9
the plea of limitation based on Section 110 of Madras Port Trust
Act, is one which the court always looks upon with disfavour and it
is unfortunate that a public authority like the Port Trust should in
all morality and justice take up such a plea to defeat a just claim of
the citizen. It is high time that governments and public authorities
adopt the practice of not relying upon technical pleas for the
purpose of defeating legitmate claims of citizens and do what is fair
and just to the citizens.
11.              In view of the judgments referred to supra the plea
taken by the opposite party nos. 1 and 2 that the claim of the
petitioners is barred by limitation and that they are not entitled to
get compensation is hereby rejected. Apart from the same, the
petitioners have shown sufficient cause for the delay in approaching
this Court to indicate that they made representation to the
authorities in the year 2003 and moved the very same authority till
2004 and subsequently they approached the authorities personally
several times, but when they failed in their attempt to get their
legitimate claim, finding no other way out, they have approached
this Court by filing the present writ petitions. In view of such
position, the contention raised by the opposite party nos. 1 and 2
that the claims are barred by limitation, therefore, fails.
12.              Mr. J. Katikia, learned counsel for the petitioners in
support of the claim of compensation has relied upon the
judgments of this Court reported in Nirmala Nayak and others v.

                                   10
Chairman-cum-Managing          Director,    Grid    Corporation     of
Orissa Ltd. and another, 2005 (II) OLR 389 and Dhananjaya
Behera and two others v. CESU represented through its Chief
Executive Officer and three others, 2011 (I) OLR 198.
13.             Before going through the judgments cited by Mr.
Katikia, learned counsel for the petitioners, on the factual matrix, it
is clear on the basis of the post mortem report and the F.I.R.
lodged before the Tangi Police Station registered as U.D. Case No.
7 of 2003 that the death has been caused due to electrocution and
such death has been caused because of the negligence on the part
of the opposite party nos. 1 and 2. If the live wire from the over-
head live had snapped and touched the ground, the opposite
parties owed a duty as per the provisions contained under the
Indian Electricity Act to take precautionary measure to disconnect
the power supply. Instead of doing so, they allowed the live electric
wire to remain touched to the ground and unfortunately having
come in contact with the said live wire, two valuable lives have
been lost. Therefore, the opposite parties are liable to pay
compensation.
14.             The meaning of compensation had came up for
consideration before this Court in Moumita Roychoudhury v.
Abhijit Chattarjee, reported in 2013 (II) ILR-CUT-820. In
paragraph-12 of the said judgment, the dictionary meaning of
compensation has been analyzed in the following manner:-

                        11
“(1) The word “compensation” should be taken to
mean the sum remaining after setting-off the gains
from the amount of loss through the non-fulfilment of
the contract. [Muralidhar Chatterjee v. International
Film Co. Ltd., AIR 1943 P.C. 34:206 IC 1].
(2) The expression “compensation” ordinarily used as
an equivalent to damages, although compensation
may often have to be measured by the same rule as
damage in an action for the breach. The term
“compensation” as pointed out in Oxford Dictionary,
signifies that which is given recompense, an equivalent
rendered damages, on the other hand, constiture the
sum of money claimed or adjudged to be paid in
compensation for loss or injury sustained, the value
estimated in money, of something lost or withheld.
The term “Compensation” etymologically suggests the
image of balancing one thing against another. Its
primary signification is equivalent, and the secondary
and more common meaning is something given or
obtained as an equivalent. [Mohamed Mozahara Ahad
v. Mohamad Azimadin Bhauinya, AIR 1923 Cal.507 at
511].
(3) According to dictionary it means, “compensating or
being compensated; thing given as recompense”. In
legal sense it may constitute actual loss or expected
loss and may extend to physical, mental or even
emotional suffering, insult or injury or loss. [Lucknow
Development Authority v. M.K. Gupta, AIR 1994 SC
787].
(4) Though the word “compensation” is not defined in
the Act or in the rules it is the giving of an equivalent
or substitute of equivalent value. It means when you
pay the compensation in terms of money it must
represent, on the date of ordering such payment, the
equivalent value, (Para 24) Rathi Memon v. Union of
India, (2001) 3 SCC 714:2001 SCC (Cri) 1311:AIR
2001 SC 1333.
(5) The      dictionary    meaning     of    the    word
“compensation” is as under “
    Black‟s Law Dictionary
    “money given to compensate loss or
    injury.”
    Webster‟s Third New International Dictionary
    “the act or action of making up, making good
    or counterbalancing rendering equal:”

                                       12
                     P.Ramanatha Aiyar: Law Lexicon
                     “something given or obtained as an equivalent; …
                     an equivalent given for property taken or for any
                     injury done to another;”
15.               In view of the aforesaid dictionary meaning of the
word „compensation‟ now the question comes for consideration as
to the applicability of the judgments cited by the learned counsel
for the petitioners. In Nirmala Nayak and others (supra),
wherein a Division Bench of this Court in a similar circumstances in
exercise of power under articles 226 and 227 of Constitution of
India had considered a similar situation where death had occurred
due to electrocution and compensation was granted. While doing so
this Court has taken note of the judgment of the Hon‟ble apex
Court in M.P. Electricity Board v. Shail Kumar and others, AIR
2002 SC 551, Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of India, AIR 1990 SC
1480,     Gujurat      State    Road     Transport    Corporation     v.
Ramanbhai Prabhatbhai, AIR 1987 SC 1690, Kaushnuma
Begum v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd., AIR 2001 SC 485.
16.               In M.P. Electricity Board (supra) reliance has been
placed on the decision of the Privy Council in Quebec Railway
Light Heat and Power Co. Ltd. v. Vandry (1920 Law Reports
Appeal Cases 662) where it is observed that the company supplying
electricity is liable for the damage without proof that they had been
negligent. Even the defence that the cables were disrupted on
account of a violent wind and high tension current found its way

                                      13
through the low tension cable into the premises of the Respondents
was held to be not a justifiable defence. Thus, merely because the
illegal act could be attributable to a stranger is not enough to
absolve the liability of the Board regarding the live wire lying on the
road.
             Therefore, the contention raised by the opposite party
nos. 1 and 2 that they are not liable to pay compensation is
absolutely a misconceived one.
17.             So    far   as  the   quantum      of  compensation      is
concerned, reliance has been placed on the judgment in Executive
Engineer,      Electricity      (M&RE)       Division,      Awantipura,
Anantanagar v. Mohammad Ashraf Bhat, AIR 1999 J & K, 137,
wherein the High Court in a case of death due to electric shock, it
was held that the claim for compensation and employment to the
son of the deceased, the High Court has jurisdiction to entertain
the petition and deal with it appropriately. The apex Court also in
the case of M.S. Grewal v. Deep Chand Sood, (2001) 8 SCC 151
observed as under:-
            “Next is the issue of “maintainability of the writ petition”
            before the High Court under Article 226 of the
            Constitution. The appellants though initially very strongly
            contended that while the negligence aspect has been dealt
            with under penal laws already, the claim for compensation
            cannot but be left to be adjudicated by the civil laws and
            thus the Civil Courts jurisdiction ought to have been
            invoked rather than by way of a writ petition under Article
            226 of the Constitution. This plea of non-maintainability of
            the writ petition though advanced at the initial stage of
            the submissions but subsequently the same was not
            pressed and as such we need not detain ourselves on that

                                        14
            score, expecting however recording that the law Courts
            exits for the society and they have an obligation to meet
            the social aspirations of citizens since law courts must also
            respond to the needs of the people. In this context,
            reference may be made to two decisions of this Court: the
            first in line is the decision in Nilabati Behera v. State of
            Orissa (AIR 1993 SC 1960) wherein this Court relying
            upon the decision in Rudral Sah (Rudral Sah v. State of
            Bihar), (AIR 1983 SC 1086) decried the illegality and
            impropriety in awarding compensation in a proceeding in
            which the courts power under Articles 32 and 226 of the
            Constitution stands involved and thus observed that it was
            a clear case for award of compensation to the petitioner
            for custodial death of her son. It is undoubtedly true,
            however, that in the present context, there is no
            infringement of the State‟s obligation, unless of course the
            State can also be termed to be joint tortfeasor, but since
            the case of the parties stands restricted and without
            imparting any liability on the State, we do not deem it
            expedient to deal with the issue any further except
            nothing the two decisions of this Court as above and
            without expression of any opinion in regard thereto.”
                 Similar view has also been taken by this Court in
Dhananjaya Behera and two others v. CESU represented
through its Chief Executive Officer and three others, 2011 (I)
OLR 198 and in the said case the case of Nirmala Nayak and
others      v.      Chairman-cum-Managing               Director,      Grid
Corporation of Orissa Ltd. and another, 2005 (II) OLR 389 has
also been referred along with Ketaki Lenka and another v.
CESCO & others, 2007 (I) CLR 516.
18.              In view of the above facts and circumstances of the
case, referring to the ratio decided in Nirmala Nayak and others
(supra) and taking into account the law laid down by the Hon‟ble
apex Court in M.S. Grewal v. Deep Chand Sood (supra) and
following the guidelines mentioned therein, this Court is of the view
that the petitioners in both the writ petitions should be paid a

                                    15
compensation of rupees two lakhs each. Accordingly, the petitioner
nos.    1  and   2   are  directed  to  pay   the  compensation   of
Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakhs) each to petitioner no.1 in both
the writ petitions with simple interest @ 6% per annum from the
date of death of the victims till the payment. The amount shall be
paid within two months from the date of passing of this order.
19.             With the above observation and direction, the writ
petitions are allowed. The petitioners are directed to produce a
certified copy of this judgment along with the copy of the writ
petition with all its annexures before the opposite party nos. 1 and
2, who shall act upon production of the same. The petitioners are
also directed to file requisites for communication of this order to
opposite party nos. 1 and 2 within three days. No cost.
                                           ……………………………..
                                             Dr.B.R.Sarangi, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 7th January, 2014/Jagdev


