                           ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                               W.P.(C) No. 19362 of 2010
          In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
          Constitution of India.
                                         ----------
          Minaketan Kanhar                              ………             Petitioner
                                          -versus-
          Union of India and Others                     ………          Opp. Parties
                  For Petitioner    :             M/s. C.R. Pattnaik, & S. Ch. Padhy
                  For Opp.Parties :               M/s. S.K. Patra.
          PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
          Date of hearing : 21.07.2014         |    Date of Judgment: 05.08.2014
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.    The petitioner has filed this petition assailing the order of his
         removal from service passed by the Disciplinary Authority dated
         24.08.2007 vide Annexure-4 and confirmation thereof by order of the
         Appellate Authority dated 05.04.2008, vide Annexure -5, the petitioner
         has filed this application seeking direction to reinstate him in service with
         all consequential benefits.
          2.           The short fact of the case, in hand, is that the petitioner
          being   successful   in  all  tests   of  selection  was    appointed    as  a
          Constable/GD in Group Centre CRPF, Bhubaneswar on 01.04.1988.

                                     2
After his joining, he was sent to Group Centre CRPF Mukamghat in 95
Battalion CRPF. Thereafter on completion of training, he was posted to
4th Battalion CRPF and while he was continuing in that Battalion he was
promoted to the post of HC/GD(Havildar) in the year 2004 and posted to
D Company of 4th Battalion CRPF, which was deployed in the residence
of the Hon’ble Chief Minister, Jammu and Kashmir for security purpose.
In that Company there were 14 guard posts and in each post three
constables and one Havildar were deployed. The petitioner, being a
Havildar, was deployed in Post no.11 as Guard Commander. On
03.04.2006 a Constable known as CT/GD- Anand Singh from Post No.3
became violent and opened fire at three CRPF personnel, such as,
Inspector Mohan Shyam (Company Commander) was deployed in front of
Kote guard of the said company, HC/GD-H.N.Pandey was deployed in
front of ORS Line No.3 and HC/GD-Yogendra Jha was deployed at ORS
Mess, consequent upon which they succumbed to the injuries on the
very date. After hearing the sound, all the company personnel including
the petitioner became stand still to but taking advantage of darkness, the
assailant escaped from the place and surrendered in the nearby Police
Station. After the above incident, inquiry was conducted by the
authorities and after completion of the same, charge-sheet was
submitted by the Disciplinary Authority namely, Commandant 4th
Battalion CRPF against three persons including the petitioner. Thereafter
on 12.12.2006 vide Annexure-1, the petitioner was called upon to show
cause. In compliance with the same, the petitioner submitted his show
cause reply on 09.01.2007 denying the allegation of negligence. The

                                      3
Disciplinary Authority without considering the same, appointed one Sri
Jaikisan A/C 4th Battalion CRPF as Enquiring Officer to enquire into the
matter under Sub-Rule (b) of Rule 27 of CRPF Rules, 1955 under
Annexure-2. Pursuant to the above order, the inquiry was conducted by
the Enquiring Officer and report was submitted before the Disciplinary
Authority against the petitioner on 23.04.2007 finding him guilty of the
charges. The said inquiry report was sent to the petitioner by the
Disciplinary Authority to file representation, if he desired, within 15 days
from the date of receipt of that report vide Annexure-3. In obedience to
the order of the Disciplinary Authority, the petitioner filed his reply
denying his fault in the said incident, but without examining the same in
a proper perspective, the DIGP, CRPF, Patna removed the petitioner from
service on 24.08.2004 vide Annexure-4. Being aggrieved by the said
order, the petitioner preferred an appeal before the Inspector General,
CRPF, Bihar for setting aside the same but the Appellate Authority
without application of mind confirmed the order of removal of the
petitioner from service by rejecting his appeal vide Annexure-5.
3.           Mr. C.R. Pattnaik, learned counsel for the petitioner,
strenuously urged that the impugned order has been passed without
application of mind in as much as in non-compliance with the provisions
contained in CRPF Rules, 1955. To substantiate his contention he has
relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in Govt. of Andhra Pradesh
and Others v. A.Venkata Raidu, 2007 (1) SCC 338, Rajendra Yadav v.
State of M.P. & Others, 2013 (II) OLR SC 48, State of Uttar Pradesh
and others v. Raj Pal Singh, (2010) 5 SCC 783, Damoh Panna Sagar

                                    4
Rural Regional Bank and another v. Munna Lal Jain, (2005) 10 SCC
84 and Union of India v. Giriraj Sharma, AIR 1994 SC 215.
4.           Mr. S.K. Patra, learned counsel for the Union of India,
strenuously urged that the punishment imposed by the authority is well
within its jurisdiction and as such, this Court has no jurisdiction to
interfere with the quantum of punishment and more so, when there is
alternative remedy available under the Rule-29 of the CRPF Rules to
prefer revision without availing of the revisional jurisdiction, the
petitioner should not have approached this Court by filing the present
writ petition. To   substantiate his contention, he has relied upon the
judgment of the apex Court in Sheela Devi v. Juspal Singh, 1990(1)
SCC 209 and Bijay Kumar Singh v. Union of India and others,
2011(Supp.II) OLR (SC) 601. Therefore, he sought dismissal of the same.
5.           Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the
judgment in A.Venkata Raidu case (supra) stating that the charge sheet
should not be vague but should be specific. In Rajendra Yadav case
(supra), it was held that punishment should not be disproportionate
while comparing the involvement of co-delinquent who are parties to the
same transaction or incident. The Disciplinary Authority cannot impose
punishment, which is disproportionate, i.e. lesser punishment for
serious offences and stringent punishment for lesser offences. The
Disciplinary Authority imposing a comparatively lighter punishment to
the co-delinquent and at the same time, harsher punishment to the
appellant cannot be permitted in law, since they were all involved in the
same incident. In Raj Pal Singh case (supra) it is held that different

                                      5
punishment for identical charges, delinquency and incident on the same
day, would amount to discrimination and when charges are same and
identical in relation to one and the same incident, to deal with the
delinquents    differently  in  the   award    of  punishment   would    be
discriminatory. In Munna Lal Jain case (supra) it is held that the Court
should interfere with the punishment if it is called for only when it is so
disproportionate as to shock the judicial conscience. In Giriraj Sharma
case    (supra),   it is   held  that   if the    punishment  awarded    is
disproportionate to the grant of misconduct, it would be arbitrary and
would violate the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
6.           Mr. Patra, learned counsel for the Union of India, has relied
upon the judgment in Bijay Kumar Singh case (supra) it is held that
whether the punishment is disproportionate to the charges alleged, the
Court has to keep in view the various factors like the nature of job, the
standard of honesty and integrity required of the employees and various
other aspects.
7.           As it appears, Rule 29 of the CRPF Rules, 1955 deals with
revision. The petitioner has not preferred the revision before the
competent authority. Mr.Patra, learned counsel for the opposite parties
has relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in Sheela Devi case
(supra), wherein the Apex Court has held that if the petitioner has
bypassed the alternative remedy, he has to mention why he has not
availed the same. As it appears from the pleadings available in the writ
petition, the petitioner has not substantiated the fact by giving any
cogent reason as to why he has not availed the remedy available under

                                      6
the statute under Rule 29 of CRPF Rules by preferring a revision. If
alternative remedy is available and there is every likelihood that the
revisional authority can consider the same in accordance with law, the
contentions which have been raised before this Court, in that case
extraordinary jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution
of India should not have been invoked. The contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioner and the law referred to substantiating
his contention, can also be considered by the revisional authority while
adjudicating the case in conformity with the provisions of law.
8.          This Court in Gopal Krishna Behera v. Union of India and
others, WP(C) No.7949 of 2014 disposed of 1.7.2014 in paragraph 9
observed thus:
             “In view of the aforesaid law laid down by the apex Court
            mentioned supra where the party had a statutory remedy
            available under the relevant statute, he cannot bypass
            the said remedy and file a writ petition under Article 226.
            It was held that if such a procedure is allowed, it may
            enable the litigant to defeat the provisions of the statute.
            The normal rule is that a writ petition should not be
            entertained when statutory remedy is available under the
            concerned legislation unless exceptional cases are made
            out in view of the ratio decided by the apex Court in
            Premier Automobiles Ltd. Vs. Kamlekar Shantaram
            Wadke, (1976) 1 SCC 496, Rajasthan SRTC v. Krishna
            Kant, AIR 1995 SC 1715, Scooters India v. Vijai
            E.V.Eldred, (1998) 6 SCC 549, Chndrakant Tukaram
            Nikam v. Municipal Corpn. of Ahmedabad, (2002) 2
            SCC 542, Seth Chand Ratan v. Pandit Durga Prasad,
            AIR 2003 SC 2736 U.P. State Bridge Corpn. Ltd. v.
            U.P.Rajya Setu Nigam S.Karmachari Sangh, (2004) 4
            SCC 268, U.P. State Spinning Co. Ltd. v. R.S.Pandey
            and another, 101(2006) CLT 160(SC) and Uttaranchal
            Forest Development Corporation v. Jabar Singh,
            (2007) 2 SCC 112.
9.          Taking into consideration the above provision of law and the
CRPF Rules, 1955, since provision of revision is made available and no

                                    7
exceptional case is made out by the petitioner to bypass the revisional
authority, this Court is of the view that without availing the alternative
remedy prescribed under the Statute, the writ petition cannot be
entertained.
10.          In the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case and
keeping in view the law discussed above, the writ petition is disposed of
observing that the petitioner may ventilate his grievance by approaching
the revisional forum under Rule 29 of CRPF Rules, 1955.
                                             ……………………………..
                                                 Dr.B.R.Sarangi, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 5th August, 2014/Ajaya


