                        ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                         Writ Appeal (Civil) No. 36 of 2013
         In the matter of an appeal under Article 4 of the Orissa High Court Order,
         1948 read with Clause 10 of the Letter Patent Constituting the High Court
         of Judicature at Patna.
                                         ----------
         Urmila Das                     ………             Appellant
                                         -versus-
         State of Odisha and others     ………              Respondents
                   For appellant   :   M/s. Sujata Jena,
                                        G.B. Jena and P. Dash
                  For respondents :     M/s. P.K. Das, H.B. Dash and,
                                        A.C.B. Das (For Opp. No.6)
         PRESENT:
         THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SHRI AMITAVA ROY
                                      AND
                    THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
         Date of hearing: 13.08.2014| Date of judgment : 19.08.2014
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.       This appeal challenges the order of the learned Single
         Judge dated 7.1.2013 in W.P.(C) No. 22553 of 2011.
         2.              The factual backdrop is that an advertisement bearing
         notification No. 225 dated 19.02.2009 was floated by the C.D.P.O.,
         Mahanga, respondent no.5, vide Annexure-1 inviting applications for
         filling up of a post of Anganwadi Worker which related to Hansadia
         Mundasahi Additional Anganwadi Centre, Mulabasanta Grampanchayat

                                     2
under Mahanga Block. The said Mundasahi Additional Anganwadi
Centre was created taking some area of Hansadia and Kuhunda, which
is  within    the  Kuhunda     Gram   Panchayat.    Pursuant    to   that
advertisement, appellant and Respondent No.6 had applied for the
post. The candidature of the applicant was rejected on the ground that
she was not coming under the service area where the centre was
located.   Consequently,    respondent   no.6   having    satisfied   the
requirements was engaged as Anganwadi Worker, vide notification
dated 15.02.2009, Annexure-2.
3.              Being aggrieved by the engagement order of respondent
no.6, the appellant filed a Writ Petition before this Court bearing
W.P.(C) No. 775 of 2010 which disposed of by this Court on
25.03.2010 directing her to prefer an appeal before the Sub-Collector,
Cuttack within fifteen days and also directing the Sub-Collector to
dispose of the said appeal within two months of filing thereof after
affording   reasonable  opportunity  of  hearing   to  the  parties.   In
compliance thereof, the appellant did prefer an appeal before the Sub-
Collector but the same was transferred to the Additional District
Magistrate, Cuttack who had jurisdiction over the matter. The same
was registered as Anganwadi Appeal No. 27 of 2010. The Addl. District
Magistrate after hearing the matter rejected the claim of the appellant,
inter alia, on the ground that the Additional Anganwadi Centre in
question had been opened on geographical basis of the Gram

                                      3
Panchayat in question and that the appellant being an outsider of the
service area of Anganwadi Centre, was not eligible to be engaged.
4.              Against   the  said  order  of the  Additional   District
Magistrate, Cuttack, W.P.(C) No.22553 of 2011 was filed by the
appellant before this Court. The learned Single Judge who heard the
Writ Petition, dismissed the same holding that there was no error in
the order of the Addl. District Magistrate having accepted the
residential certificate of respondent no.6 issued by the concerned
Tahasildar   which    was    never  challenged  by   anybody    as   per
Miscellaneous Certificate Rules while disposing of the Appeal and
declined to interfere with the same.
5.              The present appeal has been filed with new grounds
that the appellant was working as an Education Volunteer at E.C.C.E.
Centre under Mahanga Block which was being managed by the D.I. of
School, Salipur and her engagement was also approved by the then
D.I. of School, Salipur as per order No. 6230 dated 30.11.2004 vide
Annexure-5. It is stated that since the Addl. Anganwadi Centre at
Mundasahi had been formed taking some area of Anganwadi Centre of
Hansadia and Kuhunda and the E.C.C.E. Centre of Hansadia Mundasahi
covered the centre area of Mundasahi Additiional Anganwadi Centre,
the appellant’s application could not have been rejected as she was
eligible to be considered for the post applied for as per letter No.IV-

                                      4
ICDS-3/10/10729/WCD dated 16.06.2010 of the Government of
Orissa, in WCD Department, vide Clause(ii) of that letter.
6.             Clause-ii of the said letter dated 16.06.2010 reads as
follows:
                 “An ECCE worker can be considered for selection as AWW
                provided that she had worked as ECCE worker in that
                particular village.”
7.             Mrs. Sujata Jena, learned counsel for the appellant,
strenuously urged that since the appellant had worked as an Education
Volunteer in the E.C.C.E. Centre and her appointment as ECCE Worker
was approved by the then D.I. of Schools as evident from Annexure-5,
she should have been engaged as the Anganwadi Worker for the
Centre in question.
8.             Mr. P.K. Nayak, learned counsel for Respondent No.6
seriously disputes such contention of learned counsel for the appellant
and referring to Annexure-8 states that the condition as to qualification
itself stated that an E.C.C.E. Worker could not be considered for
selection as Anganwadi Worker unless she worked as an E.C.C.E.
worker in that particular village. Therefore, no benefit could be
extended to     an   Education Volunteer    in view    of such circular.
Accordingly, the appellant’s case was justly considered for appointment
as Anganwadi Worker.
9.             Mr. P.K. Muduli, learned Addl. Standing Counsel for the
State submits that Education Volunteers working under the E.C.C.E.

                                      5
Centre were not eligible to get the benefit under the circular dated
16.06.2010 vide Annexure-8. Therefore the ground stressed upon by
the appellant being a novelty, her claim cannot be favoured with.
10.             Upon hearing learned counsel for the parties and
considering of the materials available on record, it appears that the
appellant has been taking different stands at different points of time
endeavoring to be considered for engagement as Anganwadi Worker in
respect of Hansadia Mundasahi Anganwadi Centre. Reliance on
Government order dated 16.06.2010 vide Annexure-8 is of no help to
the appellant. Admittedly, she was working as an Education Volunteer
in an E.C.C.E. Centre. The circular, Annexure-8 dated 16.06.2010, is
only applicable to an E.C.C.E. worker provided she has worked as such
in the village of Anganwadi Centre for consideration for selection of
Anganwadi Worker. Admittedly, the appellant has not worked as
E.C.C.E. worker in that particular village and therefore, she was not
entitled to get any benefit of the circular dated 16.06.2010 vide
Annexure-8.
11.            In such facts and circumstances, the appellant’s case
was rightly not considered for selection as Anganwadi Worker in
respect    of Hansadia   Mundasahi    Anganwadi   Centre  pursuant   to
advertisement, Annexure-1. Therefore, the judgment of learned Single
Judge rejecting the claim of the appellant on the ground of residential
certificate as well as subsequent plea with regard to the experience

                                           6
       earned/gained by her as Education Volunteer in E.C.C.E. Centre would
       not make her eligible to be considered for engagement as Anganwadi
       Worker. We dismiss the Writ Appeal.
                                               ………………………..
                                                Dr.B.R.Sarangi, J.
Amitava Roy,C. J.    I agree.
                                               ………………………..
                                                Amitava Roy,C. J.
       Orissa High Court, Cuttack
       The 19th August, 2014/Jagdev


