                  ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
       WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) Nos. 863 & 1011 of 2013
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                              ----------
In W.P.(C) No.863 of 2013
Samarendra Jena                             ………    Petitioner
                               -versus-
Sanghamitra Biswal                          ………    Opposite Party
         For petitioner  :   M/s.Rama Ch. Sarangi & P.M.Pratihari
        For opp. Party   :   M/s.Biswanath Rath, J.Rath, S. Sethy,
                              S.K.Mishra, S.Mishra
In W.P.(C) No.1011 of 2013
Sanghamitra Biswal                          ………    Petitioner
                               -versus-
Samarendra Jena                              ………   Opposite Party
         For petitioner : M/s.Biswanath Rath, J.Rath, S. Sethy,
                           S.K.Mishra, S.Mishra
         For opp. Party : M/s.Rama Ch. Sarangi & P.M.Pratihari
PRESENT:
          THE HONOURABLE KUMARI JUSTICE S. PANDA
                                 AND
          THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
    Date of hearing: 03.07.2013 | Date of judgment : 12.07.2013

                                              2
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.       Being aggrieved by the order dated 7.1.2013 passed
          by the learned Judge, Family Court, Bhubaneswar in C.P.No. 68 of
          2010 rejecting the application to permit the petitioner-husband for
          engagement of legal practitioner under Section 13 of the Family
          Courts Act, he has preferred W.P.(C) No. 863 of 2013. The wife being
          petitioner in W.P.(C) No.1011 of 2013, has approached this Court
          seeking   for  a  direction  to the  learned   Judge,    Family Court,
          Bhubaneswar to dispose of C.P.No.68 of 2010 within a time frame.
          Since both the cases arise out of C.P.No.68 of 2010, they are heard
          together and disposed of by this common judgment.
          2.             The petitioner-husband filed C.P.No. 68 of 2010 before
          the learned Judge, Family Court, Bhubaneswar for dissolution of
          marriage, which was performed under the Special Marriage Act. In
          course of hearing, an application was filed by the petitioner-husband,
          who was respondent in the aforesaid C.P. No. 68 of 2010 before the
          learned Judge, Family Court, Bhubaneswar praying to permit him to
          be represented through a lawyer vide Annexure-1 on 3.4.2012. The
          said application was rejected by the learned Judge, Family Court,
          Bhubaneswar vide order dated 7.8.2012 without assigning any reason
          and therefore, the petitioner-husband approached this Court by filing
          W.P.(C) no.14916 of 2012. On consideration of the contentions raised
          therein, this Court by order dated 19.12.2012 set aside the order
          dated   7.8.2012   passed   by  the  learned   Judge,   Family  Court,

                                       3
Bhubaneswar rejecting the application for representation by legal
practitioner  and    remitted  the    matter  to  the  said   court   for
reconsideration   of    the  application  dated  3.4.2012    strictly  in
consonance    with    law   by passing    a  speaking  order   (afresh),
consequence thereof, the impugned order in Annexure-3 dated
7.1.2013 has been passed, which is under challenge in W.P.(C) No.
863 of 2013.
3.             On being noticed, the opposite party-wife entered
appearance and supported the order passed by the learned Judge,
Family Court, Bhubaneswar stating that in view of the provisions
contained in Section 13 of the Family Courts Act, the order passed is
absolutely correct and needs no interference by this Court at this
stage.
4.             Mr.R.C.Sarangi, learned counsel for the petitioner-
husband assails the impugned order dated 7.1.2013 on the ground
that the learned Judge, Family Court has not considered the
contentions raised in the application filed under Annexure-1 in proper
perspective and has stated that though the petitioner-husband relied
upon the judgment of this Court in          Sadhana Patra v. Subrat
Pradhan (2006(I) OLR, 524) he has not filed the order/decision
and he has abruptly came to the conclusion thereby depriving the
petitioner-husband to avail the assistance of a lawyer for the purpose
of cross-examination and making argument on his behalf. He further

                                     4
submitted that though reliance was made upon the judgment of the
apex court in S.D.Joshi and others v. High Court of Judicature at
Bombay and others, (2011) 1 SCC 252, the learned Judge, Family
Court has not appreciated the said judgment in proper perspective
and rejected the application without any application of mind. Several
judgments have been referred to in the writ petition filed by the
petitioner-husband reported in State of Orissa Vs. Sudhansu
Sekhar Misra & others, AIR 1968 SC 647, Rajpur Rudra Meha &
others Vs. State of Gujarat, AIR 1980 SC 1707, M/S Amar Nath
Om Prakash & others Vs. State of Punjab & others, AIR 1985 SC
218, Som Mittal Vs. Govt. of Karnataka, 2008(3) SCC 574 and
Rajbir Singh Dalal (Dr.) Vs. Chaudhari Devi Lal University,
Sirsa & another, 2008(9) SCC 284. According to Mr. Sarangi,
depriving the petitioner by rejecting the application to permit him to
engage a lawyer to defend his case violates Article 29 of the
Constitution and therefore, he seeks for quashing of the said order.
5.             Mr.Biswanath Rath, learned counsel appearing for the
opposite party-wife vehemently urged that the impugned order
passed by the learned Judge, Family Court, Bhubaneswar is absolutely
in consonance with the provisions of law and more so, Section 13 of
the Family Courts Act, 1984 only puts a restriction with regard to the
representation of the parties by the legal practitioner. In view of such
position, the prayer made by the petitioner-husband cannot be

                                       5
allowed in the ends of justice. He further submits that the petitioner is
himself a practicing Advocate of the Bhubaneswar Bar.
6.              Before going to the merits of the case, we propose to
state the objects of enactment of Family Courts Act, 1984, wherein it
is found that several associations of women, other organizations and
individuals have urged, from time to time, that Family Courts be set
up for the settlement of family disputes, where emphasis should be
laid on conciliation and achieving socially desirable results and
adherence to rigid rules of procedure and evidence should be
eliminated. The Law Commission in its 59th report (1974) had also
stressed that in dealing with disputes concerning the family the court
ought to adopt an approach radically different from that adopted in
ordinary civil proceedings and that it should make reasonable efforts
at settlement before the commencement of the trial. The Code of Civil
Procedure was amended in 1976 to provide for a special procedure to
be adopted in suits or proceedings relating to matters concerning the
family. However, not much use has been made by the courts in
adopting this conciliatory procedure and the courts continue to deal
with family disputes in the same manner as other civil matters and
the same adversary approach prevails. The need was, therefore, felt
in the public interest, to establish Family Courts for speedy settlement
of   family  disputes.    To   satisfy the   objects   and  reasons  for
establishment of family courts, the legislature in its wisdom have

                                      6
enacted an Act to provide for the establishment of the family courts
with a view to promote conciliation in, and secure speedy settlement
of, disputes relating to marriage and family affairs and for matters
connected therewith called “Family Courts Act, 1984”, hereinafter to
be referred to as “the Act”, in short. Various provisions have been
made under the said Act to achieve its objects. One of such provision
is Section 13, which reads as follows:
      “Sec.13. Right to legal representation:- Notwithstanding
      anything contained in any law, no party to a suit or
      proceeding before a Family Court shall be entitled, as of
      right to be represented by a legal practitioner.”
On perusal of the aforesaid section, it appears that the said Section
puts a restriction on the parties to engage lawyers to represent their
case in the family courts. Similar provision is found in Section 36 of
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. The common view in both the
enactments, i.e., Family Courts Act, 1984 and Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 is to settle the disputes through conciliation. In the latter Act,
the Section is very clear that the party to the dispute may be
represented by legal practitioner with the consent of parties, whereas
Section 13 of the Family Courts Act is silent on the point whether
permission can be obtained from the court to engage legal practitioner
by any party to the dispute to act on their behalf. The law makers
intended to keep the proceedings in the Family Court simple, informal
and non-technical to achieve the main objectives of the enactment. In
that perspective, it is mainly aimed at the right of the parties to

                                      7
engage legal practitioner. However, there is no bar on the parties to
make application to permit them to engage legal practitioner. In such
case the court can permit the parties to engage legal practitioner by
exercising its discretion to enable them to act as amicus curiae. Law
itself prohibits for engagement of lawyer to represent a case before
the family court excepting to act as amicus curiae as per the
provisions of the said Section and therefore, engagement of lawyer by
the parties is not permissible.
7.              Similar question has been considered by this Court in
Sadhana Patra (supra) in which the learned Single Judge of this Court
referring to the judgment in Leela v. Dr.Mahadeo, AIR 1991 Bom.
105 has come to a definite conclusion that the representation by a
lawyer is not a matter of right, but permission to be represented by a
lawyer should be liberally granted where the facts are complicated.
While giving such conclusion, this Court has also relied upon the
judgment of this Court in (1997) 12 OCR 196 (Manguli Dalei v.
Smt.Malini Dalei).
8.              The reliance on the judgments referred to in the writ
petition, as stated supra, have neither been placed nor have been
urged nor the same are in the context of which the case is to be
decided at the time of hearing by Mr.Sarangi, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner-husband. So far as the reference made to
the judgment of the apex Court in S.D.Joshi(supra) is concerned,

                                       8
the question of applicability of Section 13 of the Act was not under
consideration in the said case, rather the apex Court had taken into
consideration the provisions contained in Sections 3(2)(a)(d), 4, 7 to
10, 16 and 19 of the Act and also considered the meaning of ‘Judge’,
‘Court’, ‘Tribunal’, “Administration of Justice” with reference to the
constitutional provision mentioned in Articles 233, 234 and 236 of the
Constitution. Neither the applicability of Section 13 of the Act had
been urged nor was there any occasion for the apex Court to deal with
the said matter. In view of such provision, it is very much clear that
as per the provisions contained in Section 13 of the Act, the right of
representation and assistance of a lawyer before the Family Court is
totally restricted.
9.               On perusal of Section 13, it is evident that the
provision is very clear. It is well established that if the words of a
statute are clear and free from any vagueness and are, therefore,
reasonably susceptible to only one meaning, it must be construed by
giving effect to that meaning, irrespective of consequences. (See:
Nelson Motis v. Union of India, AIR 1992 SC 1981= 1992(4)
SCC 711.).
10.              The Supreme Court in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Dr.
Vijay Anand Maharaj, AIR 1963 SC 946 has held as follows:
                 “when the language is plain and unambiguous and
                 admits of only one meaning, no question of
                 construction of a statute arises, for the act speaks
                 for itself. “

                                              9
      That apart, interpretation of statute by Maxwell also states as
      follows:
                       “The construction must not, of course, be strained
                       to include cases plainly omitted from the natural
                       meaning of the words”
      In the present case, when the legislative intent is very clear while
      enacting Section 13 keeping its objects and reasons, there is no
      question of any deviation or defiance thereof.
      11.              In view of the above, we do not find any illegality or
      infirmity in the impugned order of the learned Judge, Family Court,
      Bhubaneswar       while  rejecting  the   prayer of  the   petitioner for
      permitting him to be represented through lawyers under Annexure-3.
      Accordingly, the writ petition bearing W.P.(C) No. 863 of 2013 filed by
      the petitioner-husband is dismissed.
      12.              As a consequence of dismissal of the aforesaid writ
      petition filed by the petitioner-husband, the writ petition, bearing W.P.
      (C) No. 1011 of 2013 filed by the opposite party-wife is disposed of
      with a direction to the learned Judge, Family Court, Bhubaneswar to
      conclude C.P. No. 68 of 2010 within a period of six months from the
      date of receipt of a certified copy of this judgment. No cost.
                                                        ………………………………...
                                                       Dr.B.R.Sarangi, J.
S.Panda, J.           I agree.
                                                       …………………………………..
                                                          S.Panda,J.
      Orissa High Court, Cuttack
      The 12th July, 2013/PKSahoo


