                     ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                          W.P.(C) No. 14122 of 2014
         In the matter of an application under Articles 226 of the
         Constitution of India.
                                       ----------
         Arindam Chakra                    ………               Petitioner
                                       -versus-
         Biju Pattnaik University of       ………                Opp. Parties
         Technology and another
                    For Petitioner   :     M/s. Trilochan Rath,
                                           H.K.Tripathy & R.S.Singhar
                   For Opp.Parties   :     M/s. Subir Palit,
                                           A.Mishra, R.Tripathy &
                                           A. Parija.
         PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
         Date of hearing: 29.10.2014| Date of judgment: 11.11.2014
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.        The petitioner, who completed 8th Semester in
         Electrical Electronic Engineering Branch bearing registration
         No. 0901289371 of 2009-13 Batch of Biju Pattnaik University
         of Technology has filed this writ petition seeking following
         relief :
                           “ …………. to direct the opposite parties to
                  produce the answer scripts in „Electro Magnetic Fields
                  and waves‟ paper of the petitioner who appeared in”4th
                  Semester (Special/Back) Examination, 2012-2013” vide

                                     2
        University registration No. 0901289371 of 2009-13, for
        kind perusal;
                  Declare the clause “This facility is, however, not
        available for special examinations” of para-12.0 (a) of
        the academic regulation of BPUT as ultra vires;
                  Direct the university authorities to award
        appropriate marks to the petitioner against the
        unevaluated questions and give grace mark against out
        of course question and also full marks against correct
        answer as more fully described in the foregoing paras;
        and
                  Pass appropriate order against the university
        authorities awarding exemplary cost and compensation
        for putting the petitioner under undue mental agony and
        harassment.”
2.               The short facts of the case in hand are that the
petitioner, who was prosecuting his studies in Electrical
Electronic Engineering Branch under Biju Pattnaik University of
Technology could not be successful in securing pass marks in
„Electro Magnetic Fields of Web‟ subject of the 4th semester
and as a result, he had to appear in the „4th Semester
(Special/Back) Examination, 2012-13. The examination was
held on 20th March, 2014 and result thereof was declared in
the month of June, 2014. The petitioner was awarded less
marks and declared „fail‟ once again though he did well in the
examination and was expecting pass in the examination with
good marks. However, having applied for xerox copies of the
answer sheets and on receipt of the same, he came to know
that his answer to question no. 1(i) was not evaluated at all,

                                 3
although he had given correct answer to the said question.
That apart, in respect of question No.1(b) although he had
answered correctly. „zero‟ was assigned against that answer.
Similarly, against question No.1(g), question No.7(b) and
question No.8(b), which were numerical questions, he was
awarded one mark less than the pass mark although question
of awarding less mark to such answer was not permissible for
the reason that the question mostly required a student to
enter a number for the answer. The question might also
require a student to enter units or to specify the correct
number of significant figures, which means always a correct
answer carrying full mark or no mark in the event it is wrong.
Besides the above, although grace mark of 5 was awarded as
against question no. 2(a) in favour of all the candidates by
taking into account the fact that the same was set out of
syllabus, the petitioner had been deprived of that without any
rhyme or reason. As a result of all the aforesaid illegalities and
erroneous evaluation, he was awarded 21 marks in toto as
against the required pass mark of 25 in the paper. Therefore,
the petitioner submitted an application to the authority
concerned for recounting/rechecking of the said paper in his
own institute, namely, Trident Academy of Technology. While
the   petitioner‟s  application was     recommended       to   the

                                  4
university, the institution submitted its own recommendation
pointing out the error in evaluating the answer sheets of the
petitioner and assessed the answer script of the petitioner to
be awarded 27 marks instead of 21 marks and such
recommendation was made on 01.07.2014. It is alleged that
till date no action has been taken by the university nor has
any intimation been issued in that respect. Hence, this writ
petition.
3.             Mr. T. Rath, learned counsel for the petitioner,
strenuously urged the inaction of the university authorities in
not evaluating and awarding the marks in the subject „Electro
Magnetic Fields of Web‟ and submitted that there was inaction
of opposite parties 1 and 2 in re-totaling and re-adding marks
in respect of the „special examinations‟ which they ought to
have done vide para 12.0(a) of the „Academic Regulations
Governing B.Tech/B.Pharm/B.Arch Programmes‟ prescribed by
the BPUT authorities. Consequently, he seeks the provisions
contained in para 12.0(a) of the academic regulation to be
declared ultra vires with direction to the opposite parties for
re-total  and   recheck    the marks    on  the  basis  of  the
recommendation made by the institution in the subject

                                   5
„Electro   Magnetic  Fields   of  Web‟   of  the  4th    semester
(special/back) examination, 2012-13.
4.             Mr. Subir Palit, learned counsel for the Biju
Pattnaik University of Technology, argued with vehemence
justifying the action of the university stating that as per the
provision contained in clause-4.5 of the academic regulation,
re-valuation of any subject of special examination is not
permissible.   Since   the   petitioner  appeared     in   special
examination, question of re-valuation does not arise though
such plea is not canvassed in the counter affidavit save and
except stating that the academic regulation prescribed to
conduct one special examination for the students who had
failed in the regular examinations. Since such examination
being over and above the regular examination and no such
rechecking facility being prescribed, as a student gets chance
in all the semesters to clear his back papers.
5.             He has relied upon paragraphs-19 and 20 of
the judgment in H.P. Public Service Commission v.
Mukesh Thakur, AIR 2010 SC 2620, wherein it was held that
it was not permissible for the High Court to examine the
question paper and answer sheets itself, particularly, when the
Commission had assessed the inter se merit of the candidates

                                  6
and as such it was not permissible on the part of the High
Court to go for examining the answer sheet. Basing on
observation of the Supreme Court, Mr. Palit, submitted that
this Court cannot examine this question and the relief sought
by the petitioner cannot be granted by this Court.
6.              Considering the contention raised by learned
counsel for the parties and after going through the records
and the facts pleaded, it is revealed that admittedly the
petitioner has completed 8th semester successfully in Electrical
Electronic Engineering Branch of 2009-2013 batch of BPUT.
Admittedly also he could not secure pass marks in „Electro
Magnetic Fields of Web‟ a subject of the 4th semester for which
he had to appear in “4th Semester (special/back) Examination
2012-13, which was held on 20.03.2014 the result whereof
was declared in the month of June, 2014. He was awarded
less mark and was declared „fail‟ on the said subject though he
had done well in the examination and expected good marks.
When he saw the result, he applied for xerox copies of the
answer sheet which was supplied to him vide Annexures-1 and
2 and on perusal of the same his apprehension was found
correct. Therefore, he has pleaded the same in paragraph-5 of
the writ petition as follows:-

                                     7
                     “5.   That it will be appropriate here to
      submit that after getting answer sheet vide Annexure-2,
      the petitioner was surprised to found that his answer to
      Question NO.1(i) has not been evaluated at all, although
      he has given correct answer to the said question. That
      apart, question No.1(b) although he has been answer
      correctly but the same has been awarded (0) mark.
      Similarly, against question No.1(g), question No.7(b)
      and question No.8(b), which were numerical in
      questions, were awarded one mark less of the total
      marks although question of awarding less marks to such
      answer is not permissible for the reason that such
      questions mostly requires a student to enter a number
      for the answer. The question might also require a
      student to enter units or to specify the correct number
      of significant figures. Which means always a correct
      answer, carries full mark or no mark in the event of
      being wrong. Besides the above, although grace mark of
      5 has been awarded as against question no. 2(a) in
      favour of all the candidates by taking into account the
      fact that the same was set out of syllabus, but the
      petitioner has been deprived of benefit without
      assigning any rhyme or reason. As a result of all the
      aforesaid illegalities and erroneous evaluation, he has
      only been awarded 21 marks in total as against required
      pass marks of 25 in the paper.”
7.               No specific answer has been given to the
aforesaid facts mentioned in paragraph-5 of the writ petition
by the university in its counter affidavit. In paragraph-5 of the
counter affidavit, the university has pleaded, as follows:
                     “5.   That in reply to the averments made
       in Paragraph No.5 of the writ petition, it is humbly and
       most respectfully submitted that the answer scripts
       have been evaluated by the registered teacher of the
       University (teachers from affiliated and constituent
       college) and after such evaluation, the results of the
       petitioner along with similarly situated students were
       published. Therefore, challenging the evaluation by the
       candidate himself is bad in law as there are experts who
       really judge the best marks to be awarded to any
       answer. Furthermore, the evaluation is such a process
       where no one feels satisfied with end result and if one
       will fulfil the general demand, it will lead to a situation

                                     8
         where no finality will ever come; rather it would result
         in collapsing the entire system and public at large will
         be seriously affected and also the schedule of
         examination will not be completed within the academic
         session which is non negotiable.
              Therefore, the claim of the petitioner is
         misconceived and without any substance. The petitioner
         is required fulfil the mandatory requirement as
         prescribed in Academic Regulation of the University
         which is framed by the Academic Council of the
         University.”
8.                From the above pleadings, it appears that the
university has not given any specific reply to the contention
raised by the petitioner and rather the reply of the university
is totally fake and evasive.
9.                The State Legislature enacted an Act to provide
for the establishment and incorporation of a technological
university in the State of Orissa and matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto called „The Biju Patnaik
University of Technology Act, 2002‟. Sub-section (a) of Section
2 defines „Academic Council‟ of the University. Section 19 of
the said Act defines Academic Council, which states that it
shall be the principal academic body of the University and,
subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, it shall
coordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic
programmes and policies of the university and shall be
responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction,

                                  9
research, education and examination within the University and
shall exercise such powers and perform such other duties as
may be conferred on it by Statutes. Section 20 of the said Act
deals with the powers and functions of Academic Council. As
per sub-section (ii) (c)   of Section 20, the academic council
prescribes qualification for admission of student to various
courses   of  studies,   to   research  degrees   and   to   the
examinations and the conditions under which exemptions may
be granted. Sub-section (ii) (d) of Section 20, the academic
council prescribes standards of evaluation of the performance
of students and classification of students on the basis of their
performance in the examination. Therefore, the academic
programme of the university is guided by its academic council
which consists of all Principals of affiliated and constituted
colleges, eminent Professor of the Govt. of Orissa and Govt. of
India as well as the Industries of repute numbering around
165. On due deliberation and consultation, regulation has
been prepared by the university called „„Academic Regulations
Governing B.Tech/B.Pharm/B.Arch Programmes‟‟.
10.            Mr. Palit, learned counsel for the University,
referred to regulation 4.5 of the said Academic Regulations,
which reads as follows:-

                                     10
       “4.5. There shall be a Special examination after the 8th
      semester examination for 7th and 8th semester subjects.
      Students who have failed in subjects registered by them
      in 7th and 8th semesters, may avail this opportunity to
      clear these subjects. Students, after completion of 8th
      semester, can register in any number of subjects
      (failed) for the Special examinations. The Special
      Examination will start after 30th June of every year.
              There shall not be any re-valuation for any
      subjects of the Special Examination.”
              He advanced his argument strenuously submitted
that there shall not be any revaluation of special examination
paper as that is not permissible under the regulation. Since
the petitioner had appeared in special examination and
revaluation was prohibited under the Regulations, his claim
cannot be acceded to and rightly such benefit has not been
extended to him. He further submitted that there was a
special examination after the final semester examination for
3rd to final semester subjects. Students who have appeared
the final semester examinations are eligible to appear in the
special examination and the students who had appeared in the
semester examination (3rd to final semester) and had secured
„F‟ grade in the subjects, were eligible to avail this opportunity
to clear these subjects. Students after completing final
semester examination, can register in any number of subjects
(failed) for the special examination. The special examination is
to start after 30th June every year. It is submitted that this

                                      11
facility having been availed of by the petitioner as per the
regulations,       he    cannot     claim   the    benefit    of  re-
totaling/rechecking of the answer sheets as the regulations
prohibit to do so. Clause-12.0 (a) of the Academic Regulation
deals with Re-totaling/rechecking, which reads as follows:-
               “12.0 (a) – Re-Totalling/Re-Checking: A student
       may apply through his/her college for Re-totaling/Re-
       checking of a paper within 10 calender days from the
       date of publication of the results in each Semester.
       However, evaluation be done for un-evaluated questions,
       if any. This facility is however not available for special
       examinations”
11.                Mr. T. Rath, learned counsel for the petitioner
assails the very same condition stipulated in clause-12.0 (a) to
the extent “This facility is however not available for special
examinations” and states that the clause itself create hostile
discrimination among the students those who have prosecuted
their studies in the same university and as such this amounted
to arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of power and is hit by
Article 14 of the Constitution as the same is unreasonable.
Therefore the regulation as per clause-12.0 (a) to the extent
mentioned above be declared ultra vires. He has pleaded the
same in paragraph-11 of the writ petition, which reads as
follows:-
               “11. That the conduct of university in restricting
         the facility of Re-totalling/Re-checking as provided at

                                      12
        para 12.0 (a) of the aforesaid Academic Regulation of
        BPUT only to the regular students is nothing but an act
        of discrimination and clever ploy of the university
        authorities to protect the interest of the careless an
        dishonest examiners at the cost of the interest of the
        students. Hence, the clause “This facility is, however,
        not available for special examination” appearing at para
        12.0 (a) of the aforesaid Academic Regulation of BPUT
        is liable to be struck down by this Hon‟ble Court”
12.                To   such    pleading     of   the    petitioner,  in
paragraph-12 of the counter affidavit no specific reply has
been given, save and except stating as follows:-
               “12. That the averment made in para-11 of the
        writ petition that the university is restricting the facility
        of re-checking/re-totalling as provided in para 12.0 (a)
        of the aforesaid academic regulations of BPUT only to
        the regular students is nothing but an act of
        discrimination is totally incorrect.
               Further, the Academic regulation of the university
        is being framed by the Academic Council to ensure that
        quality and standard of education is maintained and
        preserved. The regulation in force has been formulated
        by the Academic Council. The Academic Council in its
        collective wisdom never thought it prudent to abolish
        such breaks for weaker students. Its regulation permits
        a weak student to study at his/her own pace and
        complete the credit requirements for a degree in
        his/her comfortable speed. This is in line with the
        National and International practice. Further, BPUT Act,
        2002 has also empowered Academic Council to frame,
        modify and re-visit to the regulation. The petitioner has
        to accept the mandatory requirements as prescribed by
        the Academic Council.”
13.                As it appears, as per clause-4.5 there is a
restriction imposed i.e. “There shall not be any re-valuation
for any subjects of the special examination” whereas                  in
clause-12.0 (a) further restriction has been imposed i.e. “This

                                  13
facility is however not available for special examinations”. The
facility regarding re-totaling/rechecking has not been made
available for special examination. Thereby by invoking clause-
4.5, restriction is imposed with regard to re-valuation.
Similarly, by invoking clause-12.0 (a) restriction is imposed
for re-totaling/rechecking in respect of special examination.
But there is no nexus of imposing such restriction in case of
special examination has been indicated by the university. As it
appears, there is arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of power
of the university authorities putting a restriction under clause
4.5 with regard to re-evaluation and in clause-12.0 (a) with
regard     to re-totaling/rechecking   so  far   as  the special
examination is concerned. By this the university authorities
have created a discrimination among the regular examinees
vis-à-vis candidates of special examination though all are
prosecuting the same course of studies with same academic
curriculum. While in case of regular examines facilities of re-
totaling/rechecking is admissible that could not have been
denied to the candidates of special examination so far as
revaluation of marks is concerned under clause-4.5.
14.             Mr. T. Rath, learned counsel for the petitioner,
states that he does not claim for revaluation as there is a

                                   14
prohibition under the regulation, but at the same time he lays
emphasis on clause-12.0 (a) stating that putting a condition
re-totaling/rechecking is not permissible in respect of special
examination      candidates     itself   amounted       to  hostile
discrimination and that violates Article 14 of the Constitution.
15.             Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees to
every   person    equal   treatment    before   law  and   extends
protection of the laws in equal measures to all. “Equality
before law” declares that every person is equal before law, no
one can claim special privilege and that all classes are equal
subject to the ordinary law of the land.
16.             In D.K. Yadav v. J.M.A. Industries Ltd.,
(1993) 3 SCC 259, the apex Court held that Article 14 has a
pervasive     processual     potency    and     versatile  quality,
equalitarian in its social and allergic to discriminatory dictates.
Equality is the antithesis of arbitrariness.
17.             In Savitri Cairae v. U.P. Avas Ebam Vikas
Parishad, AIR 2003 SC 2725, the apex Court held that
equality clause in Article 14 is of wide import and it permits
reasonable classification based on intelligible differentia having
nexus with the object sought to be achieved. Equality before
law is a dynamic concept having many facets. One facet-the

                                 15
most commonly acknowledged is that there shall be no
privileged person or class and that none shall be above law.
18.             In Ashutosh Gupta v. State of Rajasthan,
(2002) 4 SCC 34, the apex Court held that the concept of
equality before law does not involve the idea of absolute
equality amongst all, which may be a physical impossibility. All
that Article 14 guarantees is the similarity of treatment and
not identical treatment.
19.             In Menaka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR
1978 SC 597, the apex Court held that Article 14 strikes at
arbitrariness in State action and ensures fairness and equality
of treatment. The principle of reasonableness, which legally as
well as philosophically, is an essential element of equality or
non-arbitrariness   pervades    Article  14  like   a  brooding
omnipresence.
20.             In Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib, AIR 1981 SC
487, the apex Court while settled the principle held that Article
14 strikes at arbitrariness because an action that is arbitrary,
must necessarily involve negation of equality. Therefore,
where there is arbitrariness in State action, Article 14 springs
to the action and judicial review strikes such action down.
Every action of the executive authority must be subject to rule

                                  16
of law and must be informed by reason and whatever be the
activity of the public authority, it should meet the test of
Article 14.
21.             Applying the above analogy to the present
context while putting a restriction under clause-12.0 (a) of the
academic regulation, no reasons have been assigned why the
candidates of special examination are to be treated differently
from    the    regular   students    in the    matter   of   re-
totaling/rechecking of marks. Therefore, clause-12.0 (a) to the
extent of putting a restriction of re-totaling/rechecking of
marks in a special examination is hit by the vice of the
doctrine of ultra vires.
22.             The doctrine of ultra vires refers to not only
lack of power to do any act, but also to any situation like
improper or unauthorized procedure, purpose or violation of
the law of natural justice in exercising the power that is
lawfully conferred on the authority concerned.
23.             In Shri Sitaram Sugar Company Ltd. v.
Union of India, (1990) 3 SCC 223 : AIR 1990 SC 1277, the
Apex Court dealt with “ultra vires” and held that a repository
of power acts ultra vires either when it acts in excess of its
power in the narrow sense or by acting in bad faith or for an

                                    17
inadmissible purpose or on irrelevant grounds or without
regard      to    relevant    considerations    or     with    gross
unreasonableness.        Any   repository   of   power,      whether
legislative,   administrative    or  quasi-judicial,  is    open  to
challenge if it violates the provisions of the Constitution or the
governing Act or the general principles of the law of the land
or it is so arbitrary or unreasonable that no fair minded
authority could ever have made it.
24.              Applying such doctrine to the present context,
this Court is of the view that putting a restriction under
clause-12.0     (a)   to  the  extent  that   the   facility  of re-
totaling/rechecking is not available for special examination
amounted to arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of powers,
thereby it is hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Accordingly, to that extent the provision contained in clause-
12.0 (a) is declared as ultra vires.
25.              In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the
provisions contained in clause-12.0 (a) to the extent the
facilities of re-totaling/rechecking is not available for special
examination being declared ultra vires, necessary corollary will
be that the University authorities should make necessary re-
totaling/rechecking of the answer sheets of the petitioner in

                                  18
subject “Electro Magnetic Fields of Web” subject of his 4th
Semester (Special/Back) Examination, 2012-13 on the basis
of  the    recommendation     made    by   Trident Academy  of
Technology, Bhubaneswar, an institution affiliated to the said
University and declare the result of the petitioner within a
period of three weeks hence.
26.              With the above observation and direction, the
writ petition is allowed. No order to costs.
                                      ………………………..
                                      Dr.B.R.Sarangi, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 11th November, 2014/Jagdev


