                       ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                             W.P.(C) No. 8942 of 2015
           In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
           Constitution of India.
                                        ----------
           Ajitesh Singh                               ………       Petitioner
                                              -Versus-
           Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan and others       ……        Opp. Parties
                    For the Petitioner :    M/s. U. C. Mohanty, S. Pattanayak
                                            R.R. Satpathy
                   For Opposite Party :     Mr. H. K. Tripathy
                                             (opposite party nos. 1 to 4)
           PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
              Date of hearing: 14.07.2015 | Date of judgment:18.08.2015
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.           Against the refusal of the opposite parties to admit
           the petitioner in Class-I in Kendriya Vidyalaya-2, Madhupatna,
           Cuttack during the academic session 2015-16, the petitioner has
           approached this Court through this Writ petition.
           2.           The short facts of the case, in hand, are that pursuant to
           notification issued by the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan under the

                                     2
Ministry   of  HRD,   Department     of   Education,  New    Delhi   dated
16.01.2015 schedule for admission into Class-I in Kendriya Vidyalaya
for the academic session 2015-16 has been intimated to the Principal,
KVS/all the Regional Offices with request to circulate the same
amongst the KVS under their jurisdiction. After such notification, the
petitioner   applied  for  his  admission    into  Class-I   in  Kendriya
Vidyalaya-2,     Madhupatna,    Cuttack.    On    consideration    of  his
application, the Selection Committee of Kendriya Vidyalaya prepared
a list of selected candidates in which the petitioner’s name found
place at Sl. No. 8 of the waiting list in Annexure-2. Subsequently, the
provisional selection list was prepared wherein his name was found
place at Sl. No. 7. Consequently, the petitioner’s father was called
upon by the School authority on 02.05.2015 to remain present on
05.05.2015 between 9 AM and 11 AM along with all original
documents accompanied by the child and his mother. On the date
fixed, the petitioner’s father appeared before the school authority
along with required documents, but opposite party No. 4 informed
that his son cannot be admitted into his school. The petitioner’s
father being an Addl. Central Govt. Standing Counsel appointed by
Central Govt. for Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench,
Cuttack, the petitioner could not have been denied such admission.
Hence, this Writ petition.
3.            Mr. U. C. Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner states that the petitioner’s father being a practicing

                                     3
advocate and at present working as an Addl. Central Govt. Standing
Counsel for Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench, Cuttack is
placed in the priority category-1 as per the admission guidelines of
the opposite parties. Even though the petitioner was selected but
subsequently, the said selection was rejected on the ground that the
petitioner could not produce the document that the father of the
petitioner is a regular Central Government employee under Ministry
of Law and Justice Department, Government of India as per the
service certificate filed along with the application form. Therefore, his
case   cannot    be   considered   under   the   priority category-1  for
admission into the Kendriya Vidyalaya-2, Cuttack. He submitted that
the petitioner’s father was discharging the public duty being a Public
Officer as defined under Section 2(17)(h) of the Civil Procedure Code,
1908. He was holding an office of profit and as such as per the
provisions   contained     under  Section   24   of  Cr.P.C., 1973,  the
petitioner’s father being a Public Prosecutor, having a special status
and getting statutory appointment, he can be considered under
category-1 of the guidelines issued by the Central Government
Authority and without considering the same, denial of admission of
the petitioner on the plea that the petitioner’s father is not a regular
Central Govt. Employee, cannot be sustained in the eye of law. To
substantiate his contention he has relied upon the judgment of the
apex Court in Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi etc. etc. v. State of

                                     4
U.P. and others, AIR 1991 SC 537, in Mahadeo v. Shantibhai and
others, 1969 2 SCR 422.
4.           Per contra, Mr. H. K. Tripathy, learned counsel appearing
for the opposite party nos. 1 to 4 raised a preliminary objection that
the writ petition is to be dismissed on the ground of suppression of
material facts and non-disclosure of fact is more serious and further
by adhering deliberate to falsehood by filing a false affidavit. As such
any party not approaching the Court in clean hand is not entitled to
get any relief. If the petitioner’s name was included in the select list
by mistake construing his father as a Central Govt. Employee, that
mistake can be rectified by the authority. Therefore, no illegality or
irregularity has been committed by the authority in rejecting the
claim of the petitioner to get admission into the Class-I of Kendriya
Vidyalaya-2, Madhupatna, Cuttack.
5.           The facts pleaded above reveals that the petitioner’s
father applied for admission of the petitioner into Class-I, Kendriya
Vidyalaya-2,    Madhupatna,     Cuttack   by    furnishing  documents.
Considering the same the petitioner’s name has been included in the
waiting selected list in Annexure-2 at serial no.8 and subsequently in
the provisional select list in Annexure-3 at serial no. 7. On
02.05.2015 the petitioner’s father was intimated to produce the
relevant documents for consideration for admission of the petitioner
into Class-I of Kendriya Vidyalaya-2, Madhupatna, Cuttack. On
05.05.2015, when the documents were produced, the petitioner’s

                                            5
father who was appointed as an Addl. Central Govt. Standing Counsel
by the Central Govt. for Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack
Bench, Cuttack, was called upon to produce the salary certificate. He
could not produce the same. Consequently, the authority denied the
admission to the petitioner as            his father does not come under the
priority category-1        on the       guidelines issued by          the   Kendriya
Vidyalayas Sangathan.
6.             Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan has framed a guideline for
admission into Kendriya Vidyalayas which has been annexed as
Annexure-F series to the counter affidavit filed by the opposite
parties. Part-A of the General Guidelines under Clause-3, deals with
priorities in admission which read as follows:-
       “PRIORITIS IN ADMISSION
       The following priorities shall be followed in granting admissions:-
       (A)     KENDRIYA VIDAYALAYA UNDER CIVIL/DEFENCE SECTOR:
       1.      Children   of    transferable    and    non-transferable    Central
               government employees and children of ex-servicemen. This will
               also include children of Foreign National officials, who come on
               deputation or transfer to India on invitation by Govt. of India.
       2.      Children of transferable and non-transferable employees of
               autonomous Bodies / Public sector Undertaking/institute of
               Higher Learning of the Government of India.
       3.      Children of transferable and non-transferable State Government
               employees.
       4.      Children of transferable and non-transferable employees of
               Autonomous Bodies/ Public Sector Undertakings/Institute of
               Higher Learning of the State Governments.
       5.      Children Nationals who are located in the India due to their work
               or for any personal reasons. The children of Foreign Nationals
               would be considered only in case there are no children of Indian
               Nationals waitlisted for admission.
              Admission into Kendriya Vidyalayas is governed by the
guidelines framed by the Kendriya Vidyalayas in its letter and spirit.

                                      6
Pursuant to notification issued, the petitioner’s father applied for
admission of his son- the petitioner into Class-I of Kendriya
Vidyalaya-2,    Madhupatna,       Cuttack.   The   said   application  was
registered as Regd. No. 469 for the session of 2015-16 and annexed
as Annexure-A series to the counter-affidavit filed by opposite
parties. Under the heading “SERVICE CERTIFICATE” The Senior Panel
Counsel, Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench, Cuttack
certified that the petitioner’s father is working as a regular employee
in the Office/Ministry of Law and Justice. He is a regular employee
and    the   certificate  given    by   Senior   Panel  Counsel,    Central
Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench, Cuttack is quoted below.
             “Certified that Shri Chandra Madhan Singh is working
             as regular employee in the Office/Ministry of Law and
             Justice. He/She is a regular employee of Central Govt.
             and his/her services are non-transferable/transferable
             anywhere in India.”
             On the basis of such certificate the petitioner’s case was
considered for admission into Class-I for Kendriya Vidyalaya-2,
Cuttack and his name was empanelled at serial no.8 in Annexure-2
and subsequently, at serial no. 7 in Annexure-3. On 05.05.2015 when
the petitioner’s father was called upon to produce the service
certificate, he could not be able to produce the same, as he is not a
salaried employee of the Central Government, rather he produced his
engagement order issued by Ministry of Law and Justice Department
indicating that he is working as Addl. Central Govt. Standing Counsel

                                    7
for the Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench, Cuttack. Due
to non production of salary certificate, admission has been refused.
7.          The moot question that arises for consideration is whether
the Addl. Central Government Standing Counsel appointed by Central
Government is to be considered as a Central Government employee
under Sub-Clause (A)(1) of Clause-(3) of the General Guidelines Part-
A.
8.          Admittedly, the petitioner’s father was appointed as Addl.
Central Government Standing Counsel by the Central Government for
Central Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench, Cuttack. Though he
has not been receiving regular salary, he has been paid remuneration
by way of fees for his performance/legal duties in the Court of law.
Being a Central Government Counsel he defends the Government
action in the Court of law and as such, he is discharging the public
duty.
9.          Section 2(17)(h) of Civil Procedure Code, 1908 states
“Public Officer” means a person falling under any of the following
descriptions namely:
            Xx                 xx                xx
            (h) every officer in the service or pay of the Government,
            or  remunerated      by   fees   or  commission    for the
            performance of any public duty;
10.         Section 24 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 deals
with Public Prosecutors. Under the code the Public Prosecutor has a

                                   8
special status and it is a statutory appointment and he receives a
special recognition for the said purpose. The Law Officers of the High
Court (Recruitment, Remuneration and Duties) Rules’ 1974 also
provides as under:-
             “The G.A. A.G.A., S.C. Addl. S.C. shall be subject to
             Rule-171 of the Odisha Service Code in the matter
             of leave.”
11.          It urged by Mr. U.C. Mishra, learned counsel for the
petitioner that though essentially the Addl. Central Government
Standing Counsel can not be treated as employee of the Central
Government but the nature of duty he is discharging be termed as
public duty and as such, he is an Public Officer having special
statutory engagement to discharge as Public Prosecutor within the
meaning of Sec. 24 of the Cr.P.C.
12.          In Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi (supra) the Apex Court
held that Public Prosecutors hold public office and since the
Government Counsel are paid remuneration out of public exchequer,
there exists a clear public element attached to the office or post. It
was further held that under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 the
Public Prosecutor has a special status and it is statutory appointment.
Since he receives a special recognition the apex Court held that the
office of the Public Prosecutor is a Public Office and he performs a
public duty.

                                     9
13.           In Mahadeo v. Shantibhai and others (supra), the
Apex Court considered the character of engagement of a Government
Counsel, where it was held that the lawyer engaged by the Railway
Administration during continuance of engagement hold an “OFFICE
OF PROFIT”. It is urged that since the engagement of Railway
Counsel is similar to that of the Government Counsel in Central
Administrative Tribunal and the petitioner’s father having hold the
office of profit, determination of the petitioner under category priority
(A) (1) is justified. But such determination having been done on
misinterpretation of the priority category, the mistake committed by
the authority has been rectified. So far as the allegation made that
the petitioner’s father suppressed the material facts and non-
disclosure of the fact is more serious, cannot sustain in the eye of
law. On perusal of the application form it appears Clause-5 deals with
details of mother and father. Sub-Clause-(ix) of Cluse-5 deals with
category of the parents, against which it has been mentioned as Addl.
Central Govt. Standing Counsel(copy attached) and the petitioner’s
father has furnished his engagement order issued by Central
Government as an Additional Central Government Standing Counsel.
From that it cannot be construed that the petitioner’s father has
suppressed any fact before the authority. At best it can be said that
the selection committee while considering the case of the petitioner
has misconstrued as if the petitioner’s father is an employee of the
Central Government and enlisted the name of the petitioner in

                                   10
waiting list in Annexure-2 and subsequently in Annexure-3. The
allegation with regard to deliberate falsehood of filing false certificate
must be rectified effectively, is not applicable in the present context.
With regard to the contention that the mistake can be rectified by the
authority, it may be said that if the authority has erroneously
included the petitioner’s name in the merit list prepared by them, the
same can be rectified in view of judgment referred by the Apex Court
U.T. Chandigarh & others v. Gurucharan Singh & Another, 2014
(2) S.L.J. (S.C.) 301. M/s. Maharastra State Seeds Corporation
Ltd. –vrs. Haridas & others, AIR 2006 SC 1480 and M.S. Patil V.
Gulbarga University & others, AIR 2010 SC 3783.
14.          Priorities in admission Clause-(A)(1) stated bout the
children of transferable and non-transferable Central Government
employees and children of ex-servicemen. The question now comes
for consideration is as to whether the Addl. Central Govt. Standing
Counsel can be construed to be an employee under the Central
Government so as to get the benefit of sub-Clause(A)(1) of Clause-3
of the guidelines. Certainly no master-servant relationship exists
between the petitioner’s father and the Central Government, rather
being the petitioner’s father has been appointed as a lawyer by the
Ministry of Law and Justice Department to defend the Central
Government in CAT. May it be, he is discharging the public duty as a
public officer. More so, during the continuance of engagement he
holds an office of profit, that ipso facto cannot be said that he is a

                                    11
Central Government Employee as there exists no master-servant
relationship   between    the   petitioner’s  father  and   the   Central
Government and as such he will not come within the parameters of
sub-Clause-(A)(1) of Clasue-3 of the Priorities in admission as per
guidelines for admission into Kendriya Vidyalayas. Therefore, the
petitioner is not entitled to get the benefit of admission as per Part-A
of General Guidelines.
15.          It appears that while entertaining this application, this
Court passed an interim order on 07.05.2015 in misc. case No. 8724
of 2015 that as an interim, one seat in Standard-I in Kendriya
Vidyalaya No.2, Cuttack be kept reserved till final adjudication of the
case. Mr. H.K. Tripathy, learned counsel for opposite party nos. 1 to 4
states that in compliance to the order passed by this Court, one seat
has been kept reserved in Standard-I, therefore, this Court is of the
considered view that since the seat is lying vacant, if there is no other
impediment, the opposite party may do well to accommodate the
petitioner to prosecute his studies in the Standard-1 as special case.
16.          With the above observation and direction, the writ petition
stands disposed of.
                                               …….……………………………
                                               Dr. B. R. Sarangi, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 18th August, 2015/Ajaya

12

