                        ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 9330 of 2010
      In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
      Constitution of India.
                                    ----------
      Smt.Sarojini Sahoo                       ………        Petitioner
                                    -versus-
      State of Orissa and others               ………        Opposite Parties
               For petitioner   : M/s.K.K.Swain, P.n.Mohanty &
                                  S.C.D.Dash
               For opp. parties : M/s.S.Dash, Addl. Govt. Advocate.
                                                      (for O.Ps. 1 to 6)
                                  M/s.A.K.Mohapatra & S.C.Rath
                                                       (for O.P. 4)
      PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
          Date of hearing: 03.12.2013 | Date of judgment : 18.12.2013
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J. The petitioner in this writ petition seeks to quash the
      order dated 27.4.2010 passed by the Sub-Collector, Sadar, Cuttack in
      Appeal No.14 of 2009 under Annexure-2 by setting aside the
      engagement of opposite party no.4 and allowing the petitioner to
      continue as Anganwadi Worker of Adalia Anganwadi Centre.
      2.             The case of the petitioner in nutshell is that pursuant
      to the advertisement issued by the C.D.P.O., Cuttack for engagement

                                     2
of Anganwadi Worker for Adalia Anganwadi Centre, the petitioner
being a resident of village Adalia made necessary application for the
said post. Following a due procedure of selection, the petitioner was
selected and was issued with engagement order vide Annexure-1
dated 29.11.2008. Pursuant to such engagement order, the petitioner
joined in the said post on the very same day, i.e. on 29.11.2008. The
opposite party no.4 challenging such selection of the petitioner,
preferred an appeal before the Sub-Collector, Sadar, Cuttack and
upon hearing the Sub-Collector, Sadar, Cuttack vide impugned order
dated 27.7.2010 allowed the appeal by setting aside the engagement
order issued in favour of the petitioner on the ground that she is not
a permanent resident of the service area of Adalia Anganwadi Centre
and directed the C.D.P.O., Cuttack to finalize the selection of
Anganwadi Worker from amongst the eligible candidates as per the
merit list.
3.              Mr.K.K.Swain,   learned  counsel   for the  petitioner
relying upon the guidelines of the Government of Orissa, Child and
Welfare Department dated 2.7.2007 under Annexure-3 stated that as
per clause-1 applications for selection of Volunteers to work as
Anganwadi Workers will be invited for each village/ Anganwadi Centre
area from women residing in the said village/Anganwadi Centre area.
He contended that in view of the said guidelines, it is not required
that one should be a permanent resident of the Anganwadi Centre

                                       3
area. On the contrary the scheme clearly postulates that one must be
residing   in   the   Anganwadi    Centre   area.  He   contended    that
irrespective of whether one is a permanent resident of the Anganwadi
Centre area or not, if he/ she is a resident of the Anganwadi Centre
area and is residing in any of the villages of the Anganwadi Centre
area, is eligible to apply for the post of Anganwadi Worker as per the
scheme. He has also relied upon the resident certificate granted by
the Tahasildar, Sadar, Cuttack where it is specifically stated that the
petitioner is ordinarily residing at Adlia, P.S.Sadar Tahasil, Cuttack in
the district of Cuttack. Such certificate was granted in Misc. Case No.
2601 of 2008 by the competent authority by following due enquiry
conducted by the Revenue Inspector and the enquiry report has been
annexed as Annexure-4 series. Under Clause 12 of the R.I. report, it
is stated that the applicant, namely, Sarojini Sahoo is residing in the
house of Bhagyadhar Prusty on rental basis since more than last 15
years. Therefore, the authorities have not committed any illegalities
in considering the application of the petitioner for engagement as
Anganwadi Worker in respect of Adalia Anganwadi Centre.
4.               The C.D.P.O., Cuttack, opposite party no.3 has filed
counter affidavit stating that as per the guidelines issued by the
Government, the candidates for selection of Anganwadi Worker
should belong to the service area of the Anganwadi Centre          and a
resident certificate should be produced along with the application

                                       4
form for consideration of her application. It is further stated that since
the petitioner submitted her resident certificate that she is a resident
of village Adalia and secured highest mark, she was selected as
Anganwadi Worker in respect of Adalia Anganwadi Centre. On the
basis of the complaint lodged by opposite party no.4 by preferring
appeal, the Sub-Collector, Cuttack got the matter enquired through
the Tahasildar, Sadar, Cuttack, who submitted a report stating that
the petitioner was residing in the house of one Bhagyadhar Prusty on
rental basis and presently, she is residing in the house of one Basanti
Barik of village Adalia on rental basis. It is further stated in the
counter that since the candidature of the petitioner was considered on
the strength of the resident certificate issued in her favour and the no
objection was received from any quarter during the statutory period
of inviting objection, the petitioner was issued with engagement order
to work as Anganwadi Worker in Adalia Anganwadi Centre. But on
enquiry when it was found that she was residing on rental basis, her
selection was set aside by the opposite party no.2 by the impugned
order.
5.              Opposite party no.4 in her counter affidavit reiterated
the same facts and stated that since the petitioner does not belong to
the Adalia Anganwadi Centre area, she is not entitled to get
engagement order to be engaged as Anganwadi Worker. It is also
stated that the word „residing‟ never means that a person, who is

                                       5
residing on rental basis shall be eligible to apply for the said post and
therefore, since the petitioner does not belong to the Anganwadi
Centre area in question, she is not eligible to be engaged as such.
6.              In the rejoinder to the counter filed by opposite party
no.3, the petitioner has categorically stated that the resident
certificate, which has been granted in favour of the petitioner has not
been    cancelled  and   that  apart,    the  guideline  issued   by  the
Government does not stipulate that one must be a permanent
resident of the Anganwadi Centre area. Therefore, the engagement of
the petitioner cannot be said to be in contravention of the aforesaid
guideline. He further contended that the petitioner is residing in the
said place for more than 15 years and the Tahasildar on enquiry has
issued such certificate and the said residential certificate having not
been cancelled, it has reached finality. Therefore, the finding arrived
at by the Sub-Collector, Sadar, Cuttack in the impugned order that
the petitioner is not a permanent resident of village Adalia cannot be
sustained.
7.              Mr.Swain, learned counsel for the petitioner in order to
substantiate his contentions, has relied upon the judgments of this
Court in Rohit Chauhan v. Chairman, Admission Sub-Committee,
Joint Entrance Examination- E & M-2000, University College of
Engineering, Burala, District- Sambalpur, 2001(1) OLR 305 and
Jharana Sahoo v. State of Orissa and others, 2005(1) OLR 514.

                                      6
Referring to Rohit Chauhan (supra), he submitted that a similar
question came up for consideration in the said judgment with regard
to the construction of the word “ordinarily resides” for admission to
Joint Entrance Examination (Engineering and Medical) and this Court
analyzing the same, in paragraphs 12 and 16 held that if the
certificate submitted is in the prescribed format, non-mention of the
word “permanent resident” cannot be taken as a fact against the
petitioner when it was certified by the Tahasildar that the petitioner
ordinarily resides in Khurda district. Therefore, it follows that the
petitioner has complied with the first part of the requirement, i.e. the
candidate should be a resident of Orissa and allowed the student to
participate in the selection process.
8.              In Jharana Sahoo (supra), this Court has considered
the   guidelines  issued   for  engagement    of  Swechhasevi    Sikhya
Sahayaks where in the advertisement, it was stipulated that the
candidate should enclose the resident certificate issued by the
competent authority that he/ she is a resident of the concerned
education district. The provisional selection was made but the
subsequent condition that the candidate would be residing for more
than twelve years in the Education District was challenged. This Court
in the said judgment held that since the advertisement stipulated that
a candidate should enclose a resident certificate issued by the
competent authority that he/ she is a resident of the concerned

                                     7
Education District, the stipulation made in the Govt. notification was
quashed.
9.             Perusal of the notification dated 20.10.2008 annexed
as Annexure-A/4 to the counter filed by opposite party no.4, makes it
clear that apart from other documents, under clause-3 it has been
stated that the applicant has to submit the permanent resident
certificate from the Tahasildar. When objection was raised by
opposite party no.4, enquiry was caused and on enquiry it was found
that the petitioner was residing on rental basis for more than 12
years in the house of one Bhagyadhar Prusty, but at the time of
enquiry she has been shifted to the house of one Basanti Barik of
village Adalia. Therefore, the petitioner having not satisfied the
requirement of the advertisement under Annexure-A/4 regarding
submission of permanent resident certificate as per clause (3) of the
advertisement, she incurs disqualification from the very initiation of
the submission of the application for engagement as Anganwadi
Worker. On the other hand, the petitioner being a permanent resident
of village Kulasarichuan under Kalapada R.I. Circle, her application
could not have been considered for engagement as Anganwadi
Worker in respect of Adalia Anganwadi Centre as she does not belong
to the said area and the reliance placed on the judgments referred to
supra has no application so as to extend the benefits in favour of the
petitioner.

                                     8
10.             In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, this
Court has no hesitation to hold that the Sub-Collector, Sadar, Cuttack
has rightly rejected the candidature of the petitioner as she does not
belong to Adalia Anganwadi Centre area. Accordingly, the writ petition
fails and the same is dismissed.
                                                ….……………………………..
                                                  Dr.B.R.Sarangi, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 18th December, 2013/PKSahoo


