                ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
      W.P.(C) No. 4649 of 2005, W.P.(C) No. 17155 of 2006 &
                        W.P.(C) No. 158 of 2010
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                               ----------
In W.P.(C) No. 4649 of 2005
State of Orissa                            ………       Petitioner
                                -versus-
Baidyanath Jena (since dead) represented
through his legal heirs and others         ………       Opp.Parties
         For Petitioner    :   Mr. B. Bhuyan,
                               Addl. Government Advocate
        For Opp.Parties   :    M/s B.K. Dagara, P.K. Patnaik
                               M/s S.K. Das (Caveator)
                               M/s. N.N. Mohapatra, S.Swain,
                               N. Jesty (Intervenor)
                               Mr. P.K. Mohanty, D.N. Mohapatra,
                               G.S. Satpathy, J. Mohanty
                                                 (Intervenor)
                               M/s B. Pradhan, P.Mohanty,
In W.P.(C) No. 17155 of 2006
Bhagatbandu Jena and another               ………       Petitioners
                                -versus-
State of Orissa and others                 ………       Opp.Parties
         For Petitioners     : M/s S.K. Das, N.N. Mohapatra,
                               S.Swain,D.K. Pattnaik.
         For Opp.Parties    :  Mr. B. Bhuyan, Addl. Govt. Advocate

                                                2
         In W.P.(C) No. 158 of 2010
         Sarojini Sahu                               ………      Petitioner
                                         -versus-
         State of Orissa and others                  ………      Opp.Parties
                  For Petitioners   :    M/s. Pradipta Mohanty,
                                         D.N.Mohapatra, J.Mohanty.
                  For Opp.Parties   :    Mr. B. Bhuyan,
                                         Addl. Government Advocate
         PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE KUMARI JUSTICE S. PANDA
                                           AND
                  THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
           Date of hearing: 08.08.2013| Date of judgment : 18.09.2013
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.      State   of   Orissa   being  the  Petitioner  has filed
         W.P.(C).No. 4649 of 2005 assailing the order dated 21.08.2004
         passed by the Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack in O.E.A.
         Revision Case No. 16 of 2004 leading to settlement of Government
         land measuring an area of Ac.6.500 decimals in favour of the
         Baidyanath Jena in sthitiban status.
                         Petitioners in W.P.(C) No. 17155 of 2006 being the
         son and daughter of late Baidyanath Jena have challenged the
         correctness and legality of order dated 27.01.1999 passed by the
         Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar in O.E.A. Misc. Case
         No. 33 of 1997 rejecting the claim of their father as a tenant under

                                      3
Section 8(1) of the Orissa Estate Abolition Act, in short, “O.E.A. Act”
in respect of the case land.
                W.P.(C).No. 158 of 2010 has been filed by Sorojini
Sahu, challenging the inaction of opposite party No.4, the Tahasildar-
cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar in not considering and disposing
of the application dated 5.10.2009 filed by her for mutation of the
land appertaining to Sabik plot no.218, area Ac.6.500 decimals,
moza-Chandrashekharpur, Bhubaneswar as per Rule 34 (c) of the
Orissa Survey and Settlement Rules, 1962 (hereinafter referred to as
“the Rules”) giving due regards to the judgment dated 6.2.2008,
decree   dated    12.2.2008   passed    by   the  learned  Civil  Judge
(Sr.Division), Bhubaneswar in Civil Suit No. 535 of 2005 and decision
dated 21.8.2004 of the Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack
passed in O.E.A. Revision Case No. 16 of 2004 under Section 38-B of
the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1951, which is under challenge by
the State of Orissa in W.P.(C)No. 4649 of 2005 and no order of stay
of operation of the said order has been passed by this Court. In view
of such position, according to her, there is no impediment on the part
of   the  Tahasildar,   Bhubaneswar     to   consider  the  petitioner‟s
application for mutation of the land in her favour under Section 34 (c)
of the Orissa Survey and Settlement Rules, 1962.
2.              The order of the Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector,
Bhubaneswar dated 27.1.1999 in O.E.A. Misc. Case No. 33 of 1997
refusing to accept rent has been challenged under Section 38-B of

                                      4
the Orissa Estates Abolition Act, 1951, hereinafter to be referred to
as “the Act”, in short, before the Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa,
Cuttack vide order dated 21.8.2004 in O.E.A. Revision Case No. 16 of
2004 has set aside the order dated 27.1.1999 passed by the
Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar and directed to record
the suit land measuring Ac.6.500 in the name of Baidyanath Jena in
sthitiban status and also to accept the rent from him on consideration
of the application filed under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act, and since
common question of law and facts are involved in these matters, they
are heard together and disposed of by this common judgment.
3.              The factual matrix of the case in hand is that Sabik
Plot No. 218 under Sabik Khata no.303/28 having an area of
Ac.6.500 decimals (corresponding to Hal plot no.258 part of Khata
no.472, Kisam “Rakhit” of village Chandrashekharpur) was a part of
the estate owned by Ex-ruler of Kanika (hereinafter referred to as,
the “Ex-Intermediary). The Ex-Intermediary under a „Hata Patta‟
granted on 28.7.1942 inducted one Baidyanath Jena as a tenant with
rent of twenty seven rupees three annas and „Pathkar‟ of fifteen
annas.
                The lease was granted for agricultural purpose and
from the date of lease, Baidyanath Jena remained in peaceful
possession and enjoyed the land and his name was recorded in the
Estates records in Jamabandi‟ Khata No.303/28. Baidyanath was
paying rent to the Ex-Intermediary from the year 1942 up to 1954

                                    5
vide rent receipt Nos. 411/1 dated 28.7.42, 6343 dated 24.6.1945,
113 dated 25.5.1948, 6613 dated 8.5.1951 and 757 dated 5.2.1954.
These rent receipts show that the tenant Baidyanath Jena was paying
rent from the date of induction as a tenant, i.e., from 1942 till the
vesting of the estate in the year 1954. The estate was vested to the
State Government as per the provisions of the O.E.A. Act in the year
1954. On the vesting of the estate, the Ex-Intermediary submitted
„Ekpadia‟ bearing Jamabandi No. 303/28 in favour of Baidyanath Jena
before the Tahasildar, Sadar, Cuttack vide Sl.No.364   as a proof of
his induction as a tenant prior to vesting of the estate. The
Tahasildar, Sadar, Cuttack prepared the Tenant‟s Ledger in favour of
Baidyanath Jena and accepted him as a Stitiban tenant under State
and collected rent from him up to 1968.
               After bifurcation of the Cuttack Tahasil in the year
1969, village Chandrashekharpur came under the jurisdiction of
Bhubaneswar Tahasil. In the 1973-74 settlement record of rights,
plot no. 258 including the suit land measuring Ac.6.500 dec. was
recorded in favour of the Government of Orissa with an area of
Ac.184.190 decimals under Rakhit Khata No. 472. In the 1988-89
settlement record of rights, plot no. 258 with a total area of
Ac.173.82 decimals including the suit land measuring Ac.6.500
decimals was recorded in favour of G.A. Department, Government of
Odisha with kisam „Unnata Yojana Yogya‟.

                                     6
             In the year 1995, Baidyanath Jena approached the
Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar under the O.E.A. Act
to receive the rent under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act but the latter
refused to receive rent from him, consequence thereof, Baidyanath
Jena filed O.E.A. Misc. Case No. 33 of 1997 under Section 8(1) of the
O.E.A. Act for acceptance of rent. On 28.7.1998, Baidyanath
produced original documents in support of his claim for recognition as
a tenant, which was perused by the Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector,
Bhubaneswar. On the same day, by the order of the Tahasildar, one
Amin, namely, Sri P.C. Pradhan was directed to make a spot visit and
to submit a report regarding Baidyanath Jena‟s claim under Section 8
(1) of the O.E.A.Act.
4.              The Amin visited the spot and enquired from the local
people and submitted his report on 27.1.1999 before the Tahasildar-
cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar, wherein it has been clearly
stated that Baidyanath Jena had uninterrupted possession of the suit
land right from 1942 and he had fenced the suit land, constructed a
house with stone wall and thatched roof and remained in possession
and enjoyed the suit land continuously. The Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A.
Collector, Bhubaneswar passed order on 27.1.1999 after perusing the
details  claim   advanced   by  Baidyanath   Jena  on   the   basis  of
documentary evidences like „Hata Patta‟ dated 28.7.1942, rent
receipts granted by the Ex-Intermediary, rent receipt granted by the
Tahasildar, Sadar, Cuttack, the report of the Amin dated 27.1.1999

                                      7
and sketch map of the suit land etc., in O.E.A. Misc. Case No. 33 of
1997, rejected the application filed under Section 8(1) of the
O.E.A.Act on the ground that after completion of the settlement
operation, the O.E.A. Collector has lost his jurisdiction to record the
suit land in favour of Baidyanath Jena, the tenant. He further
observed that the tenant might agitate his claim in appropriate Civil
Court or Commissioner of Settlement to record the land in his favour.
The said order of the Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar
dated 27.1.1999 is the subject matter of challenge by the legal heirs
of Baidyanath Jena in W.P.(C) No. 17155 of 2006.
5.              Being aggrieved by the order dated 27.1.1999 passed
by the Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar in O.E.A. Misc.
Case No. 33 of 1997, Baidyanath Jena filed O.E.A. Revision Case No.
16 of 2004 under Section 38-B of the O.E.A. Act before the learned
Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack. The learned Member,
Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack heard the revision petition and
called for a report from the Tahasildar, Bhubaneswar and directed
him to furnish the Tenant‟s Ledger pertaining to the village
Chandrashekharpur and also directed Baidyanath Jena to produce the
original rent receipt, certified copy of R.O.R. prepared and issued by
the Tahasildar, Sadar, Cuttack after he has been deemed to be a
tenant on vesting of the estate to the State Government. After
hearing, the Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack allowed the
revision petition and set aside the order dated 27.1.1999 passed by

                                      8
the Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar and directed to
record the suit land in the name of Baidyanath Jena with sthitiban
status and also directed the Tahasildar, Bhubaneswar to accept the
rent from Baidyanath Jena as a tenant as per Section 8(1) of the
O.E.A. Act.
6.              The State of Orissa, represented through the Special
Secretary to Government, General Administration Department filed
W.P.(C) No. 4649 of 2005 assailing the order passed by the Member,
Board of Revenue under Section 38-B of the O.E.A. Act stating that
he could not have entertained the revision application filed by the
private opposite party Baidyanath Jena. Under Section 38-B of the
O.E.A. Act, such power is only available to the Member, Board of
Revenue to be exercised either on its own motion or on report from
the Collector to call for and examine the record of any proceeding in
which any authority subordinate to him has made any decision or
passed an order under the O.E.A. Act for the purpose of satisfying
himself as to the regularity of such proceeding or correctness or
legality or propriety of such decision or order and can modify, annul,
remit the same and pass order accordingly.
7.              The Member, Board of Revenue entertained the
application filed by Baidyanath Jena, a private party in purported
exercise of the power under Section 38-B of the O.E.A. Act and
proceeded on the basis of the documents without affording an
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner, as a result of which there is

                                     9
non-compliance of the principles of natural justice. In order to make
an unlawful gain of valuable property of the State Government,
Baidyanath Jena relied upon false, fabricated and forged documents
whose genuineness and authenticity is doubted. The certified copy of
ekpadia granted by P.K.Dalabehera and relied upon by Baidyanath
Jena in the said revision case is not genuine one and the concerned
copy application register of the Cuttack Tahasil being forged, Lalbag
P.S. Case No. 27 of 1999 has been registered out of which trial in
G.R.Case No. 196 of 1990 has been initiated and accused persons
have been charge-sheeted.
8.             On bare perusal of the certified copy of ekpadia, it can
be easily ascertained that the same was copied from a register, which
was not signed or submitted by ex-intermediary, i.e., Raja Sailendra
Narayan Bhanjan Deo of Kanika Estate and authenticated by the
concerned Tahasildar. Besides, the so-called certified copy of ekpadia
shows the signature of the authorized officer, Sri Raj Kishore Das,
who is also one of the accused and has been charge-sheeted in
G.R.Case No. 196 of 1990. Though the original Jamabandi register in
respect of the case village showing the list of tenants on the date of
vesting submitted by the ex-intermediary to the O.E.A. Collector was
called for from the Bhubaneswar Tahasil, but the same has not been
perused. Without perusing the same, the impugned order has been
passed. Apart from the same, the Tahasildar, Bhubaneswar replied to
the Member, Board of Revenue that the original ekpadia, tenant

                                     10
ledger is not available either in his office or in the Cuttack Sadar
Tahasil before bifurcation of the Tahasil and on bare perusal of the
certified copy of the ekpadia, it is found that the tenant of Khata
No.303/21 is Gandharba Naik, whereas the same Khata was once
claimed by one Daitari Mohanty as seen from the order dated
29.7.1995 of the Member, Board of Revenue in O.E.A. Revision Case
no. 18 of 1994 between Daitari Mohanty v. State and others, which
will show that different certified copy of the fraudulent ekpadia
register has been obtained by many unscrupulous persons to grab
valuable property in the State capital of Bhubaneswar.
9.              Apart from the     same, Baidyanath     Jena did not
challenge the entry of two settlement record of rights in respect of
the case land before any forum whatsoever which totally negatives
his plea of possession including the so-called Amin‟s report of
Bhubaneswar Tahasil office. The Amin, who has caused the enquiry
as to the possession of the land in question during the year 1989,
could trace the possession of Baidyanath Jena since 1942, which is
not based on any materials whatsoever. The Hatpatta along with the
rent receipts said to have been issued by the ex-intermediary are not
genuine one. On perusal of the 1929-30 Revision Settlement R.O.R.,
it is ascertained that the case land at that time was a communal and
forest land and the ex-intermediary was not entitled under any law or
order or regulation in vogue, to lease out the said communal land,
which were burdened with communal rights. Therefore, the so-called

                                      11
claim of tenancy by Baidyanath Jena said to have been created by
the ex-intermediary in respect of the communal land should therefore
be interpreted to be outside the proprietary rights of the ex-
intermediary and therefore, cannot be accepted on their face value
unless and until the contrary is proved by unimpeachable proof that
the said documents are genuine and authentic. Assuming but not
admitting that the ex-intermediary inducted Baidyanath Jena as
genuine on the basis of the unregistered document, Hatpatta, which
is inadmissible in evidence as per the decision reported in AIR 1955
SC page 328 (Sita Maharani v. Chhedi Maheto and AIR 1964
Patna, page 1, (Ram Nath Mandal and others v. Jojan Mandal
and others) and as such, no documentary evidence is filed by
Baidyanath Jena to show that the person, who signed the so-called
unregistered    lease   deed  including   the rent receipts  was/were
specifically authorized to grant such lease or to receive rent for and
on behalf of the ex-intermediary. Non-acceptance of rent is an
administrative    action/  order   not   amenable  to  the   revisional
jurisdiction under Section 38-B of the O.E.A. Act in view of the
decision reported in 73(1992) CLT 868 (FB) Basanti Sahu v. State
confirmed by the apex Court in State v. Brundaban Sharma, 1995
(Supp.) 3 SCC, 249.
10.              Apart from the same, the vesting of estate has been
done in the year 1954 and Baidyanath Jena claims settlement of land
after 43 years of vesting of the estate in the year 1995 and no

                                        12
reasonable explanation is made available in the order passed by the
Member,    Board    of  Revenue     for   such belated   entertaining  of
application for settlement. Baidyanath Jena has claimed that he has
got Hattapatta from the ex-intermediary on 28.7.1942. The said
Hattapatta has neither been produced before the Tahasildar in O.E.A.
Misc. Case No.33 of 1997 nor before the Member, Board of Revenue
in Revision Case No. 16 of 2004 nor before this Court. The
genuineness of Hattapatta could have been proved, if it would have
been produced as per the provisions contained in Section 17(1)(d) of
the Registration Act, 1908 and Section 6(i) of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1982. Therefore, Baidyanath Jena has failed to prove
evidentiary value of such Hattapatta under Section 91 of the
Evidence Act. It is settled law that any agricultural land for more than
one year or from year to year basis with the fixed rate of rent must
be compulsorily registered and if it is not registered under the
Registration Act, no title passes. Therefore, no tenancy having been
created,   such    land    vested    to   the  Government     free  from
encumbrances since 1954. The tenancy ledger neither has been
opened nor rent has been collected and the so-called rent receipt
bearing No. 022771 k8 is completely forged one. Hence, the
aforesaid writ petition filed by the State.
11.            The writ petition filed by Sarojini Sahoo, who claims to
be the purchaser from Baidyanath Jena by executing an agreement
for sale of the land in question, borrowed funds from her. After

                                      13
settlement of total consideration money and advance of the funds,
agreement for sale has been made in favour of Sarojini Sahoo. As per
the agreement, when Baidyanath Jena failed to perform his part of
contract for execution of the sale deed, Sarojini Sahoo filed Civil Suit
No.535 of 2005 before the learned Civil Judge (Sr.Division),
Bhubaneswar      seeking  a  specific  performance    of  contract   and
consequently for execution of sale-deed through the court order.
Sarojini Sahoo having come to know that W.P.(C) No. 4649 of 2005
is pending before this Court, she sought for intervention in Misc. Case
No. 7337 of 2006, which has been vehemently objected by
Baidyanath Jena, consequence thereof, this Court passed an order on
5.9.2006 that the application for intervention in Misc. Case No. 7337
of 2006 would be considered at the time of hearing of the writ
petition. During pendency of the civil suit, Baidyanath Jena died, who
was defendant no.1 in the said suit and he has been substituted by
his legal heirs as defendant nos. 1 (a) to 1 (d).       Vide   judgment
dated 6.2.2008 and decree dated 12.2.2008 the Civil Suit No. 535 of
2005    was   disposed   by  the  learned    Civil Judge   (Sr.Division),
Bhubaneswar allowing the prayer of Sarojini Sahoo for specific
performance of contract directing the defendants to execute the sale
deed in favour of the petitioner, Sarojini Sahoo, within a period of
three months from the date of the decree, failing which the petitioner
was left with the liberty to execute the same through the process of
the court.

                                      14
12.            The defendants, the L.Rs. of Baidyanath Jena having
failed to comply the direction passed by the learned Civil Judge
(Sr.Division), Bhubaneswar in the judgment and decree, the court
intervened in the matter and through the process of the court
intimated to the District Sub-Registrar, Bhubaneswar vide letter
no.27 dated 23.3.2009 authorizing the Nazir of the Civil Court to
present the sale deed on his behalf and directed the parties to pay
registration fee at the time of registration and thereafter the sale
deed has also been duly executed on 8.4.2009 and receipt has been
issued to that effect, which can be presented through authorization in
favour of the person to receive the documents of the said sale deed.
Sarojini Sahoo states that she has already taken over the possession
of land in question since the time of execution of the agreement for
sale and thus, she has been continuing in possession.
13.            By virtue of the Civil Court decree, there has been sale
deed by transferring the land in favour of Sarojini Sahoo. On the
basis of the aforesaid transfer of the land and on the basis of the
decision of the Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack in terms
of Rule 34 (c) of the Orissa Survey and Settlement Rules, 1962
submitted documents before the Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector,
Bhubaneswar on 5.10.2009 requesting to correct the entry in the
R.O.R. and to allow the mutation and thereby to record her name in
respect of the land in question as a sthitiban tenant. The said
application was pending for consideration. Therefore, alleging inaction

                                      15
of the Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar, she filed the
writ petition bearing No. W.P.(C) No.158 of 2010.
14.              In order to substantiate the contention raised on
behalf of the State, Mr. B. Bhuyan, learned Addl. Government
Advocate relies upon the judgments in Basanti Kumari Sahu
(Smt.) v. State of Orissa and others, 1992 (I) OLR 41(FB)=73
(1992) CLT 868 (FB), Smt.Basanti Kumari Sahu v. State of
Orissa and others, 1995 (I) OLR (SC) 587 and State of Orissa
and others v. Brundaban Sharma and another, 1995 (Suppl) 3
SCC 248, Basanti Kumari Sahu (Smt.) v. State of Orissa and
others 1999(I) OLR (SC) 347, Smt. Harapriya Bisoi V. State of
Orissa and others, 2005 (Supp.) OLR 1021, State of Orissa &
others v. Harapriya Bisoi, 2009 (II) OCR (SC) 229=2009 (1) CLR
(Supreme Court) 1100 = 2009 AIR SCW 4808. The “Hatpatta” relied
upon being non-registered one, is inadmissible in view of the dictum
of the apex Court in Sri 5 Sita Maharani and others V. Chhedi
Mahto and others, AIR 1955 SC 328 and in Ram Nath Mandal
and others V. Jojan Mandal and others, AIR 1964 Patna(FB) 1.
15.              Per contra, Mr. P.K. Mohanty, learned Senior Counsel
appearing    for   Sarojini  Sahoo   relied upon   the judgments   in
Radhamani Dibya and others v. Braja Mohan Biswal and
others, 1984 (1) OLR 72= 57(1984) CLT 1 (FB), Manmohan Rout
(and after him) Sundari Devi and others, 1992 (II) OLR 529,
Basanti Kumari Sahu (Smt.) v. State of Orissa and others,

                                    16
1999 (I) OLR (SC) 347, Sebati Dei alias Sebati Rautray V. Orissa
State Housing Board and others, 2000 (I) OLR 134, Bhagaban
Kar & others Vs. State of Orissa and others, 2008 (II) OLR 838,
Bijay Ketan Brahma and others v. State of Orissa and
others,2009 (Suppl-II) OLR 855 and State of Orissa and others v.
Harapriya Bisoi, 2009 (II) OLR (SC) 229.
16.            Consideration has to be made to the judgment cited
by Mr.B. Bhuyan, learned Addl. Government Advocate. He relies upon
Smt.Basanti Kumari Sahu (supra), where this Court referring to
the judgments of the Supreme Court in Kumar Bimal Chandra
Sinha (deceased) and after him his legal representatives and
others, AIR 1962 SC 1912, and this Court in Radhamani Dibya
(supra) has held that under Section 8(1) of the OEA Act, tenancy
right did not vest in the State even after vesting a tenant continues
as tenant. The State as landlord is entitled to collect rent. The
Tahasildar collects rent as agent of the landlord-Government and he
has no right to settle the land with the tenant. In the event such
settlement is made by the Tahasildar that will be without jurisdiction.
Therefore, when the tenant applies to the Tahasildar with the
application purported to be under Section 8(1) of the OEA Act, the
Tahasildar may for his satisfaction make enquiry as to the records if
he is tenant and the same is administrative in nature. Challenging the
said judgment Basanti Kumari Sahoo approached the apex court and
on consideration the apex Court in Basanti Kumari Sahoo v. State

                                   17
of Orissa and others, 1995(1) OLR (SC), 587 held that the Board of
Revenue had actually exercised the power under Section 38-B of the
O.E.A. Act and therefore, the decision rendered by the High Court is
not sustainable and accordingly remitted the matter back to this
Court to hear the matter on merit on the premises that the Board of
Revenue exercised the jurisdiction under Section 38-B of the O.E.A
Act. On remitting the matter back to this Court, when re-adjudication
was made, this Court held that the order passed by the Tahasildar
under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A Act being administrative one, the
Board of Revenue cannot in exercise of the power of revision under
Section 38-B of the O.E.A. Act. Therefore, the apex Court in Basanti
Kumari Sahoo (Smt.) v. State of Orissa and others, 1999(1)
OLR (SC) 347 held that the validity of the order of the Tahasildar is
to be examined by the Board of Revenue in revision under Section
38-B of the O.E.A. Act. The Tahasildar‟s finding is on administrative
side whereas the power of Board of Revenue is on quasi-judicial side.
The Board has jurisdiction to examine the order of the Tahasildar.
The question of power of the Tahasildar under Section 8(1) and
Board of Revneue under Section 38(B) no more remains res integra
in view of the law laid down by the apex Court in State of Odisha
and Others Vs. Brundaban Sharma and another reported in 1995
Supp (3) Supreme Court Cases 249, which has been followed in
State of Orissa and others v. Harapriya Bisoi (supra).

                                     18
17.            The judgment in Radhamani Dibya (supra) cited by
Mr.P.K.Mohanty, learned Sr. Counsel has been considered time and
again by this Court as well as the apex Court in Basanti Kumari
Sahu (supra), State of Odisha and Others Vs. Brundaban
Sharma and another         (supra), State of Orissa and others v.
Harapriya Bisoi (supra) with regard to the interpretation of Section
8(1) of the O.E.A.Act.
18.            In Manmohan Rout (supra) consideration was made
in respect of Section 8(1) of the O.E.A Act where it is held that
agricultural land leased by ex-intermediary, name entered in the
tenancy ledger by the revenue officer on the basis of ekpadia and the
rent has been accepted, in that case, no document of lease is
necessary for agricultural lease. Acceptance of rent creates a tenancy
right, thereby held that the consolidation authorities are to accept
him as a royat and give respect to the decision of the authorities
under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A Act. This Court in Sebati
Dei(supra) while considering the application Section 8(1) of the
O.E.A Act has held that patita estate was settled with Raja Kanika
whose name has been recorded in the ROR, thereafter, he has
granted Hatpatta, which is found to be ekpadia in favour of the
person being in possession by the time abolition of the estate. He has
got tenancy right over the property and his name was also found
place to be in possession in the R.O.R., thereby held that he is a

                                      19
deemed tenant as per the provisions under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A
Act.
19.             In Bhagaban Kar(supra), it is held that application
filed under Section 7 read with Section 8-A and 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act
before the Tahasildar for recognition as tenant, on consideration of
which the Tahasildar declared the parties as tenant under the State
under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act and settled the lands with the
tenants under sthitiban status. This Court held that the Tahasildar
committed error in directing to settle the land in sthitiban status
reason being under section 8(1), no power is available under the said
provision to settle the land so far it relates to the tenants, reason
being if a person was inducted as tenant by ex-intermediary before
vesting and was in possession of the land on the date of vesting and
thereafter, he should be deemed to be continuing as such in
consonance with the provisions of Section 8(1) of the O.E.A Act. If
two rival persons claim to be tenants, the Tahasildar having no
jurisdiction to decide the inter se dispute has to call upon the parties
to get the right decided by civil court and as such, a tenant cannot
claim settlement of land in his favour under the O.E.A. Act and he is
only to be recognized as tenant under the State.
20.             In Bijay Ketan Brahma (supra) this Court has held
that under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A Act no proceeding is required to
be initiated and at the same time the Tahasildar is not always bound
to accept the claim raised by a person to the effect that he is

                                        20
inducted as a tenant without verifying whether the claim is genuine
or not. For arriving at such satisfaction, the Tahasildar had to conduct
enquiry, which is more in the nature of administrative enquiry. The
possession as on the date of vesting being the necessary ingredients
for recognition as tenant under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A Act, the
Tahasildar has no jurisdiction to decide as to who was in possession
on the date of vesting. The person aggrieved had to approach the
civil court for such determination.
21.              Before going to consider the rival contentions, it is
profitable to state that the purpose behind for enactment of Orissa
Estate Abolition Act is as follows :
                 “An Act to provide for the abolition of all the rights,
                 title and interest in land of Intermediaries by
                 whatever name known, including the mortgages and
                 Lessees of such interest, between the Raiyat and
                 the State of Orissa, for vesting in the said State of
                 the said rights, title and interest and to make
                 provision for other matters connected therewith.
                       Whereas in pursuance of the Directive
                 Principles of State Policy laid down by the
                 Constitution of India it is incumbent on the State to
                 secure economic justice for all and to that end to
                 secure the ownership and control of all material
                 resources of the community so that they may best
                 subserve the common good, and to prevent the
                 concentration of wealth and means of production to
                 the common detriment;
                       And whereas in order to enable the state to
                 discharge the above obligation, it is expedient to
                 provide for the abolition of all the rights, title and
                 interest in land of Intermediaries by whatever name
                 known, including the mortgagees and lessees of
                 such interest, between the raiyat and the State of
                 Orissa, for vesting in the said State of the said
                 rights, title and interest.”

                                       21
22.             The aforesaid being the purpose of enactment, to
achieve some of the objectives of the Act, amendments have been
made from time to time to enable settlement of land in favour of the
persons those who are in possession prior to vesting. In view of the
factual backdrop of the case in hand, the following questions fall for
consideration in the present case :
           (i)   Whether the order passed by the Tahasildar-cum-
                 O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar is justified ? and
           (ii) Whether the order passed by the Member, Board of
                 Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack      under Section 38-B of the
                 O.E.A. Act rejecting the order of the Tahasildar-cum-
                 O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar is justified?
23.             Admittedly, Baidyanath Jena filed an application under
Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act, which was registered as O.E.A. Misc.
Case No. 33 of 1997 for acceptance of rent declaring his tenancy
right in respect of the suit land. For better appreciation, Section 8(1)
of the O.E.A. Act is quoted below :-
                “8. Continuity of tenure of tenant:- (1) Any person who
                immediately before the date of vesting of an estate in
                the State Government was in possession of any holding
                as a tenant under the Intermediary shall, on and from
                the date of vesting, be deemed to be a tenant of the
                State Government and such person shall hold the land
                in the same right and subject to the same restrictions
                and liabilities as he was entitled or subject to,
                immediately before the date of vesting.
                (2) Any person holding land in a village for service as a
                village servant by whatever name called, shall be
                deemed to hold it under the State Government subject
                to such terms and conditions as he was entitled or
                subject to immediately before the date of vesting.

                                     22
               (3) Any person who immediately before the date of
               vesting held land under an Intermediary on favourable
               terms for personal service rendered by him to such
               Intermediary shall, from the date of vesting, be
               discharged from the conditions of such service and the
               land may be settled with him in such manner and under
               such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.“
24.            On perusal of above mentioned provisions, it is made
clear that Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act makes no provision for
application and no inquiry is contemplated in the said section and the
section is merely a declaratory of continuity of tenure of the tenant
as it was immediately before the date of vesting. Therefore, no
application is entertainable for determining the rival claims under
Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act and this question has been considered
by the Full Bench of this Court in Radhamani Dibya and others v.
Braja Mohan Biswal and others, 57 (1984) CLT 1.
25.            Law is well settled by the Apex Court in the cases
State of Odisha and Others Vs. Brundaban Sharma and
another reported in 1995 Supp (3) Supreme Court Cases 249, State
of Odisha and Others Vs. Harapriya Bisoi reported in 2009 AIR
SCW 4806 and State of Odisha Vs. Nityanand Satpathy and
others reported in 96(2003) CLT 721 as well as by the Full Bench of
this Court in the case of Radhamani Dibya and others Vs. Braja
Mohan Biswal and others reported in 57 (1984) C.L.T. 1 that
Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act makes no provision for an application
to be filed and no enquiry is also contemplated under the said
Section. The said Section is merely declaratory of the continuity of
the tenure of tenants as it was immediately before date of vesting.

                                     23
Therefore, an application under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act by
Baidyanath Jena is misconceived one.
26.             So far as the decision cited by Mr.P.K.Mohanty,
learned Sr. counsel appearing for Sarojini Sahoo, i.e.., in the case of
Jagannath Nanda Vs. Bishnu Dalei and others reported in (40)
1974 CLT 888, this Court has taken into consideration that an
application under Sections 7 and 8-A of the O.E.A. Act totally
different than that of an application under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A.
Act. Admittedly, immediately after vesting no step was taken to
accept rent by the tenant on the basis of continuous possession over
the land before vesting, rather an application was filed for the first
time in the year 1997 to declare Baidyanath Jena as tenant and to
accept rent. After forty-three years from the date of vesting there is
no scope for any enquiry as to whether the tenant is a deemed
tenant and continue in possession of the land as such. After vesting
of the estate the tenants‟ ledger was submitted to the Tahasildar-
cum-O.E.A. Collector to fix the fare and equitable rent in respect of
tenants. In the case in hand, principle laid down in Jagannath Nanda
(supra) is not applicable.
27.             On the application filed by Baidyanath Jena under
Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act, the Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A. Collector,
Bhubaneswar considering the materials available on record, declined
to exercise of his power and jurisdiction to record the suit land in
favour of the so-called tenant (Baidyanath Jena) reason being the

                                     24
settlement operation under the Orissa Survey and Settlement Rules,
1962 was completed in the year 1973-74 and the suit land has been
recorded in favour of Government of Orissa, khewat No.1, village
Chandrashekharpur, vide Rakhit khata no. 472, plot no. 258 an area
of Ac.184.190 decimals including Ac.6.500 dec. and thereafter
settlement operation was completed. In the 1988-89 settlement, the
land was recorded in the name of G.A. Department, Govt. of Orissa,
Unit-41 vide khata no. 619, plot no. 258 measuring an area
Ac.173.82 decimals including Ac.6.500 dec.. In both the settlements,
Baidyanath Jena, who claims to be a tenant, failed to submit any
documentary evidence to record the said land in his favour. From the
materials available on record, it is found that it is the admitted case
of Baidyanath Jena that he has paid rent to the Tahasildar, Sadar,
Cuttack till the year 1968 in respect of the suit land and no
documents is available after 1968 to substantiate his case that he is
in possession after 1968 by paying rents, rather his case is that he
wanted to pay rent in the year 1995 after a long lapse of 27 years
and the same having not been accepted, finding no other way, he
filed an application under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act for a
declaration as a tenant under intermediary. Though there is no
provision under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act for entertaining an
application for declaration of any tenancy right, but the Tahasildar-
cum-O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar considered such application filed
by Baidyanath Jena and passed the order that after the settlement
has been over in the years 1973-74 and 1988-89, the suit land has

                                     25
already been recorded in favour of Government of Orissa, G.A.
Department and the Government is the absolute owner of the
property. Therefore, he refused to make any declaration in favour of
Baidyanath Jena and directed to agitate his claim before the
appropriate civil court or before the Commissioner of Settlement.
28.            Against the said order dated 27.1.1999, application
was filed by Baidyanath Jena before the Member, Board of Revenue,
Orissa, Cuttack invoking the power under Section 38-B of the O.E.A.
Act in O.E.A. Revision Case No. 16 of 2004. The Member, Board of
Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack under a mis-appreciation of fact and law,
set aside the order dated 27.1.1999 passed by the Tahasildar-cum-
O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar vide order dated 21.8.2004 and
directed to record the name of Baidyanath Jena in stithiban status
and receive rent in the locality within two months from the date of
receipt of the said order. While issuing such direction, the Member,
Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack has committed gross error, which
is apparent on the face of the record that in the meantime two
settlement operations in the locality have already been over and the
property has been recorded in the in favour of the G.A. Department
Government of Orissa. In this backdrop, whether the Member, Board
of Revenue was justified to exercise his jurisdiction under Section
38-B of the O.E.A. Act is required to be considered.
29.            Section 38-B of the O.E.A. Act reads as follows:

                                      26
                “Section 38-B- (1) The Board of Revenue may, on its
               own motion or on a report from the Collector call for
               and examine the record of any proceeding in which any
               authority subordinate to the Board of Revenue and
               made any decision or passed an order under this Act
               (not being a decision against which an appeal has been
               preferred to the High Court or District Judge under
               Section 22) for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the
               regularity of such proceeding or the correctness, legality
               or propriety of such decision or order and if in any case
               it appears to the Board of Revenue that any such
               decision or order and if in any case it appears to the
               Board of Revenue that any such decision or order ought
               to be modified, annulled, reversed or remitted, it may
               pass orders accordingly.
               (2) The Board of Revenue shall not –
                  (i) xx        xx          xx           x
                  (ii) revise only decision or order under this section
                  without giving the parties concerned an opportunity
                  of being heard in the matter.”
A reading of the aforesaid provision clearly indicates that the Board of
Revenue, either on its own motion or on a report from the Collector,
call for and examine the record of any proceeding in which, any
authority subordinate to the Board, has made any decision or passed
any order under the O.E.A. Act to satisfy itself as to the regularity of
such proceeding or to the correctness, legality or propriety of such
decision or proceeding or order and, if in any case it appears to the
Board that such a decision is not correct or illegal or improper, it has
been empowered to modify, annul, reverse or remit the case to the
authority for decision according to law. Before taking any such
decision or passing an order, it is required to give an opportunity of
being heard in the matter to the affected party.

                                    27
30.            In view of the law laid down as discussed supra, a
tenant only can be recognized under Section 8(1) of the O.E.A. Act if
the intermediary was validly inducted with registered document as
per Section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, Sections 105 and 107
of the Transfer of Properties Act, and followed by Ekpadia submitted
by the intermediary with the approval of the Board of Revenue under
Section 5 of the O.E.A.Act.
31.            The power of the Board of Revenue under Section 38-
B of the Act remains no more res integra in view of decision of the
apex Court in Brundaban Sharma (supra). So far as the question of
consideration of Section 8(1) of the Act is concerned, the Tahasildar
has power to enquire into the correctness of the claim made by the
party and should have referred the case for confirmation to the Board
of Revenue. The object of conferment of such power on the Board of
Revenue appears to prevent collusive or fraudulent acts or actions on
the part of the intermediary or lower level officers to defeat the
object of the Act. This being the objective of Section 8(1) read with
Section 38-B of the Act, the Member, Board of Revenue while
considering the order passed by the Tahasildar has lost sight of the
fact that in the meantime two settlement operations in the locality,
i.e., in the years 1973-74 and 1988-89 have been over and the
property in question has been recorded in the name of the
Government. More so, if Baidyanath Jena is aggrieved by any of such
settlement, he was free to approach the appropriate forum by filing a

                                       28
duly constituted application in due time either by filing civil suit
before the appropriate civil court or revision before the Survey
Settlement authorities under the provisions of the Survey Settlement
Act. Instead of doing so, he approached the Member, Board of
Revenue by filing an application under section 38-B of the O.E.A. Act.
32.              The Member, Board of Revenue has directed for
settlement of the property in favour of Baidyanath Jena in sthitiban
status and acceptance of rent after long lapse of 36 years vide
impugned order dated 21.8.2004, which is thoroughly misconceived
one and no plausible explanation has been given by Baidyanath Jena
in his so-called application filed in the year 1997 before the
Tahasildar-cum-O.E.A.Collector, Bhubaneswar under Section 8(1) of
the Act why he has approached the said Court after a long lapse of
27 years and more so, he has not impleaded the G.A. Department,
Government of Orissa as a party to the said dispute in whose name
the property has been recorded and this fact has not been considered
by the Member, Board of Revenue while adjudicating the matter
under Section 38-B of the Act.
33.              The Member, Board of Revneue should have followed
the procedure in accordance with law since the order passed under
Section 38-B of the Act is quasi judicial in nature. Apart from the
same, factually Baidyanath Jena while submitting the application
enclosing the documents in support of his claim has enclosed the rent
receipts till the date of vesting i.e. 1954 and after the date of vesting

                                    29
in the year 1954, he submitted Epadia before the Tahasildar, Sadar,
Cuttack in his name vide Sl.No. 374 whereas before the Member,
Board of Revenue, it is stated in paragraph 6(ii) that at the time of
vesting of the estate, the ex-intermediary submitted Ekpadia to the
Tahasildar, Sadar, Cuttack vide „Jamabandi‟ No. 303/28 at Sl.No. 346
and in paragraph 4 of the impugned order, the Member, Board of
Revenue while recording the contentions raised by the counsel
appearing for Baidyanath Jena, he has recorded that the ex-
intermediary submitted Ekpadia bearing „Jamabandi‟ No. 303/28 in
favour of the petitioner at serial number 364. That itself creates a
doubt with regard to the entry of the name of Baidyanath Jena in the
Jamabandi register, thereby the Member, Board of Revenue has not
applied his mind in proper perspective.
34.            In view of the foregoing discussions, we have no
hesitation to quash the impugned order dated 21.8.2004 passed by
the Member, Board of Revenue in OEA Revision No.16 of 2004 and to
confirm the order dated 27.1.1999      passed by the Tahasildar-cum-
O.E.A.Collector, Bhubaneswar O.E.A. Misc. Case No. 33 of 1997.
Accordingly, we quash the order dated 21.8.2004 passed by the
Member, Board of Revenue in OEA Revision No.16 of 2004 by
confirming the order dated 27.1.1999 passed by the Tahasildar-cum-
O.E.A. Collector, Bhubaneswar in O.E.A. Misc. Case No. 33 of 1997.
35.            Accordingly, the writ petition filed by the State bearing
W.P.(C) No.4649 of 2005 is allowed and the writ petitions bearing

                                           30
      W.P.(C) Nos.17155 of 2006 and 158 of 2010 are dismissed. However,
      there shall be no order as to costs.
                                                  ……………………………..
                                                  Dr.B.R.Sarangi, J.
S.Panda, J.          I agree.
                                                   ……………………………..
                                                      S.Panda, J.
      Orissa High Court, Cuttack
      The 18th September, 2013/PKSahoo


