                 ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
         W.P.(C) Nos. 8350, 8352, 8353, 8355, 8356,
                  8359, 8360, and 8361 of 2012
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                           __________
In W.P.(C) No. 8350 of 2012
Suvendu Mohanty                   ………         Petitioner
                                   Vrs.
State and another                 ………         Opposite Parties
In W.P.(C) No. 8352 of 2012
Biswamohan Mishra                 ………         Petitioner
                                   Vrs.
State and another                 ………         Opposite Parties
In W.P.(C) No. 8353 of 2012
Manas Ranjan behera               ………         Petitioner
                                   Vrs.
State and another                 ………         Opposite Parties
In W.P.(C) No. 8555 of 2012
Santosh Kumar Dalai                …….        Petitioner
                                   Vrs.
State and another                  …….        Opp.Parties
In W.P.(C) No. 8356 of 2012
Swarup Ranjan Pattnaik             …….        Petitioner
                                   Vrs.
State and another                  …….        Opp.Parties
In W.P.(C) No. 8359 of 2012
Bidyut Ranjan Bhola                …….        Petitioner
                                   Vrs.
State and another                  …….        Opp.Parties
In W.P.(C) No. 8360 of 2012
Bikram Keshari Malla               …….        Petitioner
                                   Vrs.
State and another                  …….        Opp.Parties

                                                  2
          In W.P.(C) No. 8361 of 2012
          Pravat Kumar Senapati                    …….           Petitioner
                                                   Vrs.
          State and another                        …….           Opp.Parties
                        For petitioners :   M/s. A.K.Mishra, J. Sengupta, D. K. Panda, G. Sinha,
                                            A. Mishra, S.Mishra and P.P. Behera
                        For opp.parties:    M/s. N. K. Mishra (Sr. Adv.) and Associates
                                                                  (O.P.No. 2)
                                            Mr. B.Senapati, Learned Addl.Govt. Advocate
                                            Mr.J.Das, learned Sr.Counsel (for intervenors)
                                         _______________
          PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
             Date of hearing: 13.07.2015 | Date of judgment : 28.07.2015
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.         The petitioners, who are at present working as Assistant
          Project Managers in the Orissa State Police Housing & Welfare Corporation
          Ltd, have filed these petitions seeking for a direction to the opposite parties,
          more particularly, opposite party no.1 to regularize their services and to
          grant them consequential service benefits retrospectively as due and
          admissible to the post.
          2.                The short fact of the case, in hand, is that Orissa State
          Police Housing and Welfare Corporation Limited, in short, „Corporation‟, a
          Public Sector Undertaking of the Government of Odisha is committed to build
          Police Buildings innovatively to enhance police efficiency and thereby improve
          Police-Community relations. The main objective of the Corporation includes
          to undertake construction of buildings for housing of the employees of the
          Government of Odisha in the Police, Prisons, Home Guards, Fire Force
          Department and Judicial Department as well as other similarly situated

                                         3
institutions. Initially the Corporation was started by bringing the persons on
deputation from the Government and other Corporations and thereafter
certain posts were created for the Corporation by the Board of Directors,
which were later on approved by the Government in Home Department. One
of those posts was Assistant Project Manager, which is equivalent to the post
of Junior Engineer under the Government. On completion of the deputation
period, the persons, who were borrowed, were sent back and consequently,
the post of Junior Engineer fell vacant. In order to maintain the works
already undertaken by the Corporation, the Corporation was required to
recruit persons to fill up those posts. At the relevant point of time, method of
recruitment prescribed by the Government for the post of Junior Engineer in
the State was based on a resolution of the erstwhile Political and Services
Department dated 6.8.1979, which provided that the Government have to
constitute a Committee consisting of the Chief Engineers and other Heads of
Departments concerned for the purpose of recruiting the Junior Engineers.
The Committee will allocate Diploma Holders in Civil Engineering to different
Departments according to their requirement from the list of candidates
available with Technical Manpower Employment Exchange. All appointments
are to be made from the list of candidates sponsored by the said Exchange
and in case it fails to furnish candidates within a specified period of three
weeks, recruitment may be made from the open market. Accordingly, the
Corporation placed requisition to the Employment Exchange to sponsor the
names of the eligible candidates for filling up of the post of Junior Engineer.
The petitioners applied for the post and on being selected were issued with
orders of appointment as Assistant Project Manager for a period of 44 days
on ad hoc basis with a consolidated pay of Rs.3,000/- per month vide
Annexure-1. On expiry of 44 days with one day artificial break, the

                                        4
petitioners were allowed to continue again for another 44 days. The process
continued for quite long time and ultimately even though the petitioners
continued    as   Assistant   Project   Manager    on   ad   hoc    basis  on
44 days basis with one day break, they have been paid the scale of pay of
Rs.9300-34,800/- with Grade Pay of Rs.4200/- with usual allowances per
month w.e.f. 23.3.2012. After rendering service for quite long period, when
the petitioners were deprived of getting their promotional benefits, and were
paid the pay in the minimum scale of pay attached to the post, they moved
the opposite party no.2 seeking for regularization of their services. The
grievance of the petitioners was placed before the Committee of opposite
party no.2 and after thorough discussion on the subject, it was recommended
for taking appropriate steps to regularize all ad hoc employees. Accordingly,
opposite party no.2 moved the Government in Home Department seeking for
regularization of 101 ad hoc employees working under the Corporation in
different grades such as Assistant Project Manager, Junior Steno-cum-
Assistant, Senior Assistant, Driver, Asst. Supervisor, M.T.Helper, Concrete
Mixture Driver, Electrical Wiremen/ Helper, Plumber, Watchman and Orderly
Peon and such move was made on 24.6.2005 vide Annexure-3 and by that
time most of the employees had already rendered service for more than 10-
20 years. The Corporation had specifically indicated that their services are
absolutely essential during the leave period as well as when turnover was
substantially increased from 3 crores to 35 crores per annum. Accordingly,
the Corporation requested the Government to consider the proposal and
accord approval in respect of regularization of the services of the ad hoc
employees. When the matter was pending with the Government, there was
restructuring of the staffing pattern of the Corporation. Under clause (vi) of
the letter dated 16.6.2007 vide Annexure-4, it was indicated that creation of

                                         5
9 posts of Assistant Manager in the rank of Junior Engineer for regular
appointment of ad hoc Assistant Project Manager is not agreed to on the
ground that regularization of irregular recruits is not permissible under the
Government Rules. Since the State Government rules are applicable to the
Government owned Corporation, the Corporation also cannot take a decision
to regularize the irregular recruits without following due process of law.
Under Clause-C of the said restructuring letter, it was clearly indicated that
restructuring pattern will however be subject to fulfilling certain conditions,
mentioned therein that the posts created/ and upgraded may be filled up by
annual contractual appointment or on promotion from amongst the eligible
regular employees of the Corporation in the lower grade. Under sub-clause
(e) of Clause-C, it is stated that no post may be created/ upgraded for the ad
hoc and irregular employees. Under sub-clause (f) of Clause-C, it is stated
that the work of the Assistant Project Manager (JE-Civil) continuing on
contractual basis shall be reviewed and if necessary, their number may be
limited. Opposite party no.2 vide its letter dated 28.5.2011 also sought
permission to regularize the services of 9 Assistant Project Managers in the
rank of Junior Manager. While seeking such permission, it was specifically
mentioned that at present there are three categories of employees in the
Corporation, namely, regular, ad hoc and contractual. All the employees
recruited after 1998 are in the contractual category. At present there are 307
employees in the Corporation, which includes 98 regular, 88 ad hoc and 121
contractual. The ad hoc employees receive salary at the minimum of basic of
the pay scale and the contractual employees receive salary at contractual
rate fixed by the Government in Finance Department. Out of 88 ad hoc
employees, it was proposed to regularize the services of 9 Assistant Project
Managers (Junior Engineers) in the first phase reason being they have been

                                       6
recruited against permanent vacancies, which were sanctioned/ created by
the Board of Directors from time to time in their meetings held on 2.2.1982,
21.9.1988 and 31.12.1993. While appointing these 9 Assistant Project
Managers, the provisions of the ORV Act has been complied with and all
these 9 Assistant Project Managers have been interviewed by the Engineering
Head of the Corporation after due scrutinisation of their academic records
and past experience etc. They are in the pay roll of the Corporation for more
than 12 years and their regularization will not involve any additional financial
burden immediately and the Corporation is in a position to meet the future
financial burden in terms of increments from its own resources and therefore,
the Government should take a long term and generous view in the matter
and agree to the proposal for regularization of services of all these nine ad
hoc Junior Engineers of the Corporation. Similarly, correspondences were
also made on 20.78.2011 and 19.4.2012 vide Annexures-10 and 11
respectively, but no final communication has been received from the
Government. Hence, these petitions.
3.               Mr.A.K.Mishra, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
petitioners strenuously urged that since the petitioners have been appointed
by following a due procedure of selection on ad hoc basis initially for 44 days
with one day break and subsequently, they have been paid regular scale of
pay and such appointments having been made against regular vacancies,
their services have to be regularized by the authority. As such, the opposite
party no.2 has already recommended the case of the petitioners to the State
Government for its approval, but the State Government is sitting tight over
the matter without taking any decision thereon on the plea that under
restructuring programme, the petitioners being irregular recruits, their
services cannot be regularized. It is further urged that the conditions

                                        7
stipulated in the restructuring programme of the State Government are not
applicable to the petitioners in view of the fact that the petitioners have
already rendered service for more than 10-20 years and as such, the law laid
down by the apex Court in Secretary, State of Karnatak v. Umadevi,
2006(4) SCC 1; AIR 2006 SC 1806, is squarely applicable to the present
case. Therefore, the State Government cannot and could not have sat tight
over the matter instead of approving the proposal submitted by the opposite
party no.2 for regularization of the services of these 9 ad hoc Assistant
Project Managers, who have been appointed against regular vacancies.
4.                Though several opportunities have been given to the
opposite party no.1, till date no counter affidavit is forthcoming from the side
of the State Government. Mr.B.Senapati, learned Addl.Govt. Advocate for the
State argued with vehemence that since the petitioners have been appointed
irregularly even though they have rendered service for more than 10 years,
their services cannot be regularized in terms of the restructuring policy of
the State Government pursuant to Annexure-4. The restructuring of the
staffing pattern of the opposite party no.2-Corporation has been done by the
State Government as a matter of policy pursuant to which the letter under
Annexure-4 has been issued on 16.6.2002. As regularization of the irregular
recruits are not permissible under the State Government rules, the
petitioners services cannot be regularized as claimed in the writ petitions.
5.                Mr.N.K.Mishra,   learned    Sr.Counsel    appearing   for  the
Corporation supported the stand of the petitioners and referring to the
counter filed by opposite party no.2 has categorically stated that the
petitioners are continuing as Assistant Project Manager (C) on ad hoc basis
from time to time on tenure engagement basis. He further submits that the
regularization of services of the petitioners along with some other similarly

                                         8
situated ad hoc Assistant Project Managers have been contemplated by the
opposite party-Corporation with the approval of such proposal being sought
for from the Government in its Administrative Department since 2005.
Although the queries made by the Govt. from time to time have been
adequately answered by the opposite party-Corporation, neither any final
decision has been taken nor the required approval/ sanction for the purpose
of regularization of the ad hoc Assistant Project Managers including the
petitioners has been made and that in the absence of specific approval of the
Administrative Department for the Corporation in the State Government, the
opposite party-Corporation is unable to regularize the services of the
petitioners. Since approval of the administrative department is mandatory, in
absence of any decision taken by the administrative department approving
the proposal for regularization of the services of the petitioners, the opposite
party no.2 could not be able to regularize the services of the petitioners. The
issue of regularization of the services of the petitioners and similarly situated
Assistant Project Managers has been referred to the Government in Home
Department several times to consider their case, but no action has yet been
taken by the Government, consequently, the opposite party-Corporation
could not effectively attend the grievances of the petitioners. Though
regularization of the services of the petitioners and other similarly situated
Assistant Project Managers will not involve any financial burden on the
Corporation immediately since they are drawing salary as per their respective
grades, due to the inaction of opposite party no.1, the services of the
petitioners could not have been regularized.
6.                Mr.J.Das,   learned   Senior  Advocate    appearing    for  the
intervenor-petitioners, who also claim for regularization of their services.

                                         9
7.               In view of fact that, the source of recruitment of the
intervenor-petitioners is totally different from that of the present petitioners
and as such, those intervenors have filed separate writ petitions ventilating
their grievances and their case will be separately dealt with by this Court in a
separate judgment. In view of the same, these intervenors have no nexus
with the claim made by the present petitioners though the petitioners and
the intervenors have been working as Assistant Project Managers under the
Corporation, their source of recruitment, appointment and scale of pay are
different from each other and therefore, this Court thought it proper to
consider the case of these intervenor-petitioners independently.
8.               On the basis of the facts pleaded above, there is no dispute
that the petitioners are working as Assistant Project Managers under the
opposite party no.2. Though they were appointed on ad hoc basis initially on
basis of 44 days with one day break, subsequently, they have been allowed
to continue with minimum scale of pay admissible to the post against regular
vacancies and in the meantime all of them have completed more than 10
years of service and their cases have also been considered by opposite party
no.2 for regularization. Though recommendation was made time and again,
no decision is forthcoming from the administrative department on the plea
that in view of restructuring of staffing pattern of the Corporation, the
petitioners  having   been   appointed     irregularly, their case  cannot    be
considered for regularization. More so, no communication has been made on
the basis of the recommendation made by opposite party no.2 to opposite
party no.1 with regard to the regularization of their services, but as per the
provisions of law unless approval is received from the administrative
department, the opposite party no.2 cannot regularize the services of the
petitioners. Due to the inaction of the administrative department in taking

                                           10
and communicating the decision on the recommendation with regard to the
regularization of the services of the petitioners, the opposite party no.2 has
been kept in dark till date.
9.                 With regard to the regularization of the services of the
petitioners, a mention has been made in Annexure-4 that the petitioners
being irregular recruits, their regularization is not permissible under the State
Govt. rules. But this condition made in the restructuring order in Annexure-4
so far as it relates to the petitioners cannot be applicable in view of the fact
that the petitioners have been appointed against regular vacancies available
in the regular scale of pay admissible to the post. But in view of their
continued service for more than 10 years, their cases are covered by the
ratio of the judgment of the apex Court in Secretary, State of Karnatak v.
Umadevi(supra), wherein the apex Court has held that the appointments
made against temporary or ad-hoc basis are not to be regularized. In
paragraph 53 of the said judgment, it is provided that irregular appointment
of duly qualified persons against sanctioned posts, who have worked for 10
years or more can be considered on merits and steps to be taken as one time
measure to regularize them. In Paragraph 53 of the said judgment, the apex
Court has held as follows:
               “53. One aspect needs to be clarified. There may be cases where
              irregular appointments (not illegal appointments) as explained in
              S. V. Narayanappa, R. N. Nanjundappa and B. N. Nagarajan and
              referred to in para 15 above, of duly qualified persons in duly
              sanctioned vacant posts might have been made and the employees
              have continued to work for ten years or more but without the
              intervention of orders of the courts or of tribunals. The question of
              regularisation of the services of such employees may have to be
              considered on merits in the light of the principles settled by this
              Court in the cases above referred to and in the light of this
              judgment.     In that context, the Union of India, the state
              Governments and their instrumentalities should take steps to
              regularise as a non-time measure, the services of such irregularly
              appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in duly
              sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of the courts or of
              tribunals and should further ensure that regular recruitments are

                                              11
               undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that require to be
               filled up, in cases where temporary employees or daily wagers are
               being now employed. The process must be set in motion within six
               months from this date. We also clarify that regularisation, if any
               already made, but not sub judice, need not be reopened based on
               this judgment, but there should be no further bypassing of the
               constitutional requirement and regularising or making permanent,
               those not duly appointed as per the constitutional scheme.”
10.            The object behind the exception carved out in this case was to
permit regularization of such appointments, which are irregular but not
illegal, and to ensure security of employment of those persons who served
the State Government and their instrumentalities for more than ten years.
Similar question came up for consideration before the apex Court in Civil
Appeal No. 2835 of 2015 (arising out of SLP (Civil) No. 20169 of 2013
disposed of on 13.3.2015. In paragraphs 12 and 13, the apex Court has held
as follows:
         “12. Elaborating upon the principles laid down in Umadevi's case (supra)
         and explaining the difference between irregular and illegal appointments in
         State of Karnataka & Ors. v. M.L. Kesari & Ors., (2010) 9 SCC 247, this
         Court held as under:
               "7. It is evident from the above that there is an exception to the
               general principles against "regularisation" enunciated in
               Umadevi (3), if the following conditions are fulfilled:
                    (i) The employee concerned should have worked for 10
                    years or more in duly sanctioned post without the benefit or
                    protection of the interim order of any court or tribunal. In
                    other     words,      the    State     Government      or    its
                    instrumentality should have employed the employee and
                    continued him in service voluntarily and continuously for
                    more than ten years.
                    (ii) The appointment of such employee should not be
                    illegal, even if irregular. Where the appointments are
                    not made or continued against sanctioned posts or
                    where the persons appointed do not possess the
                    prescribed minimum qualifications, the appointments will
                    be considered to be illegal. But where the person
                    employed possessed the           prescribed qualifications and
                    was working against sanctioned posts, but had been
                    selected without undergoing the process of open
                    competitive selection, such appointments are considered to
                    be irregular."
        13. Applying the ratio of Umadevi's case, this Court in Nihal Singh &
        Ors. v. State of Punjab & Ors., (2013) 14 SCC 65 directed the absorption
        of the Special Police Officers in the services of the State of Punjab
        holding as under:
                     "35. Therefore, it is clear that the existence of the need for
                     creation of the posts is a relevant factor with reference

                                         12
                to which the executive government is required to take
                rational decision based on relevant consideration. In our
                opinion, when the facts such as the ones obtaining in the
                instant case demonstrate that there is need for the creation
                of posts, the failure of the executive government to
                apply its mind and take a decision to create posts or
                stop extracting work from persons such as the appellants
                herein for decades together itself would be arbitrary
                action (inaction) on the part of the State.
               36. The other factor which the State is required to keep in
               mind     while creating or abolishing posts is the financial
               implications involved in such a decision. The creation of posts
               necessarily means additional financial burden on the
               exchequer of the State. Depending upon the priorities of the
               State, the allocation of the finances is no doubt exclusively
               within the domain of the legislature. However in the instant
               case creation of new posts would not create any additional
               financial burden to the State as the various banks at whose
               disposal the services of each of the appellants is made
               available have agreed to bear the burden. If absorbing the
               appellants into the services of the State and providing
               benefits on a par with the police officers of similar rank
               employed by the         State   results    in further financial
               commitment it is always open for the State to demand the
               banks to meet such additional burden. Apparently no such
               demand has ever been made by the State. The result is-the
               various banks which avail the services of these appellants
               enjoy the supply of cheap labour over a period of decades. It
               is also pertinent to notice that these banks are public sector
               banks."
11.             Taking into consideration the law laid down by the apex
Court, which has been considered in the subsequent case as
mentioned supra, the principle so laid down by the apex Court is
squarely applicable to the present case. Since all the petitioners have
already rendered service for more than 10 years and they have been
appointed against regular and sanctioned vacancies and also getting
regular scale of pay and there will be no financial burden on the State
exchequer, their cases should be regularized keeping in view the law
laid down by the apex Court, as discussed above. Therefore, the State
Government is directed to make necessary administrative approval for
these petitioners on the basis of the recommendation made by
opposite party no.2 pursuant to Annexures-9, 10 and 11 and extend

                                    13
all the consequential service benefits as due and admissible to them in
accordance with law as expeditiously as possible preferably within a
period of three moths from the date of communication of this
judgment.
12.              With the aforesaid observation and direction, the writ
petitions are allowed. No cost.
                                                ………………………..
                                                 Dr.B.R.Sarangi, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 28th July, 2015/PKSahoo


