                         ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                           WRIT APPEAL No. 118 OF 2012
         In the matter of an appeal under Article 4 of the Orissa High Court
         Order, 1948 read with Clause 10 of the Letter Patent Constituting the
         High Court of Judicature at Patna.
                                      -------------------
         Pankajini Panda                            ………         Appellant
                                          - versus -
         State of Orissa and others                  ………       Respondents
                  For Appellant  :      M/s. A.R. Dash, S.K. Nanda-1,
                                        B. Mohapatra, S.N. Sahoo, K.S. Sahoo,
                                        L.D. Achari.
                 For Respondents:       Mr. J.P. Pattnaik,
                                        Addl. Government Advocate
                                                           (For Res.Nos.1 to 3)
                                        M/s. S.K. Pattnaik, U.C. Mohanty, P.K.
                                        Pattnaik, D. Pattnaik, S.P. Das,
                                                           (for Res. No.4)
         PRESENT:
               THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SHRI AMITAVA ROY
                                             AND
                       THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
          Date of hearing: 20.08.2014         : Date of Judgment: 26.08.2014
Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.      Opposite party no.4 in W.P.(C) No. 22259 of 2010 being
         the appellant has filed the instant appeal challenging the order dated
         02.03.2012 passed by the learned Single Judge, quashing the order
         dated 18.10.2010 passed by Sub-Collector, Khurda in Misc. Appeal No.9
         of 2010 as not sustainable.

                                     2
2.              Respondent no.3- the Child Development Project Officer,
Chilika I.C.D.S. Project issued notification No. 108 dated 11.02.1999
inviting applications from eligible     candidates  for appointment as
Anganwadi Worker in respect of Baulabandha-4 Anganwadi Centre. As
per the guidelines, the women candidates having minimum qualification
of Matriculation and residing in the same village/Anganwadi Centre area
alone would be eligible for such engagement. The appellant along with
respondent no.4 and other applicants totaling eleven in all, submitted
their applications and the selection was done on the basis of the marks
secured in the Matriculation Examination. As per the advertisement, the
candidates were required to produce their original certificates for
scrutiny on 27.02.2009. But subsequently, the said date was shifted.
Ultimately, the date of scrutiny was fixed to 30.11.2009 and it was
found that the appellant had not submitted her mark-sheet of 10th class
examination, instead she had enclosed the mark-sheet of her husband-
Sri Bibhuti Bhusan Rath. So far as other applicants are concerned, one
Smita Janhabi Nanda withdrew her candidature and the cases of six
applicants were rejected as they belonged to area outside the
Baulabandha-4 Anganwadi Centre area. Therefore, the cases of only
three candidates were taken into consideration on the basis of their
residential eligibility. However, since the appellant had not submitted
her matriculation mark sheet, she was not eligible for consideration.
Thus,   only   two    applications were  considered   and the   selection
committee selected respondent no.4 as she secured highest total marks

                                    3
of 46.6% as against the other valid candidate, Smt. Reena Behera, who
secured 37.8% of marks. Consequent, engagement order was issued on
11.01.2010 in favour of respondent no.4 as Anganwadi worker in
respect of Baulabandha-4 Anganwadi Centre. The present appellant
preferred Misc. Appeal No. 9 of 2010 before the Sub-Collector, Khurdha
challenging the selection of respondent no.4 as Anganwadi worker in
respect of concerned center. After giving due opportunity of hearing, the
Sub-Collector, Khurdha held that if at all the appellant had not
submitted her mark sheet at the time of scrutiny, her name could not
have been reflected in the scrutiny list. So it is clear that some mischief
has been made to remove her mark sheet from the concerned selection
file but she produced the original marks sheet from which it was found
that she had secured 323 marks which is more than the marks secured
by respondent no.4. Therefore, the Sub-Collector, Khurda allowed the
appeal, cancelled the selection of respondent no.4 vide order dated
18.10.2010 under Annexure-13 in respect of Baulabandha-4 Anganwadi
Centre and directed the C.D.P.O., Chilika to disengage her after
observing due formalities and appoint another Anganwadi worker as per
the    Government guideline. Challenging the said appellate order,
respondent no.4 preferred the writ petition and after hearing the
learned counsel for the parties and going through the records, learned
Single Judge quashed the order dated 18.10.2010 passed by the Sub-
Collector, Khurdha in Misc. Appeal No. 9 of 2010 as not sustainable and
allowed the writ petition, against which the present appeal has been

                                     4
preferred by the present appellant, opposite party no.4 in the writ
petition.
3.             Mr.   A.R.  Dash,    learned  counsel for  the  appellant
strenuously urged that the learned Single Judge without considering the
discussion made by respondent no.2 in his order dated 18.10.2010 in
Misc. Appeal No. 9 of 2010 and ignoring the most relevant documents,
quashed the order of engagement issued. It is urged that the document
vide Annexure-D dated 04.12.2009 filed by respondent no.4 had not
been taken into consideration by the learned Single Judge. Relying upon
the documents vide Annexure-B dated 07.01.2010, the impugned order
had been passed. Therefore, it is urged that had the documents under
Annexure-D been considered by the learned Single Judge then would
not have passed the impugned order.
4.             Mr. J.P. Pattnaik, learned Addl. Government Advocate for
the State submitted that the records of the selection procedure of
Anganwadi worker had been called for by the learned Single Judge and
on perusing the materials available on record and after hearing the
learned counsel for the parties, he passed the impugned order. He
further submitted that the allegation of non-availability of Annexure-D
on record is not correct and all the documents were available on record
itself and on perusing the same, the impugned order has been passed
and therefore, no illegality or irregularity has been committed by the

                                     5
learned Single Judge while disposing of the writ petition on the basis of
the materials available on record.
5.              Mr. S.K. Pattnaik, learned Senior Counsel appearing for
respondent no.4 submitted that the selection committee comprising of
Child Development Project Officer, Chilika, I.C.D.S. Project, Medical
Officer-in-charge, CHC-II, Balugaon, Block Development Officer, Chilika
and Vice Chairman, Chilika Block found at the time of selection that the
appellant   had   not   submitted   her   mark    sheet    of  HSC/Class-X
examination instead she had submitted the mark sheet of her husband-
Sri Bibhuti Bhusan Rath and for that reason her case was not considered
for selection. To substantiate the said fact, he had referred to
application form (Annexure-A), wherein an endorsement has been made
that “not submitted mark-sheet. She had submitted her husband’s
mark-sheet”. In the check-sheet of the ten applicants prepared by the
selection committee held on 07.01.2010, vide Annexure-B, percentage
of marks secured in H.S.C. examination was not entered in Column-8
against the name of the appellant at Sl. No.4 and in the remarks
Column-17 also it is mentioned as “Class-X marks-sheet not submitted”.
In Annexure-C, the selection committee has recorded the following
observation in its proceedings dated 07.01.2010:
                “Pankajini Panda, wife of Bibhuti Bhusan Rath had not
                submitted her matriculation mark-sheet, but she had
                submitted the Xerox copy of the matriculation mark-sheet
                of her husband. So no marks could be awarded to her by
                the Selection Committee”.

                                      6
Therefore, there is no question of any manipulation of records of the
selection and after verifying the records of the selection committee,
learned Single Judge upheld the selection process and set aside the
order dated 18.10.2010 passed by Sub-Collector, Khurdha in Misc.
Appeal No.9 of 2010.
6.              Considering the above pleadings of the parties and after
hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the records, it
appears that the appellant is one of the applicants, who submitted her
application form for selection to the post of Anganwadi worker in respect
Baulabandha-4 Anganwadi Centre. The Selection Committee, which has
been constituted in accordance with the guidelines, scrutinized the
application forms of eleven candidates out of which it appears that six
candidates were found to have not satisfied the conditions of being
resident of the locality which is as per the check list dated 07.01.2010 in
Annexure- C.
7.              It is urged by Mr. A.R. Dash, learned counsel for the
appellant that the learned Single Judge could not have come to such
finding, which is absolutely misconceived one, in view of the fact that
the said document contains the name of Panchyat, name of the Addl.
Anganwadi Center, name of Village, name and address of applicant,
Educational Qualification, permanent resident, caste and remarks would
have been provided in the application form submitted by the respective
candidates. The appellant had stated specifically that she had passed +3
Examination. But as it appears from the document in Annexure-E, the

                                    7
mark-sheet of three years degree course examination issued by Utkal
University in favour of the appellant, obtained by the respondent no.4
under the Right to Information Act, the appellant had failed in the said
examination.    But  Annexure-B,   which   relates to  the  scrutiny   of
documents for selection of Anganwadi worker under third phase
examination in respect of Mandiameru Sahi (Baulabandha-4) Anganwadi
Centre of Baulabandha Gram Panchyat the petitioner is shown as +3
pass. In the application form under Annexure-A, the appellant has
mentioned that she has passed +3 Examination in the year 2001 and
has secured 753 m arks out of total marks of 1600, i.e. 49%. Once the
appellant has failed in +3 Examination, the marks obtained in the said
examination should not have been taken into consideration while
making scrutiny of the documents. The basic qualification prescribed in
the advertisement was Matriculation. The said document has not been
produced by the appellant rather the appellant had produced the
Matriculation mark sheet of her husband which was filed along with her
application, as observed by the Selection Committee. So far as the claim
with regard to awarding of marks as physical handicapped category is
concerned no extra mark has been awarded to the respondent no.4 and
learned Single Judge has come to such finding in paragraph-11 of the
impugned order.     Thus, the authorities are justified in rejecting the
application of the appellant for non-submission of the mark sheet of
matriculation examination. Further, with regard to the allegation of
substitution of any mark sheet by any outsider, we are of the view that

                                         8
      when there is no material available on record, no presumption can be
      drawn on mere allegation.
      8.             For the foregoing discussions, the writ appeal fails and is
      dismissed.
                                                      ……………………………..
                                                       Dr. B.R.Sarangi, J.
Amitava Roy, C.J.   I agree.
                                                      ……………………………..
                                                         Amitava Roy, C.J.
      Orissa High Court, Cuttack
      The 26th August, 2014/PKSahoo


