                             ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                                 W.P.(C) No. 8769 of 2003
           In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
           Constitution of India.
                                      -----------------------
AFR
           Khirod Kumar Swain & others              ……..           Petitioner
                                                    - versus -
           State of Orissa & others               ..……          Opp. Parties
                    For Petitioners   :     M/s. K.K. Swain, D.C. Swain, K. Das & C.P.
                                            Dhir
                    For Opp. Parties :      Mr. B.P. Pradhan, Addl. Government Advocate
                                            (Opp. Parties 1-4)
           PRESENT:
                  THE HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. VINEET SARAN
                                                AND
                         THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI
                Date of Hearing: 11.04.2016 : Date of Judgment : 29.04.2016
Dr. B.R. Sarangi, J.        The petitioners claiming to be villagers of Adatira in the
           district of Cuttack have filed this application to quash the order dated
           27.11.2002     passed    by   the    Commissioner,   Land    Records   and
           Settlement, Odisha, Cuttack in R.P. No.9439/2001 directing the
           Tahasildar, Niali to make an enquiry for ascertaining the names of the
           successors of deceased Pari Mallick and record the suit Hal plot

                                      2
No.2466 area Ac.1.00 decimals in their favour in a separate khata in
sthitiban status under Orissa Survey and Settlement Act, 1958.
2.              The epitome of the facts of the case in hand is that the
Tahasildar, Niali leased out area Ac.1.00 decimals out of area Ac.3.87
decimals from Sabik Khata No.262, Plot No.2156 of mouza Padatira in
favour of one late Pari Mallick without inviting any public objection,
without publishing any public notice and without observing mandatory
provisions of leasing process as provided under law. The land in
question being an objectionable land meaning thereby, it is a “Gochar”
land, that cannot be leased out in anybody’s favour. On the basis of
the objection raised, learned Additional District Magistrate, Cuttack
cancelled the said lease and declared the same as “Rakhita” Khata,
which is being used as public land by the villagers. More so, on the
basis of lease granted, the Tahasildar, Niali had mutated the land in
favour of Pari Mallick and subsequently, Sub-Collector, Sadar, Cuttack
by order dated 30.11.1996 in Mutation Appeal No.101/1995 remitted
the matter back to the Tahasildar, Niali with direction to record the suit
land in favour of Government in “Rakhita” Khata and submit a
compliance within one month after informing the party concerned.
                Fakira Mallick, son of late Pari Mallick, the original
lessee filed Revision Petition No.9439/2001 under Section 15(b) of the
Orissa Survey & Settlement Act, 1958 before the Commissioner, Land
Records & Settlement, Orissa, Cuttack, who without considering the
material facts mentioned above, by order dated 27.11.2002 directed

                                       3
that the suit Hal Plot No.2466 area Ac.1.00 decimals be taken out from
Hal Khata No.759 and be recorded in favour of all the successors of
late Pari Mallick and for this purpose the Tahasildar, Niali will make an
enquiry to ascertain the names of the successors of deceased Pari
Mallick and record the suit Hal Plot in their favour in a separate khata
in sthitiban status. Hence this application.
3.               Mr. K.K. Swain, learned counsel for the petitioner
strenuously urged that while passing the impugned order dated
27.11.2002, the Commissioner, Land Records and Settlement, Orissa,
Cuttack has not taken into consideration the fact that the lease granted
in favour of late Pari Mallick by the Tahasildar has been cancelled by
the Additional District Magistrate, Cuttack. Subsequently, the mutation
allowed by the Tahasildar, has also been set aside by the Sub-Collector
in Mutation Appeal No.101/1995. Without considering the material
aspects, the Commissioner, Land Records & Settlement, Orissa,
Cuttack by order dated 27.11.2002 in R.P. No.9439/2001 filed by one
Fakira Mallick who is one of the legal heirs of the deceased Pari Mallick
under Section 15(b) of the Orissa Survey and Settlement Act vide
Annexure-4 directed that the suit Hal Plot No.2466 area Ac.1.00
decimals be taken out from Hal Khata No.759 and be recorded in
favour of all the successors of late Pari Mallick and further directed the
Tahasildar, Niali to make an enquiry for ascertaining the names of the
successors of deceased Pari Mallick and record the suit land in their
favour in a separate khata under Sthitiban status. Such action of the

                                          4
Commissioner is in gross violation of the provisions of law. Therefore,
he seeks for quashing of Annexure-4.
4.             Per    contra,     Mr.   B.P.   Pradhan,     learned     Additional
Government Advocate raised preliminary objection with regard to locus
of the petitioners and urged that the petitioners are not the persons
aggrieved to maintain the writ application.
5.             Having heard learned counsel for the parties and after
going through the records, this writ application is disposed of without
calling for counter affidavit from the opposite parties at the stage of
admission.
6.             While considering the question of “locus” in Ghulam
Qadir v. Special Tribunal,(2002) 1 SCC 33:2001 AIR SCW 4022, the
Supreme Court observed as under:
                “There is no dispute regarding the legal proposition that
                the rights under article 226 of the Constitution of India
                can be enforced only by an aggrieved person except in
                the case where the writ prayed for is for habeas corpus
                or quo warranto. Another exception to the general rule is
                the filing of a writ petition in public interest. The
                existence of the legal right of the petitioner which
                is alleged to have been violated is the foundation
                for invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court under
                the aforesaid article. The orthodox rule of interpretation
                regarding the locus standi of a person to reach the Court
                has undergone a sea change with the development of
                constitutional law …….”
7.             In view of law laid down by the Apex Court, the
petitioners being the general public as such there is allegation of
mismanagement of the public property, this Court considered it
expedient that public interest is involved, therefore, there is an
exception to the general rule of filing of writ application. Since there is

                                       5
a wrongful deprivation of public property in public interest, the
petitioners can approach this Court by filing this petition.
8.              So far as the case in hand is concerned, though the writ
petition was filed in 2003, nothing has been brought to the notice of
this Court whether the order so passed by the Commissioner has been
implemented or not or challenged before the higher forum. Apart from
the same, whether the order dated 30.11.1996 passed by the Sub-
Collector, Sadar, Cuttack in Mutation Appeal No.101/1995 has been
challenged before any appropriate forum or not, learned counsel for
the petitioners was not able to explain the same, save and except, in
paragraph-7 of the writ application it is stated that no revision has
been filed by opposite parties 5 to 8 to set aside the same. But, no
material has been produced before this Court to take into consideration
the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
9.              As it appears from the order dated 27.11.2002 passed
by the Commissioner, Land Records & Settlement, Orissa, Cuttack, he
has only taken into consideration the original lease order passed by the
Tahasildar, Jagatsinghpur and steps taken in settlement operation. On
the basis of the materials available on record, it appears that the land
in question has been recorded in “Rakhita” Khata under kisam
“Gochar” and the same could not have been directed to be recorded in
the names of the legal heirs of late Pari Mallick i.e. opposite party
nos.5 to 8 in exercise of power conferred under Section 15(b) of Orissa
Survey and Settlement Act, 1958. The Commissioner, Land Records

                                      6
and Settlement, Orissa, Cuttack has passed the order on 27.11.2002 in
R.P. No.9439/2001 under Annexure-4 directing the Tahasildar, Niali to
implement the order within four months.
10.            The    revisional  authority   has    not   taken   into
consideration the subsequent development taken place in the matter,
meaning thereby, the lease granted in favour of late Pari Mallick by
Tahasildar was cancelled by the Additional District Magistrate, Cuttack
and subsequently, the order of Tahasildar, Niali passed in Mutation
Case No.537/1992 was set aside by the Sub-Collector, Cuttack in
Mutation Appeal No.101/1995. These material facts were not brought
to the notice of the revisional authority while passing the impugned
order.
11.            In that view of the matter, this Court is of the
considered view that had the subsequent development been brought to
the notice of the revisional authority while adjudicating the matter in
R.P. Case No.9439/2001, then the impugned order would not have
been passed. The subsequent developments in the matter having not
been considered by the revisional authority, this Court is of the
considered view that the order dated 27.11.2002 passed          by the
Commissioner, Land Records & Settlement, Orissa, Cuttack in R.P.
Case No.9439/2001 in Annexure-4, cannot sustain in the eye of law.
Accordingly, the same is hereby quashed and the matter is remitted
back to the said authority for reconsideration by affording opportunity

                                              7
        of hearing to the parties including the petitioners herein in accordance
        with law as expeditiously as possible.
        12.              With the above observation and direction, the writ
        petition is disposed of.
                                                              Sd/-
                                                      (Dr. B.R. Sarangi, J.)
Vineet Saran, C.J.       I agree.
                                                                Sd/-
                                                      (Vineet Saran, C.J.)
        Orissa High Court, Cuttack
        The 29th April, 2016/Alok
                                             True Copy
                                             Sr. Steno

8

