$~
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+     W.P.(C) 3490/2010 & CM No. 6956/2010 (stay)
      ALL INDIA EQUALITY FORUM & OTHERS..... Petitioners
                         Through: Ms.Kiran Suri, Sr.Adv. with
                                      Mr.Kumar Parimal, Adv.
                         versus
      UNION OF INDIA THROUGH ITS SECRETARY AND
      OTHERS                                 ..... Respondents
                         Through:     Ms.Poonam Singh for Ms.Saroj
                                      Bidawat, Adv. for R-1.
                                      Mr.R.V. Sinha and Mr.R.N.
                                      Singh, Advs. for R-2 to 4.
                                      Mr.Rajat        Malhotra      and
                                      Mr.Sunil Malhotra, Advs. for
                                      R-5/GNCTD.
      CORAM:
       HON'BLE THE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE C.HARI SHANKAR
                         JUDGMENT
       %                  23.08.2017
C. HARI SHANKAR, J.
1     The petitioner, which claims to be a non-Government Society
      registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, seeks, by
      means of the present writ petition, to challenge Office
      Memorandum (OM) No.36012/18/95-Estt./(RES) Pt.II dated
      13th August, 1997, issued by the Department of Personnel &
      Training (DOPT). The said OM reads as under:-
             “The undersigned is directed to invite
             attention to the Department’s O.M.
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 1 of 30

            No.36012/36.93 Estt., (SCT) dated 19.08.1993
            clarifying that the Supreme Court had, in the
            Indira Sawhney case, permitted the
            reservation for the scheduled Castes and
            Scheduled Tribes, in promotion to continue for
            a period of five years from 16.11.1992.
            Consequent to the judgment in Indira
            Sawhney’s case, the Constitution was amended
            by the Constitution (Seventy Seventh
            Amendment) Act, 1995 and Article 16(4A) was
            incorporated in the Constitution. The Article
            enables the State to provide for reservation, in
            matters of promotion, which in favour of the
            Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes,
            which in the opinion of the State are not
            adequately represented in the services under
            the State.
            In pursuance of Article 16(4A), it has been
            decided to continue the reservation in
            promotion as at present, for the Scheduled
            Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the service
            posts under the Central Government beyond
            15.11.1997 till such time as the representation
            of each of the above two categories in each
            reaches the prescribed percentage of
            reservation where after the reservation in
            promotion shall continue to maintain the
            representation to the extent of prescribed
            percentages for the respective categories.
            All Ministers Departments are requested to
            urgently bring these instructions to the notice
            of all their attached subordinate offices as also
            the public Sector Undertaking and Statutory
            Bodies etc.
2     The present writ petition seeks
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 2 of 30

      (a)    quashing of the impugned OM dated 13th August 1997,
      (b)    quashing of all promotions made in pursuance to the said
             OM, and promotion of general category candidates
             retrospectively    from    the   date   reserved     category
             candidates were promoted, allegedly illegally, on the
             basis of the said Notification (there is no reference to any
             specific general or reserved category candidate; neither is
             any such candidate impleaded), and
      (c)    issuance, of a direction, to the respondents, to restrain
             them from providing for any further reservation in
             promotion without first “following the judgment of the
             Hon’ble Supreme Court in M. Nagaraj’s case by
             collecting quantifiable data”. [The case of M. Nagaraj,
             referred to, is the celebrated Constitution Bench decision
             of the Supreme Court in M. Nagaraj v U.O.I., (2006) 8
             SCC 212, authored by S.H.Kapadia, J. (as His Lordship
             then was).]
3     It might be stated, at the outset, that, with respect to prayer (b)
      in the writ petition, that, ordinarily, in the absence of any
      affected party being impleaded, such a prayer could not merit
      any consideration whatsoever, even in part. However, we were
      informed, across the bar, that, by an order dated 11 th March,
      2000, the Supreme Court had directed that all promotions
      effected by the respondent would be subject to the outcome of
WP(C) 3490/2010                                         Page 3 of 30

      the challenge by the petitioners. Though we have not been
      shown any copy of the said order, we have no reason to doubt
      the said statement, made as it is by learned Senior Counsel. In
      view thereof, no orders would be required to be passed, by us,
      qua prayer (b) in the writ petition.      The discussion, in the
      present judgement, would, therefore, be restricted to prayers (a)
      and (c) in the writ petition. The issue that would, essentially
      and fundamentally, fall for consideration, would, undoubtedly,
      be the validity of the impugned Notification no.36012/18/95-
      Estt./(RES) Pt.II dated 13th August, 1997, issued by the DOPT.
4     The issues raised in the writ petition throw open an expansive
      jurisprudential vista, and could invite a comprehensive and
      detailed dissertation on the entire law relating to reservation for
      Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, in the context of
      Articles 16(1), 16(4) and 335 of the Constitution of India. This
      Court is, however, proscribed from doing so by virtue of an
      order of the Supreme Court, dated 11th March 2010, passed in a
      batch of writ petitions, including WP (C) 413/1997, which is
      stated to have been filed by the present petitioner.           The
      operative portion of the said order reads thus:
             “Therefore, we permit the petitioners in these writ
             petitions to withdraw these writ petitions with liberty to
             move the High Court and in the event of writ petitions are
             filed before the High Court the same may be considered
             in the light of the observations made by this Court in M.
             Nagaraj and others vs. Union of India and another
WP(C) 3490/2010                                         Page 4 of 30

             (supra). The petitioners would be at liberty to seek
             appropriate interim relief in the High Court.”
5     The peripheries of the analysis, in the present case have,
      therefore, necessarily to be circumscribed by the contours of M.
      Nagaraj (supra).      More particularly expressed, this Court
      would be required to examine whether the impugned O.M.,
      dated 13th August 1997, could sustain, in the wake of M.
      Nagaraj (supra), and the exposition of law therein.
6     M. Nagaraj (supra) analysed:
6.1   Before proceeding to examine the judgement in M. Nagaraj
      (supra), a brief recapitulation of the events that led to the said
      decision would be apposite.
6.2   The terminus a quo, for the purposes of the present case, may
      legitimately said to be the judgment of the 9-Judge Bench of the
      Supreme Court in Indira Sawhney v U.O.I., 1992 Supp (3)
      SCC 216. As is well-known, the said judgment dealt with a
      challenge, laid to the entire policy of reservation, of the Central
      and State Governments, for Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled
      Tribes (STs) and other backward classes (OBC). While
      generally upholding the constitutionality of the said reservation
      policy of the Government, the Supreme Court recorded, in para
WP(C) 3490/2010                                         Page 5 of 30

      859 of the report, the answers to the various questions dealt
      with and answered framed by counsel in the matter. Answer
      No. (7), which is of relevance for the present case, merits
      reproduction in extenso:
            “(7) Article 16 (4) does not permit provision
                  for reservations in the matter of
                  promotions. This rule shall, however,
                  have only prospective operation and shall
                  not affect the promotions already made,
                  whether made on regular basis or on any
                  other basis. We direct that our decision
                  on this question shall operate only
                  prospectively and shall not affect
                  promotions already made, whether on
                  temporary,           officiating         or
                  regular/permanent basis. It is further
                  directed that wherever reservations are
                  already provided in the matter of
                  promotion, be in Central Services or
                  State Services or for that matter services
                  under any Corporation, authority or body
                  falling under the definition of “State in
                  Article 12 that such reservation may
                  continue in operation for a period of 5
                  years from this day”. (Emphasis
                  supplied)
      Indra Sawhney (supra) was decided on 16th November 1992.
      The period of 5 years stipulated in the above extracted passage
      from the judgement, therefore, expired on 15th November,
      1996.
WP(C) 3490/2010                                      Page 6 of 30

6.3   In view of the above direction of the Supreme Court in Indra
      Sawhney         (supra),     Office       Memorandum          No.
      36012/37/93/Estt./(SCT), dated 19th August 1993, was issued
      by the DOPT, which reads thus:-
            “The undersigned is directed to say that
            consequent on the judgment of the Supreme
            Court in Indira Sawhney and others Vs. Union
            of India and others, doubts have been
            expressed in some quarters whether the
            existing provisions of reservation for SC/ST in
            the matter of promotion are to be continued. In
            para 107 of their judgment in the above said
            case delivered on 16.11.1992, the Supreme
            Court has given the following direction:-
                   'It is further directed that wherever
                   reservation are already provided in the
                   matter of promotion-be it Central
                   Services or State Services or for that
                   matter services under any Corporation,
                   authority or body falling under the
                   definition of “State” in Article 12-such
                   reservations shall continue in operation
                   for a period of five years from this day'.
                   (16.11.1992)
            2.   In view of this direction of the Supreme
                 Court, the existing provisions of
                 reservation for SC/ST in the matter of
                 promotion are required to be continued.
            3.   The above said position is brought to the
                 notice of all Ministers/Departments for
                 information and for ensuring that the
                 existing provisions of reservation for
                 SC/ST in the matter of promotion are
                 implemented, without fail”.
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 7 of 30

6.4   Apparently with a view to transgress the 5-year window
      provided, vide Indra Sawhney (supra), for reservations in
      promotion favouring SCs and STs, sub-article (4A) was inserted
      in Article 16 of the Constitution, vide the Constitution (77th
      Amendment) Act, 1995, which came into force on 17th June
      1995. The said sub-Article, read as it was worded, provided a
      carte blanche to the State to make any provision, for reservation
      in promotion, in favour of SCs and STs, provided they were
      "not adequately represented in the services under the State", and
      read thus:
         “(4A)     nothing in this article shall prevent the
                   State from making any provision for
                   reservation in matters of promotion to
                   any class or classes of posts in the
                   services under the State in favour of the
                   Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
                   which, in the opinion of the State, are not
                   adequately represented in the services
                   under the State”.
6.5   The above sub-Article 4(A) of Article 16 of the Constitution of
      India was, subsequently, amended by the Constitution (85 th
      Amendment Act), 2001 - which was deemed to have come into
      force on 17th June 1995 - by replacing the words “in matters of
      promotion to any class”, contained in the said sub-Article, with
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 8 of 30

      the words “in matters of promotion, with consequential
      seniority to any class”.
6.6   Consequent upon the 77th and 85th amendments to the
      Constitution aforementioned, various orders/notifications were
      issued, by the Central and State Governments, towards
      implementation thereof. The said orders/notifications, as also
      the 77th, 81st and 85th amendments to the Constitution, were
      challenged, before the Supreme Court, in a batch of writ
      petitions, including WP (C) 413/1997, which is stated to have
      been filed by the present petitioner i.e. the All India Equality
      Forum. The challenge, in WP (C) 413/1997, was to OM
      No.3602/18/dated 13th August, 1997, issued by the DOPT,
      which already stands reproduced hereinabove.
6.7   During the pendency of the said writ petitions, the issue of
      constitutional validity of sub-Articles (4) and (4A) of Article 16
      came to be decided, by a Constitution Bench of the Supreme
      Court in M. Nagaraj (supra). The fundamental challenge, in
      Nagaraj (supra), was to the stipulation that reservation in
      promotion, granted to SCs and STs by the said sub-Articles,
      would also carry, with it, the benefit of consequential seniority.
      Grant of such consequential seniority, in the submissions of the
      petitioners therein to the Supreme Court, resulted in impairment
      of efficiency,    as also in discriminating between equals, in
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 9 of 30

      violation of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution. The
      Supreme Court analyzed, and determined, the controversy, thus:
      (i)    The controversy involved balancing of the right of an
             individual to equal opportunity, on the one hand, and
             preferential treatment to an individual belonging to the
             backward class on the other, in order to bring about an
             equal level playing field in the matter of public
             employment.
      (ii)   Equality in law was different from equality in fact. In
             understanding Article 16(4), equality in fact played a
             dominant role.
      (iii)  The discretion, conferred on the executive by Articles
             16(4) and 16(4A), was limited by Article 335 of the
             Constitution.
      (iv)   The controversy essentially related to the exercise of the
             power by the State Government depending upon the fact
             situation in each case. Therefore, "vesting of the power"
             by an enabling provision may have been constitutionally
             valid; the "exercise" of the said "power" by the State in a
             given case may nevertheless be arbitrary, "particularly if
             the State fails to identify and measure backwardness and
             inadequacy keeping in mind the efficiency of service as
             required under Article 335."
      (v)    The need for achieving a balance arose when the issue of
             extent of reservation was involved. Reservation, beyond
             a cut-off point, resulted in reverse discrimination.
WP(C) 3490/2010                                          Page 10 of 30

      (vi)   A numerical benchmark was, therefore, "the surest
             immunity against charges of discrimination".
      (vii) The discretion vested in the State, under Article 16(4) or
             16(4A), was subject to the existence of "backwardness"
             and "inadequacy of representation". Backwardness had
             to be based on objective factors whereas inadequacy had
             to factually exist. This was where judicial review came
             in.
      (viii) With respect to the maximum extent of reservation
             permissible, it was noticed that, while earlier decisions
             seemed to take contrary views, the judgement in Indra
             Sawhney (supra) held that reservation could not be in
             excess of 50% and that Article 16 (4) spoke of adequate
             representation, not proportionate representation.
      (ix)   On the issue of whether the 50% rule was applicable to
             each year, it was noticed that, while Indra Sawhney
             (supra) held that the said 50% was applicable to each
             year, the subsequent decision in R.K. Sabharwal v State
             of Punjab, (1995) 2 SCC 745 held that, in the case of
             promotion, the entire cadre strength had to be taken into
             account to determine whether reservation, up to the
             required limit, had been reached, and that the
             pronouncement in Indra Sawhney (supra) dealt with
             initial appointments.
      The further discussion, in Nagaraj (supra), dealing with the
      “catch-up” principle, is not of any particular relevance, insofar
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 11 of 30

      as the controversy in issue is concerned; accordingly, this order
      eschews any discussion on the said concept.
6.8   Having, thus, distilled the various principles seminal to the
      controversies arising before it, Nagaraj (supra) proceeds (in
      para 86 of the report), to observe, thus, with respect to Article
      16 (4A) of the Constitution:
             “86. Clause (4-A) follows the pattern specified
                   in clauses (3) and (4) of Article 16.
                   Clause (4-A) of Article 16 emphasises the
                   opinion of the States in the matter of
                   adequacy of representation. It gives
                   freedom to the State in an appropriate
                   case depending upon th e ground reality
                   to provide for reservation in matters of
                   promotion to any class or classes of posts
                   in the services. The State has to form its
                   opinion on the quantifiable data
                   regarding adequacy of representation.
                   Clause (4-A) of Article 16 is an enabling
                   provision. It gives freedom to the State to
                   provide for reservation in matters of
                   promotion. Clause (4-A) of Article 16
                   applies only to SCs and STs. The said
                   clause is carved out of Article 16(4).
                   Therefore, clause (4-A) will be governed
                   by the two compelling reasons—
                   “backwardness” and “inadequacy of
                   representation”, as mentioned in Article
                   16(4). If the said two reasons do not exist
                   then the enabling provision cannot come
                   into force. The State can make provision
                   for reservation only if the above two
                   circumstances exist. Further, in Ajit
                   Singh (II) [(1999) 7 SCC 209 : 1999
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 12 of 30

                   SCC (L&S) 1239] this Court has held
                   that apart from “backwardness” and
                   “inadequacy of representation” the State
                   shall also keep in mind “overall
                   efficiency” (Article 335). Therefore, all
                   the three factors have to be kept in mind
                   by the appropriate Government in
                   providing for reservation in promotion
                   for SCs and STs.” (Emphasis supplied)
6.9   Further, para 117 of the report enters the following caveat:
            “116. The test for judging the width of the
                   power and the test for adjudicating the
                   exercise of power by the State concerned
                   are two different tests which warrant two
                   different judicial approaches. In the
                   present case, as stated above, we are
                   required to test the width of the power
                   under the impugned amendments.
                   Therefore, we have to apply “the width
                   test”. In applying “the width test” we
                   have to see whether the impugned
                   amendments obliterate the constitutional
                   limitations mentioned in Article 16(4),
                   namely, backwardness and inadequacy of
                   representations. As stated above, these
                   limitations are not obliterated by the
                   impugned amendments. However, the
                   question still remains whether the State
                   concerned has identified and valued the
                   circumstances justifying it to make
                   reservation. This question has to be
                   decided casewise. There are numerous
                   petitions pending in this Court in which
                   reservations     made       under     State
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 13 of 30

                    enactments have been challenged as
                    excessive. The extent of reservation has
                    to be decided on the facts of each case.
                    The judgment in Indira Sawhney does not
                    deal with constitutional amendments. In
                    our present judgment, we are upholding
                    the validity of the constitutional
                    amendments subject to the limitations.
                    Therefore, in each case the Court has got
                    to be satisfied that the State has
                    exercised its opinion in making
                    reservations in promotions for SCs and
                    STs and for which the State concerned
                    will have to place before the Court the
                    requisite quantifiable data in each case
                    and satisfy the Court that such
                    reservations became necessary on
                    account of inadequacy of representation
                    of SCs/STs in a particular class or
                    classes of posts without affecting
                    general efficiency of service as
                    mandated under Article 335 of the
                    Constitution”.
                                 (Emphasis supplied)
7     As     already    stated  hereinabove,    consequent     on   the
      pronouncement in M. Nagaraj (supra), the batch of writ
      petitions, pending before the Supreme Court, challenging
      various orders/notifications issued under Article 16(4)(A) of the
      Constitution, were disposed of, by the Supreme Court vide
      order dated 11th March, 2010, in the following terms:-
             “The Constitution of India was amended by
             the Seventy-Seventh Amendment Act, 1995,
WP(C) 3490/2010                                       Page 14 of 30

            Eighty-fifth Amendment Act, 2001 and Eighty-
            first Amendment Act, 2000. By these Acts
            Article 16(4), (4-A) and 16(4-B) were
            amended. Thus Seventy-Seventh Amendment
            Act, 1995 and Eighty-fifth Amendment Act,
            2001 came into effect w.e.f. 16.06.1995 and
            Eighty-first Amendment Act, 2000 came into
            effect on 09.06.2000. Subsequent to these
            Amendments of the Constitution various State
            Government issued order/notifications to
            implement the provisions of the Constitution.
            These notifications/orders were challenged in
            various writ petitions and special leave
            petitions before this Court. In these
            proceedings the constitutional amendments
            were also challenged. By the decision of the
            Constitution Bench of this Court in M.
            Nagaraj and others vs. Union of India and
            others reported in (2006) 8 SCC 212, the
            constitutional validity of Article 16(4), (4-A)
            and (4-B) was upheld. In the judgment it was
            directed that various individual writ petitions
            would be considered by appropriate Bench in
            accordance with the law laid down in this
            decision. As various state orders and
            notifications have been challenged in these
            writ petitions be considered by the respective
            High Courts. The validity of the same be
            decided in view of the final decision of the
            Constitution Bench of this Court in M.
            Nagaraj and others vs. Union of India and
            others (supra).
            Therefore, we permit the petitioners in these
            writ petitions to withdraw these writ petitions
            with liberty to move the High Court and in the
            event of writ petitions are filed before the High
            Court the same may be considered by the High
WP(C) 3490/2010                                         Page 15 of 30

             Court in the light of the observations made by
             this Court in M. Nagaraj and others vs.
             Union of India and other (supra). The
             petitioners would be at liberty to seek
             appropriate interim relief in the High Court.
             The writ petitions as well as contempt petitions
             are disposed of accordingly”.
8     It is pursuant to the liberty thus granted by the Supreme Court
      in the above extracted paras of its order dated 11 th March, 2010,
      that the petitioner has moved this Court by means of the present
      writ petition.
9     Consequent to the pronouncement of law in M. Nagaraj (supra)
      there has been a slew of decisions by the Supreme Court as well
      as various other judicial fora, to the effect that the Government
      could not blindly provide for reservation in promotions, in
      favour of SCs and STs unless, prior thereto, the requisite
      exercise, to acquire quantifiable data regarding inadequacy of
      representation of SCs and STs in public services was
      undertaken and, thereafter, the said consideration was
      juxtaposed against the opposing considerations of backwardness
      and overall efficiency of administration. A few such decisions
      may be noticed:
9.1   U.O.I. v Pushpa Rani, (2008) 9 SCC 242 was a decision in
      which the challenge, postulated on the anvil of Nagaraj (supra),
WP(C) 3490/2010                                         Page 16 of 30

      was repelled. Even so, the rationale, of the Supreme Court, from
      doing so, as contained in para 61 of the report, is instructive:
            “61. The point which remains to be
                   considered is whether the order of the
                   Tribunal, which has been confirmed by
                   the High Court, can be maintained by
                   applying the ratio of M. Nagaraj
                   case [(2006) 8 SCC 212] . Dr. Rajeev
                   Dhavan, learned Senior Counsel
                   appearing for some of the respondents,
                   made strenuous efforts to convince us
                   that the policy of reservation cannot be
                   applied at the stage of making
                   promotions because the Railway
                   Administration did not produce any
                   evidence to show that Scheduled Castes
                   and Scheduled Tribes were not
                   adequately represented in different
                   cadres and that the efficiency of
                   administration will not be jeopardised by
                   reserving posts for Scheduled Castes and
                   Scheduled Tribes, but we have not felt
                   persuaded to accept this submission. In
                   the applications filed by them, the
                   respondents did not plead that the
                   application of the policy of reservation
                   would lead to excessive representation of
                   the members of Scheduled Castes and
                   Scheduled Tribes, or that the existing
                   policy of reservation framed by the
                   Government of India was not preceded
                   by an exercise in relation to the issue of
                   adequacy of their representation. Rather,
                   the thrust of their claim was that
                   restructuring of different cadres in
                   Group C and D resulted in upgradation
                   of posts and the policy of reservation
WP(C) 3490/2010                                         Page 17 of 30

                    cannot be applied qua upgraded posts.
                    Therefore, the Union of India and the
                    Railway Administration did not get
                    opportunity to show that the employees
                    belonging to Scheduled Castes and
                    Scheduled Tribes did not have adequate
                    representation in different cadres; that
                    the outer limit of reservation i.e. 50%
                    will not be violated by applying the
                    policy of reservation and that the
                    efficiency of administration will not be
                    jeopardised by applying the policy of
                    reservation. Therefore, it is neither
                    possible nor desirable to entertain a
                    totally new plea raised on behalf of the
                    respondents,     more     so,    because
                    adjudication of such plea calls for a
                    detailed investigation into the issues of
                    facts.” (Emphasis supplied)
      It is apparent, from a reading of the above passage, that, while
      the Supreme Court acknowledged the legal position that any
      provision for reservation for SCs and STs, in the absence of the
      preliminary exercise of collating quantifiable data regarding
      inadequacy of representation, and the juxtaposing, against each
      other, the said consideration, with the considerations of
      backwardness and maintenance of overall efficiency of
      administration, having been conducted, would violate Article
      16 (1) as well as Article 335 of the Constitution of India.
      However, as requested pleadings, to the said effect, were absent
      in that case, the Supreme Court demurred from entering into the
      controversy. In the present case, however, the following
WP(C) 3490/2010                                       Page 18 of 30

      averments appear, on the record of the pleadings of the
      petitioner in the writ petition:
             “24. Naturally when persons of lesser merits are
                    inducted at the cost of persons of higher
                    merit, the efficiency in administration is
                    bound to suffer. After all Government
                    servants are meant to serve the public at
                    large. For this purpose the State, as a model
                    employer has the right to appoint the cream
                    of the society in public service. But to render
                    social Justice to the backward classes some
                    sacrifices merit and efficiency has to be
                    done. At the same time there has to be a
                    limit to the sacrifice otherwise the very
                    foundation of efficiency would be shaken
                    and the State would collapse. In this regard
                    Article 335 of the Constitution comes into
                    play as a cap on the discretionary power
                    and the HSC repeatedly, time and again,
                    stressed the importance of Article 335 of the
                    Constitution. The proviso to Article 325
                    being of limited application, the importance
                    Article 335 should always be kept in mind as
                    stressed by this Hon’ble Court.
             26.    … This Hon’ble Court has been very
                    particular in stressing the point that while
                    exercising this discretionary power overall
                    efficiency in administration should and must
                    be ensured. The reference is to overall
                    efficiency and not to efficiency in the cadre
                    or class of posts in which reservation is
                    provided for. Overall efficiency necessarily
                    means the efficiency in the entire service.
                    This Hon’ble Court has held that Articles 16
                    (4A) and 16 (4B) empowers the State will be
                    enabling provision of providing for
WP(C) 3490/2010                                          Page 19 of 30

                   reservation in promotion but at the same
                   time casts a responsibility of maintaining
                   overall efficiency in administration, that is,
                   in service. This overall efficiency in
                   administration can be achieved only when
                   merit and social Justice is balanced in the
                   service at all levels on the basis of
                   quantifiable data on backwardness,
                   inadequacy of representation, extend the
                   reservation and efficiency also at all levels,
                   that is, a balance between Articles 14 and
                   16 (1) on the one hand and Articles 16 (4A)
                   and 16 (4B) on the other.
             27.   This Hon’ble Court has cast this
                   responsibility of maintaining this balance on
                   the State. It is, therefore, the duty of the
                   State to evolve a mechanism by which the
                   maintenance of balance essential and the
                   Articles of Constitution referred above, that
                   is Articles 14, 16 (1), 16 (4A), 16 (4B) and
                   Article 335, are implemented in that letter
                   and spirit. How to evolve and ensure this
                   balance is a matter on which the State has to
                   deliberate and take an appropriate
                   decision.”
      In the face of these averments, in the writ petition of the
      petitioner, Nagaraj (supra) cast a duty, on the State, to
      demonstrate, before this Court in response thereto, that the
      necessary exercise of collating quantifiable data regarding
      inadequacy of representation, backwardness and maintenance
      of overall efficiency of administration, was carried out before
      continuing the policy of reservation, for SCs and STs, beyond
      the 5-year period provided by Indra Sawhney (supra).
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 20 of 30

      However, all that is to be found, in the counter-affidavit filed by
      Respondents 2 and 3, in response to the writ petition, in this
      regard, is the following:
             “(D) That it is further submitted that decision to
                    grant reservation in appointment/promotion
                    is policy matters of the Govt and the
                    impugned policy decisions dated 13.8.1997
                    has been taken by the Govt. in bona fide
                    exercise of its power under the Constitution
                    or     otherwise     and    there    is    no
                    justification/reason for quashing the same
                    by this Double Court by exercise of its
                    power of judicial review of the executives
                    decision under Article 226 of the
                    Constitution of India.
             (F)    That the action of the replying respondent in
                    giving the reservation to various categories
                    of persons is in terms of the conscious
                    decision of the Govt. taken in this regard
                    and the same is just and in bona fide
                    exercise of its power and not liable to be
                    interfered with by this Hon’ble Court in its
                    extra ordinary power of judicial review.”
9.2   Suraj Bhan Meena v State of Rajasthan, (2011) 1 SCC 467,
      upheld the decision of the High Court of Rajasthan, impugned
      therein, in the following words:
             “66. The view of the High Court is based on the
                    decision in M. Nagaraj case [(2006) 8 SCC
                    212 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 1013] as no
                    exercise was undertaken in terms of Article
                    16(4-A) to acquire quantifiable data
                    regarding the inadequacy of representation
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 21 of 30

                   of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled
                   Tribe communities in public services. The
                   Rajasthan High Court has rightly quashed
                   the Notifications dated 28-12-2002 and 25-
                   4-2008 issued by the State of Rajasthan
                   providing for consequential seniority and
                   promotion to the members of the Scheduled
                   Caste and Scheduled Tribe communities and
                   the same does not call for any interference.”
                   (Emphasis supplied)
9.3   U.P. Power Corporation v Rajesh Kumar, (2012) 7 SCC 1, re-
      emphasised Nagaraj (supra), by carving, out of the said
      decision, the following clear principles (in the 81 of the report):
            “(i)   Vesting of the power by an enabling
                   provision may be constitutionally valid and
                   yet “exercise of power” by the State in a
                   given case may be arbitrary, particularly, if
                   the State fails to identify and measure the
                   backwardness and inadequacy keeping in
                   mind the efficiency of service as required
                   under Article 335.
            (ii)   Article 16(4) which protects the interests of
                   certain sections of the society has to be
                   balanced against Article 16(1) which
                   protects the interests of every citizen of the
                   entire society. They should be harmonised
                   because they are restatements of the
                   principle of equality under Article 14.
            (iii)  Each post gets marked for the particular
                   category of candidates to be appointed
                   against it and any subsequent vacancy has
                   to be filled by that category candidate.
WP(C) 3490/2010                                         Page 22 of 30

            (iv) The appropriate Government has to apply
                 the cadre strength as a unit in the operation
                 of the roster in order to ascertain whether a
                 given class/group is adequately represented
                 in the service. The cadre strength as a unit
                 also ensures that the upper ceiling limit of
                 50% is not violated. Further, roster has to
                 be post-specific and not vacancy based.
            (v)  The State has to form its opinion on the
                 quantifiable data regarding adequacy of
                 representation. Clause (4-A) of Article 16 is
                 an enabling provision. It gives freedom to
                 the State to provide for reservation in
                 matters of promotion. Clause (4-A) of
                 Article 16 applies only to SCs and STs. The
                 said clause is carved out of Article 16(4-A).
                 Therefore, clause (4-A) will be governed by
                 the      two       compelling       reasons—
                 “backwardness” and “inadequacy of
                 representation”, as mentioned in Article
                 16(4). If the said two reasons do not exist,
                 then the enabling provision cannot be
                 enforced.
            (vi) If the ceiling limit on the carry over of
                 unfilled vacancies is removed, the other
                 alternative time factor comes in and in that
                 event, the timescale has to be imposed in the
                 interest of efficiency in administration as
                 mandated by Article 335. If the timescale is
                 not kept, then posts will continue to remain
                 vacant for years which would be detrimental
                 to the administration. Therefore, in each
                 case, the appropriate Government will now
                 have to introduce the duration depending
                 upon the fact situation.
WP(C) 3490/2010                                      Page 23 of 30

            (vii) If the appropriate Government enacts a law
                   providing for reservation without keeping
                   in mind the parameters in Article 16(4) and
                   Article 335, then this Court will certainly
                   set aside and strike down such legislation.
            (viii) The constitutional limitation under Article
                   335 is relaxed and not obliterated. As stated
                   above, be it reservation or evaluation,
                   excessiveness in either would result in
                   violation of the constitutional mandate. This
                   exercise, however, will depend on the facts
                   of each case.
            (ix)   The concepts of efficiency, backwardness
                   and inadequacy of representation are
                   required to be identified and measured.
                   That exercise depends on the availability of
                   data. That exercise depends on numerous
                   factors. It is for this reason that the
                   enabling provisions are required to be
                   made because each competing claim seeks
                   to achieve certain goals. How best one
                   should optimise these conflicting claims
                   can only be done by the administration in
                   the context of local prevailing conditions in
                   public employment.
            (x)    Article 16(4), therefore, creates a field
                   which enables a State to provide for
                   reservation      provided     there     exists
                   backwardness of a class and inadequacy of
                   representation in employment. These are
                   compelling reasons. They do not exist in
                   Article 16(1). It is only when these reasons
                   are satisfied that a State gets the power to
WP(C) 3490/2010                                       Page 24 of 30

                    provide for reservation in the matter of
                    employment.” (Emphasis supplied)
      Having thus delineated the principles emerging from Nagaraj
      (supra), the Court went on to conclude (in para 86 of the
      report), thus:
             “86. We are of the firm view that a fresh exercise
                    in the light of the judgment of the
                    Constitution Bench in M. Nagaraj is a
                    categorical imperative. The stand that the
                    constitutional amendments have facilitated
                    the reservation in promotion with
                    consequential seniority and have given the
                    stamp of approval to the Act and the Rules
                    cannot withstand close scrutiny inasmuch as
                    the Constitution Bench has clearly opined
                    that Articles 16(4-A) and 16(4-B) are
                    enabling provisions and the State can make
                    provisions for the same on certain basis or
                    foundation. The conditions precedent have
                    not been satisfied. No exercise has been
                    undertaken. What has been argued with
                    vehemence is that it is not necessary as the
                    concepts of reservation in promotion was
                    already in vogue. We are unable to accept
                    the said submissions, for when the
                    provisions of the Constitution are treated
                    valid with certain conditions or riders, it
                    becomes incumbent on the part of the State
                    to appreciate and apply the test so that its
                    amendments can be tested and withstand
                    and scrutiny on parameters laid down
                    therein”.
WP(C) 3490/2010                                       Page 25 of 30

9.4   The same principles stand reiterated in a recent judgment of the
      Supreme Court in B.K. Pavitra V. UOI (2017) 4 SCC 620, in
      the following terms:-
             “It is clear from the above discussion in S.Panneer
             Selvam case that exercise for determining
             “inadequacy of representation” , “backwardness”
             and “overall efficiency”, is a must for exercise of
             power under Article 16(4-A). Mere fact that there
             is no proportionate representation in promotional
             post for the population of SCs and STs is not by
             itself enough to grant consequential seniority to
             promotes who are otherwise junior and thereby
             denying seniority to those who are given
             promotion later on account of reservation policy.
             It is for the State to place material on record that
             there was compelling necessity for exercise of such
             power and decision of the State was based on
             material including the study that overall efficiency
             is not compromised. In the present case, no such
             exercise has been undertaken”.
10    On this legal position being brought to his notice, Shri R.V.
      Sinha, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, fairly
      admitted that the controversy, in the present case, stood covered
      by the judgments of the Supreme Court in M. Nagaraj (supra)
      and B.K. Pavitra (supra). At the same time, he contended,
      vociferously, that the writ petition itself was not maintainable,
      as the petitioner would be required, in the first instance to
      approach the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter
      referred to as “the Tribunal”) in view of the law laid down by
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 26 of 30

      the Supreme Court L. Chandra Kumar v U.O.I., (1997) 3 SCC
      261.
11    Needless to say, the said objection of Mr.Sinha cannot merit
      any consideration in the present case, as the petitioner has
      moved this Court pursuant to the specific liberty, granted by the
      Supreme Court in this behalf, vide its order dated 11th March,
      2010, already referred to hereinabove. In view of the said
      liberty, it is not open to this Court to travel behind the said
      judgment      and    enter  into   any    discussion    regarding
      maintainability of the petition. The brief of this Court this,
      neatly and squarely, to adjudicate on whether, or not, the
      impugned OM, dated 13th August 1997 could sustain, in the
      wake of the law as enunciated in M. Nagaraj (supra).
12    The objection of Mr Sinha is, therefore, overruled.
13    As has already been noticed hereinabove, the counter affidavit,
      filed in the present proceedings on behalf of Respondents 2 to 4,
      does not disclose that the requisite exercise, collecting
      quantifiable data and determining the aspects of backwardness,
      inadequacy of representation and overall efficiency of the
      administration, was ever undertaken before blindly extending,
      beyond 15th December, 1997, the provision for reservation, in
      promotion, favouring SCs and STs. The 77th Amendment to the
      Constitution, and sub-article (4A), which was inserted in Article
WP(C) 3490/2010                                       Page 27 of 30

      16 thereby, were obviously taken as providing a carte blanche
      to the Government to extend the provisions of reservation for
      SCs and STs beyond the period of 5 years stipulated in Indra
      Sawhney (supra).      As Nagaraj (supra), and the decisions
      following thereupon show us, however, that is not the case. Any
      reservation (as also consequential seniority) extended to SCs
      and STs, without, in the first instance, conducting the requisite
      exercise of garnering quantifiable data, indicating inadequate
      representation,   and    juxtaposing,    they’re    against,   the
      considerations of backwardness and overall efficiency of
      administration, would necessarily infract Articles 16 (1) and
      335 of the Constitution of India and, consequently, be liable to
      be quashed.
14    The impugned OM dated 13th August 1997, issued by the DOPT
      cannot, therefore, sustain in view of the law laid down in the
      decisions already cited hereinabove.
15    Resultantly, prayers (a) and (c), in the writ petition, succeed.
      The impugned Office Memorandum No 36012/18/95-Estt.
      (Res) Pt. II, dated 13th August, 1997, issued by the DOPT, is
      quashed and set aside. The respondents are restrained from
      granting any reservation, in promotion, to Scheduled Castes or
      Scheduled Tribes, in exercise of the power conferred by Article
      16 (4A) of the Constitution of India, without, in the first
      instance, carrying out the necessary preliminary exercise of
WP(C) 3490/2010                                        Page 28 of 30

      acquiring     quantifiable   data    indicating    inadequacy     of
      representation, of the said categories, in service, and evaluating
      the situation by taking into consideration the said data, along
      with the competing considerations of backwardness and overall
      efficiency in administration, and arriving at an empirical
      decision on the basis thereof.
16    Prayer (b) in the writ petition, to the extent it exhorts this court
      to quash all promotions made in pursuance of the impugned
      OM dated 13th August 1997, would stand satisified by the
      interim order, stated to have been passed by the Supreme Court,
      in, inter alia, WP (C) 413 of 1997 filed by the petitioner, to the
      effect that all promotions made would be subject to the outcome
      of the challenge laid by the petitioners in the instant case. No
      further orders would, therefore, require to be passed, by us,
      regarding prayer (b), which would, consequently, also stand
      allowed, to the extent that all promotions effected on the basis
      of the impugned OM, dated 13th August, 1997, would stand
      quashed.
17    The further prayer, forming the latter part of prayer (b) in the
      writ petition, that "the employees of general category be given
      benefit of promotion retrospectively from the date reserved
      category employees were promoted illegally" cannot, however,
      be granted, for the simple reason that promotion may be
      dependent on a variety of factors, including seniority, eligibility,
WP(C) 3490/2010                                          Page 29 of 30

      qualifying service, availability of vacancies, application of the
      quota-rota principle, and the like, and, in the absence of any
      specific prayer qua any specific post, an omnibus direction, to
      promote all "employees of general category", retrospectively,
      "from the date reserved category employees were promoted
      illegally", cannot possibly be issued. All that we can say, on
      this prayer of the petitioner, is that, if, consequent on this
      judgement, any general category employee becomes entitled to
      promotion against a post against which an SC or ST candidate
      was promoted on the basis of the impugned OM dated 13 th
      August 1997, it shall be open to such general category
      candidate/candidates     to    represent    to    the    concerned
      administrative authorities, or to independently seek her, or his,
      judicial remedies in that regard. Liberty, to the said extent is,
      therefore, granted.
18    The writ petition is disposed of, in the above terms.
19    No costs.
                                                C.HARI SHANKAR, J.
                                           ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE
AUGUST 23, 2017
neelam
WP(C) 3490/2010                                         Page 30 of 30


