         THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
W.P.(C) NOs. 12740, 12739, 12826, 12809, 13560, 13161, 16015 &
16016 of 2013
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                             --------------
Dr. Himansu Sekhar Sahoo
and others               ---   Petitioners in W.P.(C) No.12740 of 2013
Dr. Biswajeet Kar
and others               ---   Petitioners in W.P.(C) No.12739 of 2013
Dr.Tanushree Mishra
and others               ---   Petitioners in W.P.(C) No.12826 of 2013
Pradyumna Kanhor         ---   Petitioner in W.P.(C) No.12809 of 2013
Dr.Satyabrata Routray
and others               ---   Petitioners in W.P.(C) No.13560 of 2013
Dr.Sitakanta Panda       ---   Petitioner in W.P.(C) No.13161 of 2013
Dr. Rajendra Das
and another              ---   Petitioners in W.P.(C) No.16015 of 2013
Dr. Sangram Keshari Sahoo
and another              ---   Petitioners in W.P.(C) No.16016 of 2013
                         -Versus-
State of Odisha & Ors.   ---     Opp. Parties
                               (in all the writ petitions)
        For Petitioners  :     M/s.R.K.Rath, Sr. Advocate
                                      S.K.Das & S.K.Mishra
                               (in W.P.(C) No.12740 of 2013)

                            2
                          M/s. G.A.R.Dora, Sr. Advocate
                                G.Rani Dora, J.K.Lenka
                                & P.K.Behera
                          (in W.P.(C) No.12739 of 2013)
                           M/s. J.Patnaik, Sr. Advocate
                                B.Mohanty, P.K.Pattnaik,
                                S.Pattnaik, A.Pattnaik,
                                R.P.Roy, B.S.Rajguru
                          (in W.P.(C) No.12826 of 2013)
                          Mr. Bhojaraj Seth
                          (in W.P.(C) No.12809 of 2013)
                          M/s. Dillip Kumar Mohapatra,
                                A.Sahoo & N.Nayak
`                         (in W.P.(C) No.13560 of 2013)
                          M/s. Sanjit Mohanty, Sr. Advocate
                                U.K.Sahoo & S.C.Samantaray
                          (in W.P.(C) No.13161 of 2013)
                          M/s. Umesh Ch. Patnaik,
                                A.Mishra & S.Patnaik
                          (in W.P.(C) No.16015 of 2013)
                          M/s. Avijit Mishra, S.Patnaik
                                & S.Soren.
                          (in W.P.(C) No.16016 of 2013)
  For Opp. Party No.1   : Mr.R.K.Mohapatra, Govt. Advocate
  For D.M.E.T. & M.C.I. : Mr.R.C.Mohanty
  For Intervenors       : Mr. S.K.Padhi, Sr. Advocate
                          & Mr.S.P.Mishra, Sr. Advocate.

                                               3
          PRESENT:
                   THE HON’BLE CHIEF JUSTICE SHRI C.NAGAPPAN
                                               &
                  THE HON’BLE SHRI JUSTICE INDRAJIT MAHANTY.
             Date of Hearing: 18.07.2013            Date of Judgment: 24.07.2013
       ________________________________________________________________________
C.Nagappan, C.J.    In this batch of writ petitions, the petitioners herein are the
       Doctors who have served under the State Government for more than “five
       years” and they seek to challenge the guidelines framed by the State
       Government for allotment of candidates for Post Graduate (Medical) Course,
       2013 in Odisha, communicated under cover of letter dated 27.5.2013 and
       further seek to challenge the decision of the State Government to treat the
       Doctors who have served for “three years” under the “in-service category” for
       admission into Post Graduate (Medical) Course in the academic year
       2013-14.
       2.           Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the petitioners
       after completing of their M.B.B.S. degree registered themselves under the
       Orissa Medical Council as registered doctors and after they were selected by
       the Orissa Public Service Commission (OPSC) were appointed as Asst.
       Surgeons under the service of the State and have all completed five or more
       years of service under the State. It is stated on behalf of the petitioners that
       in exercise of the power under Section 33 of the Indian Medical Council Act,
       1956, the Medical Counsel of India passed a regulation called “Post
       Graduation (Medical) Education Regulation 2000” which have been

                                         4
amended from time to time and by amendment made by the Notification
dated 21.12.2010, the Medical Council of India decided by way of regulation
to hold a common National Eligibility cum Entrance examination for
admission into the P.G. (Medical) Courses throughout the country each
year. Such examination is called as the “National Eligibility cum Entrance
Test (NEET) for Admission to P.G. (Medical) Courses”. To conduct the
aforesaid examination, the National Board of Examinations (NBE) was
constituted and such common eligibility test was to be given effect to from
the session 2013-14.
3.           Pursuant to the aforesaid decision, the National Board of
Examinations issued a “information bulletin” requiring eligible candidates to
apply for admission into P.G. courses for the year 2013. The said bulletin
stipulates the time schedule which requires the submission of application
form through online registration between 4th October to 12th November,
2012 and the date of entrance examination was fixed from 23 rd November to
6th December 2012 and declaration of result was to be made by 31 st
January, 2013. The most important clause in the Information Bulletin
issued by the National Board of Examinations for our present purposes is at
Clause-IV which is quoted hereunder.
                          “The     reservation   of    seats   in    medical
             colleges/institutions for respective categories shall be as per
             applicable laws prevailing in States/Union Territories. An all
             India merit list as well as State-wise merit list of the eligible
             candidates shall be prepared on the basis of marks obtained in
             National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test and candidates shall be

                                         5
             admitted to Post Graduate courses from the said merit lists
             only.
                          Provided that in determining the merit of
             candidates who are in service of Government/public authority,
             weightage     in   the   marks      may    be   given  by   the
             Government/Competent Authority as an incentive at the rate of
             10% of the marks obtained for each year of service in remote
             and/or difficult areas upto the maximum of 30% of the marks
             obtained in National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test, the remote
             and difficult areas shall be as defined by State
             Government/competent authority from time to time.”
04.          It is further averred by the petitioners that, the term “as per
applicable laws prevailing in States” so far as Orissa is concerned, refers to
the policy of the Orissa State Government followed         from 1980 till 2012
whereby, the “in-service candidates” have been defined in Clause-6.2.1 of
the prospectus for Selection of Candidates for Post-Graduate Courses in the
Government Medical Colleges of Odisha-2012 as follows:
                          “Is in the employment in Government of Odisha
             and has completed a length of 5 years of service which includes
             all categories of employment like contractual/temporary/ad-
             hoc/regular by 31st December, 2011, excluding at-a-stretch
             leave of any kind, of 30 days or more. However the maternity
             leave is exempted from this exclusion and shall be counted
             towards the length of five years of service.”
             Relying on the above, it is asserted on behalf of the petitioners
that at the time of their application they had completed “five years” of
service and therefore, they alone should be considered for admission into
seats reserved for “in-service” candidates and no others.
05.          In the light of the above, it is submitted that whereas the notice
for holding of the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test was issued in the
month of September 2012 and online registration was to be held between 4th

                                         6
October, 2012 to 12th November, 2012 and examination was to be
conducted by 23rd November and result were also to be declared by 31st
January, 2013. The opposite party-State have sought at this belated stage
to change the eligibility criteria by issuing the impugned guidelines under
cover of letter dated 27.05.2013 by redefining the definition of “in-service
candidates” and making such guidelines applicable for admission during
the academic year 2013-14 which is as follows:
             “F.2. An “In-service candidate” is one who at the time of
             application:-
             Is in the regular employment in Government of Odisha/Govt. of
             Orissa Public Sector Undertakings/Govt. of India Public Sector
             Undertakings located in Odisha and has completed a length of
             3 years of regular service including contractual, temporary, ad-
             hoc and has been duly selected by Govt./OPSC/PSU
             appointing authority, before 31st March 2013, excluding at-a-
             stretch leave of any kind, of 30 days or more. However the
             maternity leave is exempted from this exclusion and shall be
             counted towards the length of three years of service.”
      And also further issuing the following directions:
                    “The Selection committee shall collect the detail State
             Quota seats for the academic year 2013-14 from the Principals
             of three Govt. Medical Colleges and Hi-Tech Medical College,
             Bhubaneswar and prepare the seat matrix for counseling.
             The reservation percentage should be strictly adhered to while
             preparing such merit list.”
06.          Learned counsels for the petitioners in the present batch of writ
application while seeking to challenge the guidelines framed by Orissa as
mentioned hereinabove and its communication to the DMET vide letter
dated 27.5.2013, inter alia, submit that the said guidelines having been
issued, much after the results have been declared, the same ought not to
have been made applicable for admission in the year 2013. It is further

                                         7
submitted that such a policy itself cannot and ought not to have given any
retrospective operation.
              In this respect, reliance was placed on the judgment of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Secretary, A.P.Public Service
Commission v. B.Swapna and others, (2005) 4 SCC 154 which lays down
the proposition that “once the process of selection starts, the prescribed
selection criteria cannot be changed. The logic behind the same is based on
fair play.” For better appreciation, Paragraph-14 thereof is quoted herein
below:
       “14. The High Court has committed an error in holding that the
       amended rule was operative. As has been fairly conceded by learned
       counsel for Respondent 1 applicant it was the unamended rule
       which was applicable. Once a process of selection starts, the
       prescribed selection criteria cannot be changed. The logic behind the
       same is based on fair play. A person who did not apply because a
       certain criterion e.g. minimum percentage of marks can make a
       legitimate grievance, in case the same is lowered, that he could have
       applied because he possessed the said percentage. Rules regarding
       qualification for appointment if amended during continuance of the
       process of selection do not affect the same. That is because every
       statute or statutory rule is prospective unless it is expressly or by
       necessary implication made to have retrospective effect. Unless
       there are words in the statute or in the rules showing the intention
       to affect existing rights the rule must be held to be prospective. If
       the rule is expressed in a language which is fairly capable of either
       interpretation it ought to be considered as prospective only.”
       Reliance was also placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of K.Manjusree v. State of Andhra Pradesh and
another, (2008) 3 SCC 512, wherein the Hon’ble apex Court has laid down
the law that “Therefore, introduction of requirement of minimum marks for
interview,    after  the   entire  selection  process   (consisting   of  written

                                         8
examination and interview) was completed, would amount to changing the
rules of the game after the game was played which is clearly impermissible.”
               Reliance was also placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Mohd. Raisul Islam and others v. Gokul
Mohan Hazarika and others, (2010) 7 SCC 560. While deciding the
question as to whether the amended rule would operate prospectively or
retrospectively, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that “the effect of
amendment to rules on seniority of persons recruited in selection process
initiated prior to amendment, the applicable rules are those on basis of
which selection process was commenced.”
07.            The State, on the other hand, opposed the prayer made in the
batch of writ applications and placed reliance on the counter affidavit filed
on behalf of opposite parties 1, 2 and 3 and submitted that the Govt. of
Orissa on 16.10.2012 has taken a “decision” regarding the criteria of
admission to P.G. students appearing in the National Eligibility cum
Entrance Test, 2013 and it was decided as follows:
                     “That, the total P.G. seats in different disciplines of
       Medical Colleges of our State comes to 343 earlier, 50% of the seats
       were filled up through selection process conducted by State P.G.
       Council and the rest 50% State quota was filled up from among direct
       and in-service candidates on 50:50 ration basis. Now a common
       entrance test will be conducted by National Board of Examination
       leaving no scope for State authority to intervene. In the larger interest
       of State following provisions may be incorporated by NBE while
       finalizing the norms of selection process.
             1. Even if a common test is conducted, 50% of the total seats
                need to be filled up from among the permanent natives of
                Odisha.

                                   9
     2. The system of percentage need to be converted to percentile
         should be lowered so as to fill up all the State seats by the
         native of Odisha.
     3. The regular OPSC sponsored candidates having three years of
         service experience including the period of contractual/adhoc
         service may be considered as an in-service candidate.
     4. The seats reserved for in-service candidates need to be filled
         up from among the in-service candidates only.
     5. The State will prepare its own merit list from among the
         selected candidates by allowing additional weightage of 10%,
         20%     &    30%      to    in-service  doctors     serving    in
         Remote/Tribal/backward area for a period of one, two and
         three years respectively and accordingly the State Govt. has
         send a letter to the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
         Welfare, Govt. of India, Nirmal Bhawan, New Deli regarding
         National Eligibility cum Entrance Test for P.G. students in the
         selection process to safeguard the interest of the State.”
The regular OPSC sponsored candidates having three years of service
experience including the period of contractual/adhoc service may be
considered as “in-service” candidate and in support of this, placed
reliance on Annexures-A/3 and B/3 respectively. It is further
contended that once the Medical Council of India decided to hold the
National Eligibility cum Entrance Test, several writ applications came
to be filed before the Apex Court. The Hon’ble Supreme Court on 13th
December, 2012, while adjourning the matter for further hearing,
allowed the respective entrance examination which had already been
notified to be held. As a consequence of this, National Eligibility cum
Entrance Test was conducted. It is further submitted that while the
State has not challenged the Notification of the Medical Council of
India   dated    27.12.2010     notifying   the National    Eligibility  cum
Entrance Test (NEET) for admission into Post Graduate Medical

                                 10
Course, on receipt of the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated
13.12.2012 intimated the National Board of Examination to conduct
entrance test for P.G. (Medical) Course for the State of Orissa and
further that the counseling would be conducted by P.G. (Medical)
Selection Committee. In Paragraph-20 of the counter affidavit,
relevant portion is stated as follows:
                   “xx xx The DMET, Odisha had moved the file for
            approval of the guidelines for admission to P.G.
            Courses on 11.04.2012 which was finally decided on
            29.04.2013 by the Government regarding the
            conditions/eligibility etc. for admission to the course,
            wherein it was decided that 3 years continuous service
            will be taken for consideration instead of five years for
            in-service doctors and the said decision of the
            Government was communicated along with the
            guideline to the DMET, Odisha on 27.05.2013. xx xx”
08.         It is also pertinent to mention herein that, in the course
of hearing of this case, it was brought to our notice that Hon’ble
Supreme Court had finally disposed of the batch of writ applications
by quashing the Regulation introducing the National Eligibility
Entrance Test (NEET) vide judgment dated 18.7.2013.
09.         In the light of the aforesaid circumstances, learned
counsel for the State has appended various documents including
note-sheets which clearly indicates that the various suggestions were
being considered by the State Government, in the respective
Ministries regarding redefining the eligibility criteria for various
reasons (including the fact that the challenge pending before the

                                 11
Hon’ble Supreme Court although various recommendations had been
made) but it ultimately culminated in a decision only on 21.5.2013
(erroneously noted as 21.5.2012) when Hon’ble Chief Minister signed
in the said file and communicated the said decision to the DMET,
Odisha under cover of letter dated 27.5.2013.
10.          Learned counsel for the intervenors, on the other hand,
vehemently contended that in the present facts and circumstances of
the case, there is neither any necessity nor any justification to
interfere with the impugned guideline framed by the State of Odisha.
As would be available from the counter affidavit of the State since in
the past, the seats reserved for “in-service candidates” by the State of
Odisha were going unfilled and remained vacant and since adequate
number of eligible candidates having 5 years of work experience in the
State were not being found, as a consequence a number of seats were
being left vacant which was thereafter being given to the “direct
candidates” and, therefore, no impediment is caused to the petitioners
who claims to have 5 years or more experience.
11.          It is further contended that the notification of the Medical
Council of India and the bulletin issued by the National Board of
Examination refers to “applicable laws prevailing in the State” and
there being no law prevailing in the State of Odisha, no infraction
thereof can be pleaded. At the very best, a prevailing practice or

                                 12
convention existed and such prevailing practice or convention cannot
take the place of “existing law” as stipulated in NBE’s instructions.
12.          It is submitted on behalf of the intervenor that in the
present facts situation of the case, the NBE did not issue any
prospectus and only issued instructions, pursuant to which all
applicants made their applications online. Therefore, in terms of the
directions issued by the NBE, the petitioners as well as intervenor
(who have completed “three years of work experience”) appeared at the
same examination. It is submitted that in the present case, there is no
change of rules of the game after the game has begun, since the State
had not framed any guideline or policy for admission for the year
2013. While the NBE conducted the examination, the State was at
liberty to frame its guidelines, prior to selection of candidates for
admission (counseling) and in the present case, the counseling is yet
to be made for admission into P.G. Degree course for 2013. The
guidelines of the State impugned herein would govern selection to be
made after framing of the guidelines and, therefore, the case laws
cited by the petitioners relating to change of the rules of the game
after the process of selection had begun, has no application. It is
averred that in the present case, in the absence of any guidelines or
policy of the State, all applicants i.e. the petitioners as well as
opposite parties appeared in the self-same entrance exam and,
therefore, their names finds mention in the merit list. But since

                                 13
counseling is yet to be conducted the issue of the impugned
guidelines by the State, prior to counseling, cannot make the said
guidelines retrospective in operation as alleged but prospective, since
the counseling was yet to be conducted.
13.          Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioners,
learned counsel for the State as well as the leaned counsel for the
intervenors, we are of the considered view that the main issue that
arises for consideration in the present case is, as to whether the
impugned     guidelines    framed   by   the  State  of   Odisha   and
communicated to the DMET on 27.5.2013 can be permitted to govern
admissions into P.G. Degree courses for “in-service candidates” for the
year 2013.
14.          In this respect, it would be important to take note of the
stand of the State as contained in the counter affidavit and in
particular, Paragraph-6 in which it is stated that the State
Government      was facing problems as the in-service Doctors having
minimum five years service were not sufficiently available and even if
available were not qualifying at the entrance examination for which
reason the State Government decided to reduce the period of service
in the eligibility of “in-service candidates” from five years to three
years. While this reason apparently forms the basis for the change of
policy of the State Government, while we find the reason behind such
decision to be germane and in the interest of the State, yet, the

                                  14
question remains as to whether such policy could cover admission for
the academic year 2013-14 or not?
15.           While the impugned guidelines in Clause F-2 defines that
“an in-service candidate is one who at the time of application”, is in
the regular employment in Government of Odisha. Similarly, in
Clause F-1 which defines that “a direct candidate is one at the time of
application.
16.           Since applications had been called for by the NBE
between 4th October 2012 to 12th November, 2012 i.e. before midnight
of 12th November 2012, the law prevailing at the time of submission of
application would alone be relevant and no subsequent law or policy.
Although    it   is  contended    by  the  State  that the   State  was
contemplating amendment to the eligibility criteria of “in-service
candidates” from five years to three years in the counter affidavit in
Paragraph-21, the stand of the State is unambiguous and clear. We
can do no better than to extract Paragraph-20 of the counter affidavit
of the State which is as follows:
                     “20. That, the State Government had not issued
              any guideline for allotment of candidates for Post
              Graduate (Medical) courses in the Govt. Medical
              Colleges of Odisha as the NEET (Post Graduate) for
              MD/MS/Post Graduate Diploma Courses 2013
              admission sessions which was challenged before the
              Hon’ble Supreme Court and the Hon’ble Supreme Court
              order dated 13.12.2012 in which the Hon’ble Supreme
              Court had given liberty to hold the examination and
              directed not to declare the results. The State
              Government though had taken a policy decision to hold

                                   15
              to the counseling only was able to issue the Guideline
              on 27.05.2013 after the order dated 13.05.2013 was
              passed wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court had lifted
              the bar imposed on 13.12.2012 and allowed the results
              already conducted to be declared to enable the
              students to take advantage of the same for the current
              year. But the decision was taken by the Government,
              regarding the guidelines for admission counseling for
              admission to the P.G. course, 2013. The DMET, Odisha
              had moved the file for approval of the guidelines for
              admission to P.G. courses on 11.04.2012 which was
              finally decided on 29.04.2013 by the Government
              regarding the conditions/eligibility etc. for admission to
              the course, where in it was decided that 3 years
              continuous service will be taken for consideration
              instead of five years for inservice doctors and the said
              decision of the Government was communicated along
              with the guideline to the DMET, Odisha on 27.05.2013
              in continuation to the earlier letter of the Government
              which was issued to DMET by the Government. xx xx”
17.           The aforesaid stand of the State in its counter affidavit
that the change of guideline was finally decided on 29.4.2013 is
clearly erroneous. From the documents appended to the counter
affidavit filed by the State under Annexure-F/2, it shows that on
29.4.2013 the Minister of Health and Family Welfare signed on the
note-sheet and thereafter the same was placed before the Hon’ble
Chief Minister, Odisha who signed on 21.5.2013 (erroneously noted
as 21.5.2012) and communicated only on 27.5.2013 to the DMET.
Therefore, until 27.5.2013, it cannot be said that any decision by the
State had been taken.
18.           In this respect, it is important to refer to the judgment of
this Court in the case of Bishnu Charan Mohanty v. State of Orissa
and others, AIR 1973 ORISSA 199, where this High Court after

                                 16
referring to various leading judgments of the Hon’ble Apex Court dealt
with the scope of Article 166(3) of the Constitution of India and
concluded that while Article 163(3) of the Constitution lays down that
“until such an order reaches the person concerned, it does not attain
any finality. It is open to Government even to recall a letter sent to
another office before it reaches the person concerned. When, however,
the order is communicated to the person concerned, the order
becomes final.”
             Therefore, the decision of the State Government though
signed by the Hon’ble Minister on 29.4.2013, was approved by the
Hon’ble Chief Minister on 21.5.2013 and communicated to the person
concerned i.e. DMET, Odisha on 27.5.2013 and, therefore, the date
27.5.2013 has to be held the date on which the order was given effect
to. Much prior thereto applications had been called for, examination
had been held and results had also been declared. The law that was
applicable to the State of Odisha, on the date of applications were
made prior to midnight of 12.12.2012 and such law and/or policy
prevailing at that time alone will govern the matter of admission for
PG (Degree) Course for the year 2013.
             We are further of the considered view that even though
the impugned guideline have been issued by the State prior to the
counseling for the year 2013, yet, the selection process having already
commenced      on   the   date  of  application  i.e. 12.11.2012,   the

                                  17
law/policy/guideline as it prevailed on the last date of application
would govern the case at hand.
19.           Taking into consideration of the judgments of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Secretary, A.P.Public Service
Commission (supra), K.Manjusree (supra) and Mohd. Raisul Islam
and others (supra), it is well settled principle of law that once the
process of selection has started, the prescribed selection criteria
cannot be changed and further that, introducing of any change into
eligibility criteria after the selection process has commenced, would
amount to changing the game after the game has been played. It is
also further well settled that in the present case, the selection process
commenced from 12th November, 2012 (i.e. the last date of making
online application) and therefore, any requirement/selection has to be
made on the basis of the process/ policy/law existing on the said
date. We are of the further considered view that while the State is at
liberty to change its policy and we are not required to comment upon
the justifiability and reasonability of such a change of policy. We are
of the view that the impugned guidelines/policy would operate only
prospectively i.e. from 27.5.2013 for future examinations that may be
conducted but insofar as admission of P.G.(Medical) Course for “in-
service candidates are concerned for the year 2013, Clause-F-2 of the
impugned guidelines cannot be made to apply to such admissions

                                        18
      into the seats reserved for “in-service candidates” for the year
      2013-14.
      20.             Accordingly, all the writ petitions are allowed with
      directions to the opposite parties 1, 2 and 3 to only consider the
      candidates having five years service experience, as “in-service
      candidates” for admission into P.G. (Medical) Course 2013 and
      consequently, we declare that Clause-F-2 of the impugned guidelines
      dated 27.5.2013 shall not apply for admission of “in-service
      candidates” for P.G. (Medical) Courses for the year 2013. Since the
      Hon’ble Supreme Court has directed conclusion of counseling on or
      before 31st July, 2013, we direct opposite parties to act forthwith and
      complete the admission process within the period as directed by the
      Hon’ble Supreme Court.
                                                        Sd/-
                                                    ……………..………
                                                    C.Nagappan, C.J.
I.Mahanty, J.         I agree.
                                                        Sd/-
                                                     ……………………
                                                      I.Mahanty, J.
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
     24th July, 2013/RKS


