                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     Criminal Appeal No. 171 of 2008
                            Sri Javad Uzir,
                            Son of Bhedelu Uzir,
                            Resident of Village and P.O. Halogaon,
                            P.S. Soulkuchi, Dist. Kamrup, Assam.
                                                             ----- Accused/Appellant
                                        – VERSUS –
                            The State of Assam
                                                             ----- Respondent.
                                              BEFORE
                 Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                  Advocate for the appellant        : Mr. N Upadhyay, Sr. Advocate.
                  Advocate for Respondent            : Mr. BJ Dutta, Addl. P.P.
                   Date of hearing and Judgment & Order ::            25th of July, 2017.
                                JUDGMENT & ORDER (Oral)
                  This appeal, under Section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal
       Procedure, is directed against the judgment and order dated 22-08-
       2008, passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge (FTC) No. 4,
       Kamrup, Guwahati, in Sessions Case No. 353/2007, convicting the
       accused-appellant under Section 436 of the IPC and sentencing him to
       suffer rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in
       default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 3 months.
       2.         I have heard Mr. N Upadhyay, learned counsel appearing on
       behalf of accused-appellant, and Mr. BJ Dutta, learned Additional
       Public Prosecutor, Assam.
       Crl. A. No. 171 of 2008                                                        Page 1 of 6

3.         The prosecution case, as unfolded during the trial, is that on 01-03-
2006, at about 1.30 p.m., the accused-appellant, Javad Uzir, came to
the house of his brother, Amrit Uzir, and misbehaved his father. The
accused-appellant was compelled to get out from the house of his
aforesaid brother. The accused-appellant took one iron spade and
threatened to commit murder. The brother of the accused-appellant
appeared at the place of occurrence at the time and when he
prevented the accused-appellant from assaulting with spade, the
accused-appellant threatened to set ablaze their house, which he
ultimately did. Their house along with all articles inside, were completely
set in fire by the accused-appellant.
4.         On receipt of the FIR, on the above facts, Sualkuchi Police Station
registered a case, under Sections 448/436/427 of the IPC, investigated
into it, collected evidence, arrested the accused, and finally, submitted
the charge-sheet against the accused-appellant for commission of
offences, under Sections 448/436/427 of the IPC.
5.         The Additional Sessions Judge (FTC) No. 4, Kamrup, Guwahati,
after exhausting all the procedures, framed a formal charge against the
accused-appellant, under Section 436 of the IPC to which the accused-
appellant pleaded innocence.
6.         Although the accused-appellant did not lead any evidence in
support of his case of denial, yet he had taken the plea of denial in his
statement, recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
8.         On completion of the trial, the accused-appellant was convicted
and sentenced by the learned trial Court, as indicated above.
9.         The prosecution examined as many as 6 witnesses, including the
Investigating Police Officer, who were subjected to cross-examination by
the defence.
10.        The point for determination in this case is whether the accused-
appellant committed mischief by setting the house used for dwelling or
Crl. A. No. 171 of 2008                                              Page 2 of 6

custody of property of the informant in fire intending or knowing that he
was likely to cause destruction of the house used for human dwelling or
for custody of property of the informant.
11.        In a case under Section 436 IPC, the prosecution is required to
establish that the house in which the accused-appellant set fire, was a
human dwelling house and that the accused-appellant set fire in the
said house with intention or knowing that he was likely to cause loss or
damage to the person or property in the said house and thereby caused
injury or wrongful loss to the property of the informant.
12.        Let us, now, scan the evidence on record to see whether the
prosecution has been able to establish the alleged offence committed
by the accused-appellant, under Section 436 of the IPC.
13.        The evidence of PW4 appears to be important in this case in the
sense that she is the informant and she claims to be the eye witness to
the occurrence that took place prior to setting fire in the house. Her
evidence makes it appear that at about 1.00/1.30 p.m. on the date of
occurrence, there took place a quarrel with the accused-appellant in
which he used abusive language. The accused-appellant rebuked his
parents in the house of PW4. He even took a dao and a spade from the
room of his father and attempted to assault her husband, Amrit Uzir,
examined as PW5. On being resisted by PW5/Amrit Uzir, husband of PW4,
the accused-appellant could not assault them including their parents.
Thereafter, the accused-appellant went to their farm house, unlocked
the door with the dao in his hand, brought out the match box therefrom
and set the said house in fire.
14.        PW5, husband of PW4/informant also categorically deposed that
the accused-appellant set the house in fire. He and his wife, PW4 went to
the place of occurrence and found his house was already damaged by
fire. The fire caused loss of about Rs. 90,000/- to Rs. 1,00,000/-.
Crl. A. No. 171 of 2008                                             Page 3 of 6

15.        The evidence of PW4 to the effect that the accused-appellant
rebuked his parents in their house is corroborated by PW5 while he
speaks in the same tune to say that the accused-appellant abused
them including their parents at about 1.00/1.30 p.m. on the date of
occurrence.
 16.       The evidence of PW1, Paresh Bhandar Kayastha makes it appear
that the house in which the informant used to stay along with other
property, like clothes, utensils etc., was set in fire. After the fire, nothing
could be recovered from the house. The evidence reveals that the
house, which was set in fire, was thatched house for human dwelling
and the other adjacent house were meant for custody of property.
PW1claims to have witnessed the occurrence of setting fire of the house
by the accused-appellant.
17.        In his cross-examination, he also appears to have asserted that at
the time of setting fire of the house, he was somewhere around the said
house. He also witnessed a dao and a match box in the hand of the
accused-appellant. He was very categorical while stating that he saw
the accused-appellant setting fire in the house.
18.        The evidence of PW3 makes it appear that at the time of
occurrence, he was at his own house, which is situated at about 200 feet
away from the place of occurrence. He heard the accused-appellant
raising hue and cry in his house with a dao in his hand and threatening
to set fire in the house of PW5/Amrit Uzir. After some time, PW4 and PW5
saw the house burning. At his arrival at the place of occurrence, he did
not see the accused-appellant there. PW2 although did not state
anything very specifically about setting fire of the house by the accused-
appellant, yet it appears from his evidence that he implicated the
accused-appellant with setting fire in the house of the informant/PW4.
19.        PW6 is the Investigating Officer, whose evidence is of routine
nature in respect of investigation of the case.
Crl. A. No. 171 of 2008                                             Page 4 of 6

20.        It appears from the above evidence that PW1 saw the accused-
appellant setting fire in the house and he also saw the accused-
appellant with a dao and a match box in his hand. Corroborating the
evidence in respect of accused-appellant raising hue and cry, holding a
dao, near the place of occurrence makes it convincingly appear that
he had set the house in fire. This conclusion of this Court is also based on
the fact that there is no evidence to discredit the evidence of PW1 in
respect of the fact that the accused-appellant was holding a dao and
a match box at the relevant time of occurrence and PW1 himself saw
him setting fire in the house.
21.        PW3 appears to have stated about the circumstances, which
point to the irresistible conclusion that it was none, but the accused-
appellant, who had set the house in fire alongwith his evidence that the
accused-appellant was found raising hue and cry with a dao in his hand
near the place of occurrence, which fact tallies with evidence of PW1
that the accused-appellant was holding a dao and a match box in his
hand and saw the accused-appellant setting fire of the house.
22.        Such evidence is further strengthened by the undisturbed
evidence of PW4 and PW5 that immediately before the occurrence took
place, the accused-appellant went to the house, had quarrels and even
attempted to assault them including the parents of PW5.
23.        The eye witness’s account of PW1 supported the circumstances
narrated by PW2 and PW3, as indicated above, leads to the conclusion
that it was none, but the accused-appellant, who had set fire in the
house. There is no dispute at the Bar that the said house was used for
keeping property like utensils, clothes etc of PW4 and PW5 as well as for
stay of the PW4 and PW5 and the adjacent houses were meant for
keeping straw and other properties of the family.
24.        Therefore, the above evidence make it appear that to satisfy and
to attract the provisions of Section 436 of the IPC, the prosecution has
Crl. A. No. 171 of 2008                                            Page 5 of 6

been able to prove that it was the dwelling house, which was set in fire
by accused-appellant. That being so, in the considered view of this
Court, the judgment and order passed by the learned trial Court, as
indicated above, needs no interference by this Court.
25.        Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
26.        Send down the LCR along with a copy of this judgment and
order.
                                                              JUDGE
Paul
Crl. A. No. 171 of 2008                                    Page 6 of 6


