                                    ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                                                     CRLMC No. 134 of 2012
           An application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
                                                                 ---------------
           Hrudananda Sahu                                                                         …          Petitioner
                                                                  Versus
           State of Orissa (Vigilance)                                                             …          Opp. Party
                      For Petitioner        :          M/s. S.K. Mund, H.K. Mund, A.K. Dei
                                                                  and J.B. Sahu, Advocates.
                      For Opp. Party                   :          Mr. Prasanna Kumar Pani, Addl. Standing
                                                                  Counsel (Vigilance).
                                                                 ---------------
           PRESENT :
                                 THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE C.R. DASH
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                            Date of Judgment                  :    09.10.2013
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C.R. Dash, J.                    In this application under Section 482, Cr.P.C., the petitioner has
           invoked the inherent jurisdiction of this Court for quashing of the entire
           proceeding initiated against him in the Court of learned Special Judge
           (Vigilance), Keonjhar in T.R. Case No.84 of 2011 for alleged offence under
           Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) and Section 7 of the Prevention of
           Corruption Act, 1988.
           2.                    One Laxman Kumar Mahakud is the informant. Ac.2.34 decs. of
           land in mouza Jamukundi under Barbil Tahsil vide Plot Nos.600, 601 and 602

                                         2
appertaining to Khata No.2 stood recorded in the name of one Abhi Mahakud,
who happens to be the elder brother of the father of the informant. The
informant applied for demarcation of the aforesaid land before the Tahsildar,
Barbil. Accordingly the aforesaid lands were demarcated by the present
petitioner and his peon named Ram Chandra Jena (co-accused) on
20.01.2002. On that day, i.e. 20.01.2002, the informant sought for supply of
the trace map and identification copy from the petitioner, who allegedly
demanded Rs.300/- (rupees three hundred) as bribe for supply of the said
documents. The informant expressed his inability to pay that much of amount,
but the petitioner asked him (informant) to come to his (petitioner’s) office on
02.02.2002 with the amount. The informant with much difficulty arranged
Rs.300/- and filed F.I.R. on 02.02.2002 in Balasore Vigilance Police Station,
vide Balasore Vigilance P.S. Case No.5 of 2002, alleging therein about illegal
demand raised by the petitioner for supply of copies. After registration of the
F.I.R., a trap was laid during which the tainted money was received by the
peon Ram Chandra Jena and the same was recovered from him during the
trap by vigilance officials. Aforesaid Ram Chandra Jena (co-accused) on being
challenged, gave out that he received the tainted money of Rs.300/- (three
hundred) from the informant as per the instruction of the present petitioner.
The trap report, detection report, etc. were prepared witnesses were examined
and after completion of the investigation, the Vigilance Police submitted Final
Form observing therein as follows :-
                       “Since the amount involved is scanty and
               considering the process of detection, the case is
               referred to accused persons’ authority for regular
               departmental action for initiating departmental
               proceeding for award of major penalty which may meet
               the ends of justice.”

                                        3
3.             After submission of the Final Report, learned Special Judge
(Vigilance) issued notice to the complainant / informant for filing his objections,
if any. In pursuance of the aforesaid notice, the complainant / informant filed a
memo in the aforesaid Court mentioning therein that he had no objection if the
Final Form is accepted. However, the learned Special Judge (Vigilance),
Balasore (as the case was pending there then) by his order dated 27.04.2011
chose not to accept the Final Report after perusal of the records of the case by
observing thus :-
                      “…..law is well settled that pendency of a
               departmental proceeding or where a departmental
               proceeding is contemplated, in either of the case, the
               criminal case shall run for penal action against the
               persons concerned, who has committed any offence
               under any penal law.
                      In this circumstance this court not in a position to
               conceive as to how the I.O. has submitted final form on
               flimsy ground. Hence let an explanation be called for
               from the I.O. namely A.K. Dash as to how he had
               submitted the final form against the accused persons
               and to justify his stand. Let copy of this order also be
               sent to the S.P. Vigilance, Balasore Division, Balasore
               as well as the Director General of Vigilance for their
               information and necessary action.
                      Put up this case record on 20.05.2011 awaiting
               the explanation of the I.O. concerned and for further
               orders on the matter of sanction and cognizance.”
Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the S.P. (Vigilance), Balasore, vide his
forwarding letter dated 19.05 2011, submitted the report before the Collector,
Keonjhar for according sanction. By order dated 22.06.2011 Collector and
District Magistrate, Keonjhar accorded sanction for prosecution so far as the
petitioner is concerned and vide order dated 07.06.2011, Tahasildar, Barbil
accorded sanction so far as the prosecution of co-accused Ram Chandra Jena

                                         4
(Peon) is concerned. After receipt of the sanction order against both the
accused persons learned Special Judge (Vigilance) vide order dated
05.09.2011 took cognizance of the offence and issued process. Now, in this
petition under Section 482, Cr.P.C., the petitioner has impugned the entire
proceeding.
4.              From the materials on record, it is found that the petitioner on
20.01.2002 demarcated the land applied for by the informant and on that day
he is alleged to have demanded gratification of Rs.300/- when the informant
sought for supply of the copy of the Trace Map and the Identification copy. The
informant expressed his inability to pay the amount demanded by the
petitioner. The petitioner asked the informant to meet him in his office on
02.02.2002 with the demanded amount to take the Trace Map and
Identification copy. On the basis of the F.I.R. lodged on 02.02.2002, the trap
was laid and the informant along with the witnesses and Vigilance Officials
proceeded to the office of the petitioner. The informant saw co-accused Ram
Chandra Jena coming out of the office. He (informant) asked co-accused Ram
Chandra Jena regarding whereabouts of the petitioner. Co-accused Ram
Chandra Jena said that the petitioner is not there in the office and he had
asked him to receive Rs.300/- brought by him (informant). The informant
thereafter paid Rs.300/- to co-accused Ram Chandra Jena and he was trapped
while taking the aforesaid tainted money.
5.              Mr. Pani, learned Additional Standing Counsel appearing for the
Vigilance Department strenuously submits that the petitioner having demanded
illegal gratification from the informant, such an act itself is culpable under
Section 7 of the P.C. Act, 1988. He relies on the case of Bhaskar vrs. State
of Maharashtra and others, II (2008) CCR 197 to substantiate his contention.

                                         5
               Learned counsel for the petitioner on the other hand submits that
the informant being an accomplice to the transaction, his evidence is not
sufficient without any corroboration in material particular and the chance of
conviction in the case is very bleak. It is further submitted by learned counsel
for the petitioner that, in the present case the materials on record are not
sufficient to prove the essential ingredients of the offence, i.e. the factum of
demand, acceptance and recovery.
6.             In an offence under Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, the points requiring proof are -
        (i)    that, the accused at the time of the offence was, or
               expected to be, a public servant;
        (ii)   that, he accepted or retained or agreed to accept, or
               attempted to obtain from some person a gratification;
        (iii)  that, such gratification was not a legal remuneration due
               to him;
        (iv)   that, he accepted such gratification as a motive or
               reward, proof of which is essential for –
               (a)     doing or forbearing to do an official act, or
               (b)     showing or forbearing to show favour or disfavour
                       to someone in exercise of his official functions, or
               (c)     rendering or attempting to render any service, or
                       disservice to someone, with the legislative or
                       executive government, or with any public servant.
7.             From the aforesaid ingredients, it is clear that acceptance or
retention of the bribe money, agreement to accept the bribe money, or attempt
to obtain bribe money are the essential pre-requisites or the essence of the

                                          6
offence under Section 7 of the P.C. Act, 1988. The case of Bhaskar (supra),
on which Mr. Pani, learned Addl. Standing Counsel (Vigilance Department)
placed reliance, is a case where there was agreement by the accused to
accept the bribe. In the present case, however, the fact in Bhaskar’s case is
distinguishable. The petitioner in the present case on 20.01.2002 demanded
bribe from the informant. The informant expressed his inability to pay the
amount. The petitioner then asked the informant to come to his office with the
bribe money of Rs.300/- on 02.02.2002. There has been no agreement at any
point of time between the petitioner and the informant for acceptance of the
bribe. Where the statute defines the offence of bribery by an officer to be the
act of agreeing to receive a bribe, a mere offer by an official to accept the bribe
from another, unaccompanied by the agreement of the person solicited is not
criminal. In the present case, if the entire allegation is taken into consideration,
it is seen that there has been demand or offer by the petitioner to receive
Rs.300/- towards bribe, but there has been no agreement by the informant to
pay that amount, as he has expressed his inability to pay that much of amount.
Therefore, the case of Bhaskar (as relied on supra by Mr. Pani, learned Addl.
Standing Counsel, Vigilance Department) is not applicable to the fact of the
case.
8.             Further it is seen that, Section 7 speaks of the “attempt” to obtain
a bribe as being in itself an offence. Mere demand or solicitation, therefore, by
a public servant amounts to commission of an offence under Section 7 of the
P.C. Act. The word “attempt” is to imply no more than a mere solicitation,
which, again may be made as effectually in implicit or in explicit terms. Viewed
from this perspective, mere demand of Rs.300/- by the petitioner from the
informant constitutes the offence under Section 7 of the P.C. Act.

                                          7
9.              Hon’ble Supreme Court, in the case of Panalal Damodar Rathi
vrs. State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1979 SC 1191, has held thus :-
                        “There could be no doubt that the evidence of the
                complainant should be corroborated in material
                particulars. After introduction of Section 165-A of the
                I.P.C. making the person, who offers bribe, guilty of
                abetment of bribery the complainant cannot be placed
                on any better footing than that of an accomplice and
                corroboration in material particulars connecting the
                accused with the crime has to be insisted upon……”
                Section 12 of the P.C. Act, 1988 is analogous to Section 165-A,
I.P.C. Abetment of offence defined in Section 7 or Section 11 of the P.C. Act,
1988 is a distinct offence under Section 12 thereof and a bribe giver in
umpteen number of cases has been held to be an abettor. In the present case,
so far as demand or solicitation of bribe of Rs.300/- by the petitioner is
concerned, there is admittedly no corroborative materials except the statement
of the informant. Informant is the sole witness so far as such demand or
solicitation is concerned. Admittedly, the bribe money has not been received
by the petitioner, but the same has been received by the second accused Ram
Chandra Jena on the ground that the petitioner had told him to receive the
amount. In view of such fact, the trap in the case so far as the present
petitioner is concerned has failed. There being no corroborative materials on
record except the statement of the informant on the point of demand /
solicitation of bribe of Rs.300/- by the petitioner on 20.01.2002, the chance of
conviction of the petitioner in the event of a trial is very very bleak.
10.             Taking into consideration all the aforesaid facts and especially
the defects in the process of detection, the I.O. in his wisdom had rightly
submitted the Final Form, to the acceptance of which the informant had also no
objection.     Learned Special Judge (Vigilance) however proceeded on a

                                           8
different footing and held that initiation or pendency of a Departmental
Proceeding is not a bar for trial of the petitioner before the criminal court.
Learned Special Judge (Vigilance), as found from his order dated 27.04.2011,
has not at all taken into consideration the defects in the process of the
detection and other inherent improbabilities in the prosecution case which the
I.O. by virtue of his experience had the wisdom to sense.
11.             In the premises as aforesaid, the impugned proceeding is
quashed and the CRLMC is accordingly allowed.
                                              ……………………
                                               C.R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 09th day of October, 2013. / S.K. Parida.


