             ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                  Jail Criminal Appeal No. 133 of 2000
From the judgment and order of sentence dated 10.09.1999 passed by
Shri N.K. Rajguru Mohapatra. Sessions Judge, Sundargarh in
Sessions Trial No. 151 of 1997, under Sections 302/34, I.P.C.
                                            ----------
Sahadev @ Mangalu Munda and two others                                  …        Appellants
                                  Versus
State of Orissa                                                         …       Respondent
         For Appellants             :         Mr. Rajanikanta Sahoo, Advocate.
         For Respondent             :         Addl. Standing Counsel.
                                             ----------
PRESENT:
       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                              AND
            THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE C.R. DASH
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Date of Hearing : 18.08.2010                        Date of Judgment : 18.08.2010
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.                This appeal arises out of the judgment and order of
sentence dated 10.09.1999 passed by learned Sessions judge,
Sundargarh in Sessions Trial No.151 of 1997. Learned trial court
found all the three appellants guilty of the offence under Section
302/34, I.P.C. and accordingly sentenced each of them to suffer
imprisonment for life.

                                   2
2.           A compendium of the prosecution case is as follows –
             The occurrence happened at about 2 a.m. in the night of
21/22.04.1997 in village Upurda under Bonai P.S. Informant (P.W.1)
happens to be the brother of the deceased Manu Kishan. He was in
his house. He heard ‘hulla’ of one Kalu Kishan (P.W.12) of his
village shouting that the deceased Manu Kishan is running away after
assaulting him. On hearing such ‘hulla’ he (P.W.1) came out of his
house and found Lecha Kishan (A-2), Kandara Kishan and Hari
Kishan (all are sons of P.W.12) were searching for the deceased, who,
by that time had hidden himself in a bush behind his (deceased’s)
dwelling house. In the meantime Sahadev @ Mangalu Munda (A-1)
and Raghu Munda (A-3), who belong to village Belkudar situated on
the other side of the river Brahmani, reached there with a ‘budia’.
They along with the aforesaid sons of Kalu Kishan (P.W.12) dragged
the deceased out of the bush from the place of his concealment and
assaulted him, confronting him as to where he has concealed their
fishing nets.    Thereafter all of them forcibly took the deceased
towards the river. In the next day morning the dead body of the
deceased was found on the other side of the village. The informant
(P.W.1) lodged report in Bonai P.S. The then O.I.C. of Bonai P.S.
(P.W.14) registered the case and took up investigation.          After
completion of the investigation, he filed charge-sheet implicating the
accused persons for the offence punishable under Sections
302/201/34, I.P.C.

                                   3
3.           Prosecution has examined 14 witnesses to prove the
charge. P.Ws. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9 and 12 are the eye-witnesses to the
occurrence, out of whom P.Ws. 2, 3, 9 and 12 have turned hostile and
admittedly their evidence is of no avail to the prosecution. Besides
P.W.13, who is the Medical Officer, and P.W.14, who is the
Investigating Officer, all other witnesses are witnesses to the seizure
of wearing apparels of the accused persons at different points of time,
seizure of wearing apparels of the deceased on production after post-
mortem examination, seizure of the axe (‘budia’), (M.O.-VII), at the
instance of accused Raghu Munda (A-3).
             The defence plea is one of complete denial.
4.           Learned trial court has returned the finding of guilt of the
appellants under Section 302/34, I.P.C. on the basis of the following
evidence –
      (i)    P.Ws.1, 7 and 8 can be believed so far as a part of the
             occurrence is concerned;
      (ii)   presence of blood stains of human origin of ‘AB’ group
             on the wearing apparels of Lecha Kisan (A-2) and
             Sahadev @ Mangalu Munda (A-1) and their failure to
             explain regarding presence of such blood stains on their
             wearing apparels;
      (iii)  seizure of the axe (M.O.-VII) at the instance of Raghu
             Munda (A-3).
5.           Learned counsel for the appellants submits that P.Ws. 7
and 8 having been contradicted on material particulars and the

                                     4
contradiction being major in nature, their evidence cannot be believed
to sustain the conviction of the appellants; P.W.1 having given
prevaricative evidence regarding his presence and regarding the very
genesis of the prosecution case, his evidence also cannot be believed.
It is further submitted that if evidence of P.Ws.1, 7 and 8 are taken out
of consideration, there is nothing on record, which can be held to be
sufficient to sustain the charge.
6.             Learned Addl. Govt. Advocate on the other hand
supports the impugned judgment and submits that even if P.Ws.1, 7
and 8 are disbelieved, the two circumstances of seizure of the axe
(M.O.-VII) at the instance of Raghu Munda (A-3) and presence of
blood stains of human origin of ‘AB’ group on the wearing apparels
of Sahadev @ Mangalu Munda (A-1) and Lecha Kisan (A-2) can be
made the basis of conviction.
7.             On perusal of the evidence of P.Ws. 7 and 8 and the
impugned judgment, it is found that learned trial court, in paragraph-7
of the judgment, while dealing with evidence of P.Ws. 7 and 8, has
specifically observed thus –
               “… The only contradiction as available in their
               statement under section 161, Cr.P.C. is that they
               stated to police that on hearing the hullah they
               had not come out of the house but from the
               shouting they had gathered that the accused
               persons were taking their deceased son. …”
The aforesaid contradiction has been held to be not a major
contradiction by the learned trial court. We are not able to accept the
view of learned Trial Court on this aspect. In the trial both the

                                    5
witnesses, i.e., P.Ws. 7 and 8 are testified to have seen the occurrence.
Before the police, during investigation, however, they had stated that
they had not come out of the house but from the shouting they had
gathered that the accused persons were taking their deceased son.
They were contradicted on this aspect under Section 145 of the
Evidence Act. Both the aforesaid statements, i.e., one made before
the police during investigation and another made during trial, cannot
be reconciled.      Learned Trial Court, however, has taken into
consideration, the improvements made by both P.Ws. 7 and 8 during
trial over their statements recorded by the police to justify that their
evidence in court explains as to under what circumstance, they might
have made such a statement before the police. The aforesaid
contradiction in the evidence of P.Ws. 7 and 8, as obtained under
Section 145 of the evidence Act, is a major contradiction inasmuch as
it affects the very basis of their evidence as eye witnesses. We are
ready to accept that P.Ws. 7 and 8 are tribals and they are rustic. We
are also ready to accept variance in their evidence on the fringes but
not at the core. We are also ready to accept discrepancies in details or
contradictions in narrations so far as their evidence is concerned. But
evidence of P.Ws. 7 and 8 in view of the contradiction as discussed,
which militate against the veracity of the core of their testimony,
cannot be accepted giving them allowance on the ground of their
illiteracy. Therefore, we are of the view that no reliance can be placed
on the evidence of P.Ws. 7 and 8.
8.            Coming to the evidence of P.W.1, it is found that he has
given prevaricative testimony so far as his presence at the time of

                                     6
occurrence is concerned. In his examination-in-chief he has testified
that all the accused persons forcibly took the deceased Manu Kishan
from his house.      Such evidence is totally in contradiction to the
genesis of the prosecution case, which speaks of raising of ‘hulla’ by
one Kalu Kishan, which attracted P.W.1 to come out from his house
to find the accused persons dragging the deceased from out of the
bush, where he was hiding himself.         In the cross-examination on
behalf of the accused Sahadev @ Mangalu Kishan he has testified that
the accused persons assaulted the deceased Manu Kishan near the
river and he was in his house at that time. He has further testified that
the river is at a distance of 100 cubits away from his house. In his
examination-in-chief he has testified that immediately after dragging
the deceased from his house, the accused persons assaulted the
deceased by means of axe (‘budia’) and stone and thereafter they
dragged him to the river side and threw him inside the river; thereafter
they threw his dead body into a ditch near village Belkudar. Again in
paragraph-5 of his cross-examination he has testified that he was in
his house when the occurrence took place and the accused persons
took his brother from the house and he has seen the accused persons
assaulting his brother in the night. If the evidence of P.W.1 is read in
its entirety, conclusion is irresistible that he is giving prevaricative
testimony so far as his presence at the time of assault and factum of
assault on his deceased brother and place of assault on his deceased
brother are concerned. Such conduct of P.W.1 makes us to disbelieve
his evidence.

                                   7
9.           Coming to the circumstance of seizure of the axe (M.O.-
VII) at the instance of Raghu Munda (A-3), it is found from the
discussion in the impugned judgment at paragraph-9 that most of the
witnesses to the factum of seizure have not supported the prosecution
case. There are also discrepancies regarding the factum of seizure of
the weapon of offence at the instance of Raghu Munda (A-3). The
chemical examination report (Ext.22) speaks of no presence of human
blood on the axe alleged to have been seized at the instance of Raghu
Munda (A-3). In view of such fact, we are of the view that this
circumstance pressed by the prosecution cannot be held to be one
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act and it is of no avail so far as the
prosecution is concerned. The lone circumstance that remains for
consideration is presence of human blood of ‘AB’ group on the
wearing apparels of Lecha Kisan (A-2) and Sahadev @ Mangalu
Munda (A-1). There is nothing on record to show the grouping of
blood of the aforesaid convicts/appellants. Further it is found from
the chemical examination report (Ext.22) that all the wearing apparels
seized from the accused persons and the wearing apparels of the
deceased seized on production by the accompanying Constable were
sent for chemical examination in one parcel consisting of one
cardboard box. When the wearing apparels of the deceased and the
accused persons had been sent in one cardboard box and there is no
evidence to the effect that the wearing apparels of the accused were
sealed separately and the wearing apparels of the deceased were also
sealed separately and when there is no evidence regarding blood
group of the appellants concerned, we are of the view that this
circumstance cannot be held to be of any avail to the prosecution.

                                    8
10.          In view of our discussions supra, the order of conviction
of the appellants under Section 302/34, I.P.C. is set aside. They be
released from custody forthwith, if their detention is not required in
connection with any other case.
             The Jail Criminal Appeal is accordingly allowed.
                                       …………………..
                                       L. Mohapatra, J.
                                       ………………….
                                        C.R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 18th day of August, 2010. /Parida.


