                         ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                                   Jail Criminal Appeal No. 74 of 2003
            Arising out of the order of conviction and sentence dated 27.06.2003
            passed by Shri M .K. Mohanty, learned Sessions Judge, Mayurbhanj
            in S.T. Case No.46 of 2000, under Section 302, I.P.C.
                                                        ----------
            Debendra Sidu                                         …        Appellant
                                              Versus
            State of Orissa                                       …       Respondent
                              For Appellant :            Mr. Arunrendra Mohanty.
                              For Respondent :           Mr. Sangram Das, Addl. Standing Counsel.
                                                                  ----------
            PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                                          AND
                        THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE C.R. DASH
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Date of argument & judgment : 17.04.2012
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C.R. Dash, J.                 This appeal is directed against the judgment of
            conviction and order of sentence dated 27.06.2003 passed by learned
            Sessions Judge, Mayurbhanj in Sessions Trial Case No.46 of 2000
            convicting the appellant under Section 302, I.P.C. and sentencing him
            to suffer imprisonment for life.
            2.                The occurrence happened at about 11.00 A.M. on
            09.11.1999 in front of the house of the appellant. The prosecution case

                                     2
is to the effect that, the appellant was suspecting the deceased to have
killed his (appellant’s) daughter by practicing sorcery. At the relevant
time the appellant was preparing to bury his deceased daughter in
presence of Dubraj Sidu(P.W.3) and Harish Chandra Sidu(P.W.4).
The appellant at that time dealt an axe blow to the deceased causing
her instantaneous death. On the basis of the F.I.R. lodged by
Laxmidhar Sidu (P.W.1), who happens to be the brother of the
deceased, the case was registered and after completion of
investigation, the appellant was charge-sheeted for offence under
Section 302, I.P.C.
3.            The prosecution examined twelve witnesses to prove the
charge. P.W.1 is the informant and brother of the deceased. P.Ws.3
and 4 are the eye witnesses to the occurrence. P.W.2 is another
brother of the deceased and he is also a post-occurrence witness like
P.W.1. P.W.5 is the wife of P.W.2. P.W. 6 is the constable, who took
the dead body for post-mortem examination. P.W.7 is a witness, who
had accompanied P.W.1 to the Police Station at the time of lodging of
the F.I.R. and saw the appellant appearing in the Police Station
holding the weapon of offence (M.O.-I). P.Ws. 8 and 9 are witnesses
to the seizure of weapon (M.O.-I) on production by the appellant on
his voluntary appearance in the Police Station. P.W.10 is a post-
occurrence witness. P.W.12 is the Medical Officer, who conducted
autopsy on the dead body of the deceased. P.W.11 is the Investigating
Officer.
4.            The defence plea is one of complete denial but none was
examined by the defence.

                                     3
5.            Learned counsel for the appellant submits that P.W.3
having testified in his cross-examination that he had already left the
spot by the time of occurrence, he cannot be believed as eye witness
to the occurrence and conviction of the appellant on the basis of his
testimony is not sustainable in the eye of law. Learned Additional
Standing Counsel on the other hand supports the impugned judgment.
6.              Perusal of the evidence on record shows that P.Ws.3
and 4 were examined as eye witnesses to the occurrence out of whom
P.W.4 is the brother of the appellant. As P.W.4 turned hostile in
course of his examination in court, he was cross-examined by the
prosecution under Section 154 of the Evidence Act. After such fate of
the evidence of P.W.4, the prosecution is left with the evidence of
P.W.3, who remains to be the sole eye witness to the occurrence.
P.W.3 in his evidence has testified that he was there in the house of
the appellant to help him to cremate the dead body of his daughter. He
has further testified that Harish Chandra Sidu(P.W.4) was also present
with him and they were digging a pit in the graveyard for the purpose
of burial of the dead body. He (P.W.3) has specifically testified that
the appellant killed the deceased Suryamani with the help of (M.O.-I)
in his presence; Suryamani died in front of the house of the appellant.
There has been no cross-examination of P.W.3 to elicit any
contradiction which may assume relevance under Section 145 of the
Evidence Act. In his cross-examination P.W.3 has testified that he
was present in the house of the appellant till 9.00 A.M. He has further
testified that the burial place is situated in front of the house of the
appellant. Taking clue from the aforesaid answer of P.W.3 in his
cross-examination it is submitted by learned counsel for the appellant

                                     4
that when P.W.3 ipse dixit has testified that the occurrence happened
at about 12.00 (noon) A.M. in front of the house of the appellant, how
could he happened to witness the occurrence, if he was there in the
house of the appellant till 9.00 A.M.
7.           We are constrained to say here that in a murder trial, time
and space assume less relevance if there is a ring of truth in the
evidence taken as a whole. The answer of P.W.3 in cross-examination
regarding his presence till 9.00 A.M. relates to “in the house”. The
house of the appellant is not the spot which is situated according to
P.W.3 in front of the house of the appellant. In his cross-examination
he (P.W.3) has testified that he was there in the house of the appellant
till 9.00 A.M., so the reference “in the house” may not be understood
as spot and cannot be stretched to mean that P.W.3 had already left
the spot by 9.00 A.M. It is the evidence of P.W.3 that Harish Chandra
Sidu (P.W.4) was present with him and was helping him in digging a
pit. When they were digging the pit at the spot for burial of the
deceased daughter of the appellant, the occurrence had happened. In
view of such fact, P.W.3 cannot be disbelieved on the basis of
aforesaid facts as obtained in his cross-examination.
8.           Harish Chandra Sidu (P.W.4) has turned hostile. Even if
his evidence to the extent he has turned hostile is eschewed it is there
in his evidence to shows that P.W.3 and he himself were there in the
house of the appellant to dig the pit for burial of the deceased
daughter of the appellant. Such a fact lends ample corroboration to the
evidence of P.W.3 on the point of his presence at the spot. There are
other evidence of post-occurrence witnesses like P.Ws.1, 2 and 5, who

                                    5
came to the spot on being informed by the minor daughter of the
deceased about the occurrence and saw the dead body lying there at
the spot. There is evidence of P.Ws.7 and 8 to show that the appellant
on his own volition appeared at the Police Station and produced the
weapon of offence (M.O.-I), which was stained with blood. Though
confession of the appellant before the police in presence of the
aforesaid witnesses is not admissible, his conduct of producing the
axe out of his own volition on making appearance in the Police
Station is a relevant piece of evidence to corroborate P.W.3 especially
in view of the fact that the chemical examination report is indicative
of presence of blood of human origin on the axe (M.O.-I).
9.            Taking into consideration the entire evidence on record,
we do not find force in the contentions raised by learned counsel for
the appellant and we do not find any infirmity in the impugned
judgment. In the result, the appeal being devoid of any merit is
dismissed.
                                        ……………………
                                           C.R. Dash, J.
                                        ……………………
                                          L.Mohapatra, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 17th day of April, 2012. /A.K.Dhal.


