             ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                   Jail Criminal Appeal No. 44 of 2001
From the judgment and order of sentence dated 15.05.2001 passed by
Shri S.K. Mishra, learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Jeypore in Sessions
Case No. 7 of 2000, under Section 302, I.P.C.
                                            ----------
Soda Sirika                                   …        Appellant
                           Versus
State of Orissa                               …      Respondent
         For Appellant              :         Miss Tapaswini Sinha, Advocate.
         For Respondent             :         Addl. Standing Counsel.
                                             ----------
PRESENT:
       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                              AND
            THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE C.R. DASH
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Date of Hearing : 18.08.2010                        Date of Judgment : 18.08.2010
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1.                This appeal arises out of the judgment and order of
sentence dated 15.05.2001 passed by learned Addl. Sessions Judge,
Jeypore in Sessions Case No. 7 of 2000. Learned Trial Court found
the appellant guilty of the offence under Section 302, I.P.C. and
sentenced him to suffer life imprisonment and pay fine of Rs.1,000/-

                                     2
(one thousand), in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for one
year more.
2.            A compendium of the prosecution case is that the
occurrence happened at about 3 p.m. on 21.05.1999. The deceased,
who is a little boy aged about 5 years, was standing in front of his
house. The appellant came there at that time being armed with an axe
and dealt a blow with that axe on the back side of the neck of the
deceased causing his instantaneous death. The Investigating Officer
(P.W.10), on registration of the case, took up investigation and on
completion of the investigation, filed charge-sheet implicating the
appellant in the offence punishable under Section 302, I.P.C.
3.            Prosecution examined 10 witnesses to prove the charge.
P.Ws.1 and 2 are the eye-witness to the occurrence, P.Ws.3 and 4 are
immediate post-occurrence witness, P.W.5, who happens to be the
father of the deceased, is the informant, P.W.9 is the Medical Officer,
who conducted post-mortem examination over the dead body of the
deceased and P.W.10 is the I.O. P.Ws.6, 7 and 8 are witnesses to the
facts like inquest and seizure, etc.
              The defence plea is one of complete denial, but no
evidence was adduced by the defence.
4.            Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submits that
the eye-witness account adduced by P.Ws.1 and 2 cannot be believed
in view of the close relationship of P.W.2 with the deceased and the
informant and in view of material contradictions in the evidence of
P.W.1. She also further submits that the appellant having given only

                                    3
one blow on the backside of the neck of the deceased, the offence
committed by the appellant would be one punishable under Section
304, Part-II, I.P.C. and not under Section 302, I.P.C.
              Learned Addl. Govt. Advocate on the other hand
supports the impugned judgment and order of sentence.
5.            The evidence of P.W.1 shows that P.W.1 was present in
his front verandah at the time of occurrence and he saw the occurrence
from a close quarter. There is nothing in his cross-examination to
discredit his sworn testimony. Learned counsel for the appellant is
not in a position to show before us as to what contradiction in the
evidence of P.W.1, according to her, is a major contradiction, which
has a tendency to shake the prosecution case. So far as P.W.2 is
concerned, she is the mother of the deceased.         She has seen her
deceased son being slain by the appellant in front of her eyes. In such
a case she would not screen the real offender to falsely implicate the
present appellant on the ground of enmity of the appellant with her
husband relating to dispute between them over a maize field. A
mother, before whom her child has been killed, cannot be equated
with other related witnesses. In such a situation she would even
loathe to screen her husband, if he is the assailant. The filial love,
which she, by nature nurtures, makes her not to betray her position in
relation to her child, who looks up to her for his/her protection. This,
however, cannot be said to be an inflexible rule in all the cases of a
mother being the eye witness to the murder of her child. There may be
exception. If from evidence it is shown that there is/are cause/causes
to overwhelm or overshadow even the filial love in her; that she has

                                    4
been induced and influenced to depose in the manner she has deposed;
and that her evidence is otherwise not trustworthy, the consideration
may, however, be different. In absence of the exceptions as aforesaid
or like considerations, sole testimony of a mother is sufficient to
justify conviction and the court may not insist for any corroboration.
In the present case, there is no effective cross-examination of P.W.2
so far as the transaction of the murder is concerned. At the time of
occurrence she (P.W.2) was sitting on the front verandah of her house
and was breast-feeding her younger child. The deceased was playing
in the front courtyard of the house in front of her. The appellant came
and committed the crime in the manner testified by her (P.W.2) and
P.W.1.      P.Ws.1 and 2 are thoroughly corroborated in material
particulars by P.Ws. 3 and 4, inasmuch as P.Ws. 3 and 4, on hearing
the cry of P.W.2, came out from their respective houses and saw the
deceased lying at the spot and the present appellant decamping from
there with the axe (M.O.-I) in his hand. We, therefore, do not find any
justification to interfere with the findings arrived at by the learned
Trial Court.
6.            Coming to the alternative submission of learned counsel
for the appellant that the offence committed by the appellant is one
punishable under Section 304, Part-II, I.P.C., it is seen from the
impugned judgment that learned trial Court has addressed the question
on thorough examination of the nature of the injuries sustained by the
deceased, sizes of such injuries and the medical evidence on the point.
We do not find any justification to take a different view.

                                    5
7.           In view of our discussion as aforesaid, the Jail Criminal
Appeal is dismissed.
                                       …………………..
                                       L. Mohapatra, J.
                                       ………………….
                                        C.R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 18th day of August, 2010. /Parida.


