           ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                    Criminal Appeal No. 34 of 1997
                                  AND
                     Govt. Appeal No. 75 of 1998
(Arising out of the judgment and order of sentence dated 15.02.1997
passed by Sri R.N. Bhuyan, learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Sambalpur, in
S.T. Case No. 198/8 of 1995-96, for the offence punishable under
Section 302/34, I.P.C.)
                               -------------
In Crl. Appeal No. 34 of 1997
Pabitra Mohan Bagh                      …    Appellant
                   Versus
The State                               …    Respondent
       For Appellant     :     Mr. C.R. Swain and P.K. Kuanr.
       For Respondent    :     Addl. Govt. Advocate.
                               AND
In Govt. Appeal No. 75 of 1998
State                                   …    Appellant.
                   Versus
Pabitra Mohan Bagh and another …             Respondents.
       For Appellant     :     Addl. Govt. Advocate.
       For Respondents :       Mr. C.R.Swain, P.K. Kuanr,
                               J.K.Mohanty and B.Mohanty.
                               -------------
PRESENT :

                                                   2
        THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                                AND
             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE C.R. DASH
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Date of Hearing : 28.07.2010                           Date of Judgment : 28.07.2010
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Both the appeals arise out of the same judgment and order
of sentence dated 15.02.1997 passed by learned Addl. Sessions Judge,
Sambalpur in S.T. Case No. 198/8 of 1995-96. Out of the three accused
persons, accused Tikeswar Balua being a juvenile, accused Pabitra
Mohan Bagh and his mother accused Sakuntala Bag were tried by the
learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Sambalpur in the aforesaid session’s trial.
Learned Trial Court acquitted accused Sakuntala Bagh of the charge and
convicted accused Pabitra Mohan Bagh for the offence under Section
304, Part-I, I.P.C. and sentenced him to suffer R.I. for five years and to
pay fine of Rs.2,000/- (two thousand), in default to suffer further R.I. for
one year.
2.                Government has preferred appeal assailing the judgment of
acquittal in respect of accused Sakuntala Bagh and conviction of accused
Pabitra Mohan Bagh under Section 304, Part-I, I.P.C. instead of his
conviction under Section 302, I.P.C. Convict Pabitra Mohan Bagh has
preferred appeal assailing his conviction under Section 304, Part-I, I.P.C.
and the consequent sentence recorded thereunder.
3.                A compendium of the prosecution case is as follows –
                  The occurrence happened at about 5 a.m. on 11.03.1995 on
the cultivable land of the deceased, which adjoins the cultivable land of
the accused Pabitra Mohan Bagh. At the time of occurrence, deceased

                                     3
Santosh Dip was in his house. All the accused persons including the
convict Pabitra Mohan Bagh dragged him outside and assaulted him
mercilessly. At the time of assault, convict Pabitra Mohan Bagh was
armed with a ‘Tangia’, accused Sakuntala Bagh was armed with a
‘Budia’ and accused Tikeswar Balua was armed with a lathi. At that
time Mathura Dip (P.W.2), wife of the deceased was engaged in
collection of ‘mohua’ flowers at a distance of 500 yards from her house.
She heard ‘hulla’ in her house.      Her minor daughter (P.W.3) came
running and told her about the incident. She rushed to see convict
Pabitra Mohan Bagh, his mother Sakuntala Bagh and their ‘Halia’
Tikeswar Balua running away from the spot. She (P.W.2) raised ‘hulla’,
on hearing of which P.W.1 and P.Ws.4 to 10 came to the spot.
Pranabandhu Khilar (P.W.1), who is the Ward Member of the village,
asked the deceased as to how he got the injuries. To the audience of
P.Ws.1 and 4 to 10 the deceased replied that the convict Pabitra Mohan
Bagh, his mother Sakuntala Bagh and their ‘Halia’ Tikeswar Balua dealt
blows by ‘tangia’ inside his house and that when, in order to save his life
he tried to run away from the house, he fell down and thereafter they
dealt blows on his head, hands and other parts of the body on the blunt
side of the ‘tangia’. On the basis of the written report lodged at the P.S.
by P.W.1 Pranabandhu Khilar, the I.O. (P.W.13) registered the case and
took up investigation.    On completion of the investigation, he filed
charge-sheet against the convict Pabitra Mohan Bagh and his mother
Sakuntala Bagh under Section 302/34, I.P.C.
4.            Prosecution has examined 14 witnesses to prove the charge.
P.W.3, the minor daughter of the deceased is the sole eye-witness to the
occurrence. P.W.2, the widow of the deceased is the immediate post-

                                     4
occurrence witness, P.W.1 and P.Ws.4 to 10 are the witnesses to the oral
dying declaration made by the deceased. P.W.11 is the local Revenue
Inspector, who prepared the sketch map of the place of occurrence on
police requisition. P.W.12 is the Police Constable, who took the dead
body for post-mortem examination, P.W.14 is the Medical Officer, who
conducted autopsy over the dead body and P.W.13 is the I.O.
5.           The defence plea is one of complete denial.          In their
statements recorded under Section 313, Cr.P.C., it is the specific plea of
accused Pabitra Mohan Bagh and his mother accused Sakuntala Bagh
that the spot land belongs to them and there is dispute between the
parties concerning that land, and on the date of occurrence Pabitra
Mohan Bagh was plaughing that land. It is further pleaded by them that
at that time deceased Santosh Dip came over the land and assaulted
convict Pabitra Mohan Bagh on his chest by a ‘tangi’. On hearing his
shout, his mother Sakuntala Bagh came over the spot and took her son
for treatment. Accused Sakuntala Bagh has taken the further plea that
her father, mother, late brother Nabin and deceased Santosh had sold that
land to her for consideration of Rs.4880/-, but after death of her parents
and brother Nabin, deceased Santosh was creating disturbance over
possession of that land by them being instigated by some evil spirited
co-villagers. The defence has examined none to prove their case. The
F.I.R. lodged by them in the counter case, the seizure list concerning
‘tangi’ used by the deceased in assaulting convict Pabitra Mohan Bagh,
report of the Medical Officer, who examined convict Pabitra Mohan
Bagh on police requisition, have been marked as Exhibits on behalf of
the defence.

                                      5
6.            Learned Trial Court has believed P.W.3, minor daughter of
the deceased, as the eye-witness to the occurrence, P.W.2, the widow of
the deceased as immediate post-occurrence witness and P.Ws.1 and 4 to
10 as witnesses to the oral dying declaration made by the deceased
before them, to sustain the charge.         Taking stock of the spot of
occurrence, evidence regarding litigation between the convict Pabitra
Mohan Bagh and the deceased since the time of his (deceased’s) father
over the disputed land and injuries sustained by convict Pabitra Mohan
Bagh, learned Trial Court however came to hold that there has been
fighting between the deceased and convict Pabitra Bagh in course of
which convict Pabitra Bagh has given the vital blows by the axe he was
holding. Taking into consideration the nature of injuries sustained by
the deceased and the weapon of offence used, learned Trial Court
acquitted accused Sakuntala Bagh on the reasoning that the ‘budia’ held
by her must not have been used in assaulting the deceased, and convicted
accused Pabitra Mohan Bagh under Section 304, Part-I, I.P.C.
7.            Before proceeding to examine the probative value of the
evidence adduced by the prosecution, we feel it proper to fix the spot of
occurrence. According to P.W.1, the deceased was lying with injuries in
the ‘Bari’ (locally referred to ‘backyard’), which is at a distance of about
50 cubits from the house of the deceased. The aforesaid spot, according
to P.W.1, is at a distance of about 50 cubits from the house of the
accused persons. P.W.2, the widow of the deceased, has also testified
that her husband was lying in an open place at a distance of about 50
cubits from the house. She has further testified that it was a ploughed
land. The I.O. (P.W.13) in his evidence has testified that the house of
the deceased is bounded by green fence and the dead body of the

                                     6
deceased was lying outside the green fence. He, in paragraph-6 of his
cross-examination, has further testified that the spot where the deceased
was lying is close to the land, which the deceased was ploughing before
the occurrence, and the adjacent plots belong to the deceased. From the
evidence of the I.O. (P.W.13), P.W.1 and other materials on record, it is
also clear that the house of the convict is near the house of the deceased
without house of any other person in between. The R.I. (P.W.11), who
prepared the sketch map vide Ext.17 on police requisition, has testified
that the plot, on which the dead body was lying, as shown to him by the
police, is a piece of government plot. The I.O. (P.W.13) has testified
that on examination of Rasananda Bagh, the father of convict Pabitra
Bagh, he (P.W.13) seized Xerox copy of the written agreement regarding
sale of the disputed land, Xerox copies of two encroachment cases – one
against convict Pabitra Mohan Bagh and another against Laxman Dip,
father of the deceased. He made seizure of the aforesaid documents vide
Ext.23. Learned trial court, on consideration of the aforesaid materials
on record, has held thus –
              “… Since there is no sufficient evidence to connect
              that the assault had been given to Santosh inside the
              house and he was dragged to outside and subsequently
              he was also assaulted on the bari, it would simply be
              believed that Santosh was assaulted on his bari at a
              distance of about 50 cubits from his house and that
              bari had been ploughed and that may be accepted as
              the place of assault. …”
              The aforesaid finding of the learned trial court is erroneous,
inasmuch as ‘bari’ locally refers to a place inside the backyard; but,
according to the I.O. (P.W.13) the spot where the dead body of the
deceased was lying was outside the green fencing around the house of

                                      7
the deceased. The R.I. (P.W.11), on police requisition, has prepared the
sketch map (Ext.17) and he has testified that the aforesaid spot is a piece
of government land. In that view of the matter, the spot cannot be said
to be a place inside the ‘bari’ of the deceased, and when the prosecution
has suppressed the genesis of the occurrence, there is no evidence to
come to a finding as to who had ploughed the land and under whose
possession the spot land was there on the relevant date of occurrence.
From the seizure list Ext.23, it is clear that there was clamour for
possession of the suit land and both the parties might have been claiming
bona fide right over the spot land.
8.            In order to believe P.W.3, a child witness, as the occurrence
witness, initially the spot, where the first assault on the deceased was
mounted, is to be the house of the deceased, as P.W.3 in her evidence
has testified that the convict Pabitra Bagh and others dragged her father
from the house and assaulted him by means of ‘tangia’, ‘budia’, etc.
Except the spot, where the dead body of the deceased was lying, no
blood stained earth having been seized from anywhere else, learned trial
court, in the conclusion afore-quoted, has rightly held that the spot of
occurrence is the place where the dead body was lying and it cannot be
inside the house of the deceased, from where he was dragged to outside
and the ‘bari’, where he was assaulted subsequently. In view of such
conclusion by the learned trial court, it was erroneous on its part to
believe P.W.3 as the eye-witness, when she testified that the assault on
his father was mounted on his being dragged from the house. In order to
believe P.W.3 that she would have seen the occurrence, the time of
occurrence is very important. The occurrence happened at about 5 a.m.
in the morning and the date of occurrence is 11.03.1995. The occurrence

                                       8
having happened at about 5 a.m. in the month of March, it must be the
dawn time, and P.W.3 having not testified that she was present with her
father (deceased) at that time and the prosecution witnesses having tried
to shift the spot inside the house of the deceased to suit the prosecution
case, it is to be held that P.W.3 must not have seen the occurrence in the
manner she has testified.
9.             P.W.2, the widow of the deceased, is the immediate post-
occurrence witness. She has only testified that she saw convict Pabitra
Mohan Bagh and other accused persons running away from the spot with
the respective weapons they were holding. Her evidence is, therefore, of
no avail to throw light as to how the occurrence happened and in what
manner her husband was assaulted.
10.            P.W.1 and P.Ws. 4 to 10 are the witnesses to the oral dying
declaration made by the deceased. The aforesaid witnesses, i.e., P.Ws.1
and 4 to 10 have not testified about the exact version the deceased told to
them and there is wide variation in the substance of what the deceased
told to them.
       P.W.1, who is testified to have reached the spot first on hearing
       sought of P.W.2 (widow of deceased), has testified thus –
               “… I asked Santosh as to how he got this injuries. He
               said that his nephew (sister’s son) Pabitra, his Nani
               Sakuntala and their Halia Tikeswar Balua dealt me
               blows by tangia inside his house and that when in
               order to save his life he ran away from the house, he
               fell down and thereafter they dealt blows on his legs
               causing fractures and thereafter they dealt blows on
               his head, hands and other parts of his body on the
               blunt side of tangia. …”

                             9
P.W.2 has testified thus –
     “… Pranabandhu asked my husband as to who
     inflicted injury to him. My husband disclosed that his
     Nani, his Bhanja and their Halia inflicted the injuries
     on his person. …”
P.W.4 has testified thus –
     “… I asked Santosh as to how he got injuries on his
     person, he said that he will not survive. He also said
     that Sakuntala Bagh, Pabitra Bagh and Tikeswar
     Balua killed him by means of Tangia, budia and lathi.
     …”
P.W.5 has testified thus –
     “… Pranabandhu asked the injured as to how he got
     injuries. I also asked the same thing to him. To our
     question, the injured replied that his sister Sakuntala
     Bagh, his sister’s son Pabitra and their Halia Tikeswar
     Balua assaulted him by means of tangia, tangi and
     lathi, as a result of which he got fracture on legs and
     hands and injuries on all over the body. …”
P.W.6 has testified thus –
     “… Pranabandhu again asked him as to who has
     caused injuries to him, he said that his sister
     Sakuntala, his sister’s son Pabitra and their halia
     Tikeswar Balua dealt blows to him, thereafter it was
     asked to him that where he was assaulted, he replied
     that he was in his house with his baby. When Pabitra
     Bagh entered into his verandah and asked him to
     come out and when he did not come out, by means of
     tangia accused Pabitra dealt blows to him and that
     when he ran to outside to save his life, accused
     Sakuntala dealt blows by means of tangi at the door
     and when he was running towards sahi, he was
     restrained by the Halia Tikeswar and thereafter when
     he ran towards bari, he fell down and thereafter again
     when I asked him as to who murdered him, he said

                                     10
            that his sister, sister’s son and their Halia did so by
            means of tangia, tangi and lathi. …”
      P.W.7 has testified thus –
            “… Myself and Pranabandhu asked Santosh as to how
            he got the injuries and who caused this injuries. He
            said that his sister Sakuntala Bagh and his sister’s son
            Pabitra Bagh and his Halia Tikeswar Bagh assaulted
            him by means of tangia, tangi and lathi. …”
      P.W.8 has testified thus –
            “… When I asked Santosh as to who assaulted him, he
            said his sister Sakuntala, his sister’s son Pabitra and
            Tikeswar Balua assaulted him in his house and when
            he ran to save his life, they dealt blows to me and he
            will not survive. Again we served water to him. He
            also said that he will not survive and his advocate
            Jogelal Sahu of Deogarh be informed. …”
      P.W.9 has testified thus –
            “… At that time, Pranabandhu Khillar asked Santosh
            who caused these injury to him, Santosh said that his
            sister Sakuntala and his sister’s son Pabitra and their
            halia assaulted him in his house and brought him to
            outside and made him flat there. Thrice Santosh had
            given the above statement. …”
      P.W.10 has testified thus –
            “… The Ward Member Pranabandhu asked Santosh as
            to who caused this condition to him. Santosh said that
            his sister Sakuntala Bagh, his sister’s son Pabitra and
            Tikeswar had assaulted him and caused these injuries.
            …”
11.         It is well settled in law that unless one is certain about the
exact words uttered by the deceased, no reliance should be placed on
verbal statements of witnesses and the oral declarations made by the

                                     11
deceased. (see – Ramnath Madho Prasad and others vrs. State of
Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1953 SC 420). Hon’ble Supreme Court, while
dealing with the point on the question of necessity of corroboration of a
dying declaration in the case of Harbans Singh and another vrs. State
of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 439, has held that the evidence furnished by
the dying declaration must be considered by the Judge, just as the
evidence    of   any    witness,   though    undoubtedly    some    special
considerations arise in the assessment of dying declarations, which do
not arise in the case of assessing the value of a statement made in Court
by a person claiming to be a witness of the occurrence. One of the
special considerations, according to the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the
aforesaid case of Harbans Singh, is to make sure as to what the statement
of the dead man actually was, which in itself, is often a difficult task.
The evidence of the prosecution witnesses quoted supra on the face of it
makes it clear that the witnesses themselves are not sure as to what has
been stated by the deceased to them. Some of the witnesses have tried to
shift the spot exploiting their position as the witnesses to the oral dying
declaration made by the deceased though there is no cogent evidence to
prove the fact that the occurrence happened at any place other than the
spot where the dead body was lying. The witnesses are not consistent
about the manner, in which statement by the deceased has been made.
P.W.2, widow of the deceased, is the first person to reach the spot. It
was natural on the part of the deceased to state before her as to who tried
to do his death, as admittedly at that time the deceased was labouring
under anticipation of his death. Without doing so why the deceased
waited till arrival of P.W.1 and other witnesses to make the statement
regarding injuries sustained by him, throws doubt regarding the veracity

                                     12
of the prosecution witnesses on the point of dying declaration. The
evidence of P.Ws.1 and 4 to 10, on the face of discrepancies on the point
of the statement of the deceased made before them, their tendency to
shift the spot to suit the prosecution case, and variance in their evidence
regarding the manner in which the statement of the deceased constituting
the dying declaration has been made, suffer from infirmities beyond
cure. The evidence of the Medical Officer (P.W.14) regarding ability of
the deceased to make the dying declaration after he received injuries and
especially injury nos. (vi) and (vii), which are opined to be the fatal
injuries, makes us firm in our conclusion that the deceased could not
have made the dying declaration in the manner deposed to by P.Ws.1
and 4 to 10.      In view of such facts, the evidence of the aforesaid
witnesses is not believable.
12.           The defence, taking the plea of their presence and assault by
the deceased on convict Pabitra Mohan Bagh, has admitted a part of the
occurrence; but, in absence of any cogent evidence regarding genesis of
the occurrence, which the prosecution has designedly suppressed, such a
defence plea, which, at best, may raise a suspicion regarding complicity
of the convict and other accused persons in the transaction, cannot,
however, take the place of proof to establish their guilt, inasmuch as
conjecture and surmises cannot take the place of evidence, as has been
well settled in law.
13.           In view of all the aforesaid facts, we feel persuaded to hold
that the prosecution has failed to prove the charge. In view of our
discussion supra, we do not feel persuaded to interfere with the order of

                                     13
acquittal, as recorded by the learned trial court in respect of accused
Sakuntala Bagh.
14.           In the result, the impugned judgment and order of sentence
are set aside and the Criminal Appeal is accordingly allowed. The Govt.
Appeal, for the aforesaid reasons, is dismissed.       Appellant Pabitra
Mohan Bagh, who is stated to be on bail, be discharged of the bail bond.
                                         ……………………
                                         L. Mohapatra, J.
                                         ……………………
                                            C.R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 28th day of July, 2010. /Parida.


