                                    ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                                             CRLMC Nos. 2223 & 2224 of 2009
           In the matter of an application under Section 482 of the Code of
           Criminal Procedure.
                                                                -----------------
           Kishore Kumar Agarwal                                                                   …          Petitioner
                                                                                                   (In both the cases)
                                                                  Versus
           M/s Paradeep Phosphates Pvt. Ltd.                                                       …          Opp. Party
                                                                                                   (In both the cases)
                      For Petitioner                   :          Mr. Aditya Kumar Mohapatra,
                                                                             (In both the cases)
                      For Opp. Party                   :          M/s G.Rath, S.Rath and
                                                                         Satyanarayan Mishra,
                                                                             (In both the cases)
                                                                 -------------
           PRESENT :
                                 THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE C.R. DASH
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                 Date of Judgment                  : 21 .11.2012
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C.R. Dash, J.                    As the parties in both the criminal misc. cases are same and the
           causes of action are same, they are taken up together for disposal by this
           common judgment.
           2.                    The petitioner has filed Criminal Misc. Case No. 2223 of 2009 for
           quashing the criminal proceeding vide 1.C.C. No. 2631 of 2005 under Section
           138 of the N.I. Act read with Section 420, I.P.C. involving cheque No. 735774,
           dated 19.5.2005. Similarly the petitioner has also filed Criminal Misc. Case No.

                                          2
2224 of 2009 for quashing the criminal proceeding vide 1.C.C. No. 2632 of
2005, under Section 138 of the N.I. Act read with Section 420, I.P.C. involving
cheque No. 735775, dated 26.5.2005. Both the criminal proceedings are
pending before the learned J.M.F.C., Bhubaneswar.
3.             The opposite parties deposited the aforesaid cheques at the
State Bank of Hyderabad, Bhubaneswar branch on 20.5.2005. The aforesaid
banker on 3.6.2005 informed the opposite parties that the cheques issued by
the drawer have bounced for the reason “payment stopped by drawer”. The
opposite parties through their lawyers sent notice dated 18.06.2005 in the
address of the petitioner at A-3, Indrapauri, New Agra, Agra-282005. The
aforesaid demand notice was returned undelivered by the postal authority with
the remarks that the petitioner is absent in the aforesaid address.Thereafter the
opposite parties sent another notice in both the cases on 12.7.2005 demanding
payment within fifteen days of the receipt of the notice. When the petitioner
failed to comply with the demand in the notice, both the aforesaid complaints in
respect of both the cheques were filed before the learned J.M.F.C.,
Bhubaneswar. In both the complaints cognizance was taken, the trial
commenced and the matter is now at the sage of recording of accused
statement.
4.             At this stage, the petitioner has moved this Court for quashing of
the criminal proceedings mainly on two grounds.
               (i)     Issuance of demand notice in the correct address of the
                       petitioner after the period of limitation of fifteen days
                       cannot be held to be sufficient compliance of Section 138
                       of the N.I.Act.
               (ii)    The dishonour of cheques being on the ground of
                       “stop payment” instruction by the petitioner, no offence
                       under Section 138 of the N.I. Act is attracted.

                                          3
5.             Learned counsel for the petitioner relies on the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Prem Chand Vijay Kumar v. Yashpal
Sinigh and another, (2005) 4 SCC 417, so far as the first contention is
concerned. Learned counsel for the petitioner also relies on the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Raj Kumar Khurana v. State of (NCT
of Delhi) and another, (2009) 6 SCC 72, so far as the second contention is
concerned. It is strenuously submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that
any action can be brought under the mischief of Section 138 of the N.I. Act, if
the cheque is returned by the bank unpaid, either because the amount of
money standing to the credit of the account is insufficient to honour the cheque
or that it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an
agreement made with the bank. In no case any offence is made out under
Section 138 of the N.I. Act, if sufficiently ahead of the presentation of cheque,
the drawer of the cheque has issued “no payment” instruction to the banker
and has communicated such of his action to the payee of the cheque. Some
more grounds relating to the breach of agreement between the parties etc.
have been taken by the petitioner with which this court is not concerned at this
stage.
6.             Learned counsel for opposite parties on the other hand supports
the impugned order and submits that “stop payment” instruction does not
preclude an action under Section 138 of the N.I.Act by the payee or holder of
the cheque against the drawer in view of presumption available under Section
139 of the N.I.Act. On the point of limitation in respect of the demand notice it is
submitted by learned counsel for the opposite parties that notice was issued
within time against the petitioner but the notice was returned with the postal
endorsement that “the petitioner is absent.” From such postal endorsement it

                                       4
can not be said that, notice was sent in a wrong address as the petitioner was
endorsed to be absent only. Had the postal endorsement being to the effect
that the “addressee not found” a conclusion could have been drawn that the
notice was issued in the wrong address. In view of the above, such a question
of fact cannot be addressed in a proceeding under Section 482, Cr.P.C.
according to learned counsel for the petitioner.
7.             On the question of payment of cheque stopped by the drawer of
the cheque, Hon’ble Supreme Court in M/s. Modi Cements Limited v. Kuchil
Kumar Nandi, 1998 SC 1057 has held that once the cheque is issued by the
drawer a presumption under Section 139 in favour of holder must follow and
merely because the drawer issues a notice to the drawee or to the bank for
stoppage of the payment will not preclude an action under Section 138 by the
drawee or the holder of a cheque in due course. Section 138 to 142 of the N.I.
Act promotes the efficacy of banking operations and to ensure credibility in
transacting business through cheques. It is for this reason, Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the aforesaid three Judge Bench decision has overruled its earlier
decision in M/s. Electronics Trade and Technology Development
Corporation Limited, Secuanderabad v. M/s. Indian Technologists and
Engineers (Electronics) Private Limited and another, AIR 1996 SC 2339.
Same is the view of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of M/s. M.M.T.C.
Limited and another v. M/s. Medchl Chemicals and Pharma (P) Ltd. and
another, 2002 CRI. L.J.,266(SC). In view of the rulings of the Hon’ble Court
Supreme Court in the aforesaid cases, the proceeding cannot be quashed on
the aforesaid ground of “stop payment” instruction. Rather in view of
presumption under Section 139 of the N.I.Act, the petitioner is at liberty to rebut
such presumption by adducing defence evidence to show that at the time of
issuing “stop payment” instruction he had sufficient funds in his account against

                                          5
which the cheques had been drawn. The decision relied on by learned counsel
for the petitioner on this point is not applicable to the facts of the present case
in view of my discussion supra.
8.              So far as the first contention of limitation is concerned, I am one
in my view with Mr. G.Rath, learned Senior Counsel appearing for opposite
parties. Whether address given in the first notice was a wrong address or it
was a designed avoidance by the petitioner is a question of fact and that
question can not be gone into in this proceeding.
9.              In view of the above, I do not find any merit in the criminal misc.
cases and accordingly, both the criminal misc. cases are dismissed.
                                                      ……………………
                                                        C.R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 21st day of November, 2012 /Dhal.

6

