                        IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                            Criminal Appeal (J) No.91 of 2016
                Sri Bitul Bhuyan
                                                     ……. Appellant
                        -Versus –
                The State of Assam.
                                             ….. Respondents.
                                    PRESENT
                HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE HITESH KUMAR SARMA
For the petitioner      :      Mr. Z. Hussain,
                               Amicus Curiae.
For the Respondent :           Mr. B. Dutta,
                               Additional Public Prosecutor, Assam
Date of hearing         :      15.06.2017
Date of Judgment        :      19.06.2017
and order
                          JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
                This is a jail appeal, preferred by the accused-appellant from
Central Jail, Jorhat, vide his application dated 02.08.2016, against the judgment
and order, dated 08.07.2016, passed in Sessions Case No.13(JJ)/2014,
convicting the accused appellant under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code,
and sentencing him to rigorous imprisonment for 7(seven) years and to pay a
                                                                        Page 1 of 8

fine of Rs.10,000/-, in default, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for another six
months.
2.             The facts leading to this case is that the victim (P.W.7), while she
was alone and sleeping at her house, at about 3.30 P.M., on 13.2.2012, the
accused appellant entered into her house and committed rape on her person.
She was also physically assaulted by the accused appellant causing serious
injuries on her person including on her private parts.
3.             On receipt of the FIR of the above incident, lodged by P.W. 8, the
son of the victim, on 14.2.2012, the Pulibor Police Station, registered a case,
investigated into it, collected evidence, and finally, submitted charge-sheet
against the accused appellant under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code.
4.             The learned Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Jorhat, framed a
formal charge against the accused appellant, to which he pleaded innocence.
Then the trial of the case commenced as per procedure.
5.             The prosecution examined 12 witnesses to bring home the guilt
of the accused appellant. Out of the witnesses, examined by the prosecution,
after scanning, it is found that the evidence of the victim (P.W.7) and the
evidence of P.Ws. 5, 9 and 10, are of great importance for a just decision of this
case, to find out whether the accused appellant committed rape on the person
of the victim (P.W.7), as alleged.
6.             The evidence of P.W. 1, Smt. Niru Bhuyan, is the mother of the
accused appellant, has no bearing on the facts of the case, except that P.W.3
and P.W. 4 visited their house on 14.2.2012 and took the accused appellant
from her house to their office first, and then, handed over to the police. The
evidence of P.W. 3 and P.W. 4 also makes it appear that they went to the house
                                                                        Page 2 of 8

of the accused appellant, took him out of his house and, ultimately, handed
over the accused appellant to police on 14.2.2012. P.W. 6 accompanied the
victim to the police station when she went there to lodge the FIR about the
commission of rape on her by the accused appellant. P.W. 8, Sri Prafulla
Bhuyan- informant, is the son of the victim, who lodged the FIR after hearing
about the occurrence from his mother i.e. the victim, vide Ext. 3. P.W. 11 is the
seizure witness only and he has no knowledge about the facts of the case. P.W.
11 only proved the seizure made vide Ext.2. P.W. 12 is the investigating police
officer, who investigated the case and also caused recording of the statement of
the victim under Section 164 Cr.P.C. by the learned Magistrate.
7.             Admittedly, the occurrence took place inside the house of the
victim, P.W. 7, and considering the nature of the offence and also the place of
occurrence, it is not expected that anybody had witnessed the commission of
offence of rape. As regards allegation of rape, under the circumstances, we are
bound to rely upon the evidence of the victim (P.W.7). In her evidence, she is
found to have narrated, with extreme clarity, that at about 3.30 P.M., about two
years back, while she was sleeping at her home, the accused entered there,
gagged her and thereafter undressed her. Then, he committed rape on her and
had also bite on her private parts causing injuries on her vagina. When she
attempted to ran away from the place of occurrence, the accused appellant
dragged her inside, although she could manage to escape somehow. She raised
alarm, following which, her neighbours -      Keri Bhuyan and Rupali Bhuyan,
examined as P.Ws. 6 and 5 respectively, came. In the meantime, the accused
appellant fled away. She informed them about the occurrence.
8.             It appears from the evidence of P.W. 6 Smti. Keri Bhuyan, that
she came to know about the occurrence next day only, and to that extent, she
is not found to have supported the evidence of the victim. However, P.W. 5-
Rupali Bhuyan, has corroborated the evidence of the victim –P.W.7, while she
deposed that after hearing the alarm raised by the victim, she proceeded
                                                                      Page 3 of 8

towards the house of the victim and, at that time, she saw the accused being
fleeing away from the house of the victim. So, such facts clearly makes out that
at the time of commission of the rape on the person of the victim, as alleged,
the accused appellant went to the house of the victim and while leaving the
house, he was seen fleeing by P.W. 5.
8.             Let us now look into the evidence of P.W.10-Dr. Ritu Saikia, the
Medical Officer of Jorhat Medical College and Hospital. In her evidence, it is
found that she examined the victim on 15.2.2012 and, on her examination, she
found the following :
               “P hysical ex am ination
               Built average-height 5 feet 1 inch w eight 38 k gs.
               Breast – sagging breast w ith injury m arks
               Genital ex am ination
               P ubic hair absent
               Vulva, Labia m ajora and m inor – injury m arks present.
               Vagina 2 fingers can be inserted – injury m arks present.
               Description of injuries
               1.      Liner cut injury over chin 4 cm long. N o active bleeding.
                       Surrounding edem a 4 cm x 4 cm colour bluish black.
               2.      Bite m arks of teeth over right and left breast, few scratch
                       m arks over right nipple area. N o active bleeding colour
                       radish blue.
               3.      Scratch m ark over pubic sym phisis are w ith surrounding
               edem a, having size of 3 cm x 3 cm .
               4.      A cut injury having size of 2 cm near pubic sym physis area.
               No active bleeding.
               5.      Scratch m ark (m ultiple) over vulva, labia m ajora and labia
               m inora.
               6.      Scratch m ark (m ultiple) covered w ith scale over dorsum of
               both hands.
                                                                         Page 4 of 8

               Epiphysis of prox im al of distal ends of radius of ulna are fused.
               Epiphysis of low er and hem erus are fused.
               B/ C illac crests of ischial tuberosity are fused.
               Epiphyses of articulacy bones of shoulder are fused.
               Sex ual segm ents are fused.
               Laboratory ex am ination : N o 13536 dated 15.02.12
               No sperm atozoa seen in the sm ear.
               As per her opinion,
                   1) Her (victim ’s) age is above 25 (tw enty five) years as per X
                        ray report.
                   2) No evidence of recent sex ual activity seen as per laboratory
                        report dated 15.02.2012.
                   3) The injuries on the person found is described abve.
                        She opined that as per the colour of the injuries found on
               the body of the victim , said injuries w ere caused w ithin 72 hours
               form the tim e of her ex am ination.
                        I n her cross ex am ination she deposed that after tw o days
               of the incident, the victim w as ex am ined. She adm itted that the
               tim e of ex am ination is not m entioned in her report but the date of
               ex am ination is m entioned in the report.”
9.             Now, it would appear from the above medical evidence of P.W.
10 that it corroborates the statement of the victim that she was injured in her
private parts by the accused appellant while committing rape including the bites
on her breast.      The evidence of the Medical Officer, examined as P.W. 10,
lends complete support to the evidence of the victim (P.W.7) as regards her
injuries as she found the injury marks on the vulva, labia majora and minora
and vagina, and also liner cut injury over her chin of size 4 cm in length and
bite marks of teeth over her right and left breast and few scratch marks over
her right nipple area. Ext. 6 is the medical report. In her statement recorded
before the learned Magistrate also under Section 164 Cr.P.C., the victim
narrated the facts of commission of rape by the accused appellant, as has been
stated in her evidence before the Court, while examined as P.W. 7.
                                                                           Page 5 of 8

10.            That apart, the evidence of P.W. 9 Sri Arup Manta, the Senior
Scientific Officer, Forensic Science Laboratory, Assam, Kahilipara, Guwahati,
reveals that the “Saree” of the victim, which she was wearing at the time of the
incident and which was seized by the police vide Ext. 1, got positive test for
blood, which doubly confirms to the fact of commission of sexual violence on
the person of the victim, who is a widow, by the accused appellant.
11.            Mr. Z. Hussain, the learned Amicus Curiae, has submitted, during
the course of her submission, that there is one day delay in lodging the FIR and
two days delay in examining the victim by the doctor. There is no sign of recent
sexual intercourse found while the victim was examined. The victim is a widow,
is an admitted position. The age of the victim is stated by herself as 50 years on
the date of recording her evidence. The victim was, admittedly, examined by
the doctor, P.W.10, on 15.2.2012 although the occurrence took place on
13.2.2012. As such, naturally, to detect recent sexual intercourse cannot be
expected. However, the undisputed and corroborated evidence of the victim
that, at the time of commission of rape, she sustained injuries caused to her by
the accused appellant, means that there was violence at the time of commission
of the rape, which is most usual in case of resistance by a victim of rape.
12.            That apart, so far delay is concerned, the FIR was lodged by the
son of the victim on the next day of the date of occurrence and, this delay, in
the considered view of this Court, is not unnatural considering the facts,
circumstances and the nature of the case. The evidence of the informant P.W. 8
shows that he was not at his home at the time of occurrence. While he came
home back from the place of his work, Panichakuwa, he was told about the
occurrence by the victim/his mother. Next day, he lodged the FIR. There is
absolutely no evidence on record to suggest that the delay of one day is due to
any extraneous reason. There is, in the opinion of this Court, no reason to
doubt the genuineness of the prosecution case for only one day delay in lodging
the FIR. This Court finds that the evidence of the victim-P.W. 7 is reliable and
                                                                        Page 6 of 8

there is nothing so inconsistent which makes her evidence as regards the
accusation unbelievable or improbable.
             This Court relies upon the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in State of Him achal Pradesh Vs. Sanjay K um ar Alias Sunny (2017) 2
SCC 51, wherein it is held that –
             “31.     … … … … … .. By now it is w ell settled that the testim ony of a
             victim in cases of sex ual offences is vital and unless there are
             com pelling reasons w hich necessitate looking for corroboration of
             a statem ent, the courts should find no difficulty to act on the
             testim ony of the victim of a sex ual assault alone to convict the
             accused. No doubt, her testim ony has to inspire confidence.
             Seeking corroboration to a statem ent before relying upon the
             sam e as a rule, in such cases, w ould literally am ount to adding
             insult to injury. The deposition of the prosecutrix has, thus, to be
             taken as a w hole. N eedless to reiterate that the victim of rape is
             not an accom plice and her evidence can be acted upon w ithout
             corroboration. She stands at a higher pedestal than an injured
             w itness does. I f the court finds it difficult to accept her version, it
             m ay    seek   corroboration   from     som e   evidence   w hich  lends
             assurance to her version. To insist on corroboration, ex cept in the
             rarest of rare cases, is to equate one w ho is a victim of the lust of
             another w ith an accom plice to a crim e and thereby insult
             w om anhood. I t w ould be adding insult to injury to tell a w om an
             that her claim of rape w ill not be believed unless it is corroborated
             in m aterial particulars, as in the case of an accom plice to a crim e.
             W hy should the evidence of the girl or the w om an w ho com plains
             of rape or sex ual m olestation be view ed w ith the aid of spectacles
             fitted w ith lenses tinged w ith doubt, disbelief or suspicion ? The
             plea about lack of corroboration has no substance (See Bhupinder
             Sharm a V. State of H.P .5). Notw ithstanding this legal position, in
             the instant case, w e even find enough corroborative m aterial as
             w ell, w hich is discussed hereinabove.”
                                                                           Page 7 of 8

13.             In view of the discussions above, and the reasons recorded
therein, this Court is of the view that the prosecution has been able to establish,
beyond all reasonable doubt, that the accused appellant had committed rape on
the person of the victim (P.W. 7) making himself liable for punishment under
Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code.
14.             Therefore, the conviction of the accused appellant, recorded by
the learned Trial Court, under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, and the
sentence imposed upon him, as indicated above, calls for no interference.
15.             Accordingly, the judgment of the learned Trial Court is up-held.
16.             Send a copy of this judgment to the Superintendent of Central
Jail, Jorhat for furnishing the same to the accused/appellant.
17.             Send down the LCR with a copy of this judgment.
                                                                 JUDGE
ISINGH
                                                                        Page 8 of 8


