                                    1
                       IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
      (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                         ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                             PRINCIPAL SEAT
                      Crl. Appeal (J) No. 74/ 2011
Abdul Khalique
Son of Abdul Bari,
Village- Rahimpur,
P.S. Shiber Chowk,
P.S. and District- Karimganj,
Assam.
                                       ……….Appellant
                    -Versus-
State of Assam
                                       ……….Opposite Party
Advocate for the appellant:            Mr. B.N. Gogoi,
                                              Amicus Curiae
Advocate for the Opposite Party:       Mr. B.B. Gogoi
                                       Addl. Public Prosecutor, Assam.
                                 -BEFOR E–
   HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
               Date of hearing                : 28.06.2017
               Date of judgment & order       : 28.06.2017
                      JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)

                                      2
            Heard Mr. BN Gogoi, learned Amicus Curiae, appearing on
behalf of the appellant and Mr. BB Gogoi, learned Additional Public
Prosecutor, appearing for the State of Assam.
2]            This appeal has been preferred by the present appellant who
was convicted under Section 304 Part-II IPC and sentenced to undergo for
7 (seven) years rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs. 5,000.00 (Rupees
five thousand) in default 6 (six) months R.I. for the offence under Section
304 (Part-II) IPC.
3]            The facts of the case is that one Sikandar Ali of village
Routhgram P.S. Ratabari lodged an FIR on 6.8.2007 at Kaliganj Watch Post
stating the facts as follows- Imrana Begum daughter of the informant
Sikandar Ali was married to one Faizur Rahman. Faizur Rahman stays in
Aizawl in connection with his work. During absence of her husband the
above named accused persons tortured Imrana. The brother-in-law of
Imrana pressed her for establishing sexual relationship with him and
tortured her for that reason. Imrana reported that matter to the informant
and other family members. Once when Imarna came to ‘naiyor’ then the
accused person also came to the house of the informant and after assuring
that they would not torture Imrana any more took Imrana back to their

                                       3
house. But thereafter also the accused person tortured Imrana on the
demand of dowry. On 6.8.2007 at around 12 noon one Abdul Rahim went
to the house of the informant and reported that Imrana had committed
suicide by hanging in a tree. On receipt of the information Sikandar Ali and
others went to the father-in-law’s house of Imrana and saw the dead body
of Imrana lying on the ground in a jungle like area adjacent to the house.
They did not find any sign of hanging on the body of Imrana. Rather on
different parts of the body of Imrana there were injury marks.
4]            On receipt of the FIR, a GD Entry vide No. 77 dated 6.8.2007
was made at Kaliganj Watch Post and the said FIR was forwarded to
Karimganj P.S. where a case was registered vide Karimganj P.S. Case No.
339/2007 under Section          498 (A)/ 304(B) IPC. The police started
investigation. During the course of investigation, inquest and Post Mortem
Examination were done on the dead body of the deceased. The
Investigating Officer visited the place of occurrence and prepared a sketch
map. He also recorded the statements of the witness. Subsequently, after
completion of investigation charge sheet was submitted against accused
Abdul Khalique, Rehan Uddin, Kushrun Bibi and Sofia Begum under Section
498(A)/ 304 (B) IPC.

                                     4
5]            The offence under Section 304 (B) IPC being exclusively
triable by the court of Sessions, the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Karimganj committed the case to the court of Hon’ble Sessions Judge.
Subsequently, the case was transferred to this court and formal charges
under Section 498(A)/ 304(B)/ 302/34 IPC were framed against the
accused persons. The charges were read over and explained, all the
accused persons pleaded not guilty and claimed for trial.
6]            The accused persons Rehan Uddin, Khusrun Bibi and Sofia
Begum were not found guilty and they were acquitted from the charges and
accused/ appellant Abdul Khalique was found guilty under Section 304 (Pt-
II) of IPC and sentenced with 7 (seven) years rigorous imprisonment and
with fine of Rs. 5,000/- (Rupees five thousand) only in default 6 (six)
months R.I under Section 304 (Pt-II) of IPC.
7]            Being aggrieved, the present appeal is preferred by the
appellant from jail.
8]            Mr. BN Gogoi, learned Amicus Curiae, appearing on behalf of
the appellant submits that the conviction of the appellant is merely on the

                                        5
basis of the confessional statement wherein the appellant confessed that on
6.8.2007 he asked for water from his sister-in-law i.e. the deceased Imrana
Begum and while serving a glass of water in the table she scolded the
appellant with filthy language and on the heat of passion he could not
control his anger and dealt a blow on her head with a             two battery
torchlight lying nearby. Accordingly, she fell down on the ground,
immediately thereafter she died.
9]             It is also submitted that the sketch map shows that the dead
body of the deceased was recovered outside the house beneath a tree. The
learned trial court after considering the evidence of the various witnesses
came to the finding that it has been established beyond all reasonable
doubt that the accused (appellant) Abdul Khalique struck a blow on the
head of deceased Imrana Begum by means of torchlight and as a result
Imrana Begum died. The learned trial court also held that the confessional
statement of the appellant was made voluntarily without any inducement or
threat and it was recorded by the Magistrate after following the requisite
due procedure of law. The learned court below considered that the
appellant struck the blow on the head of the deceased not with intention to
kill her rather in the heat of passion, the appellant hit Imrana Begum with a

                                      6
torchlight. The learned trial court accordingly convicted the appellant for
the offence of culpable homicide, not amounting to murder.
10]           Mr. BN Gogoi further submits that the prosecution failed to
establish various injuries on the body of the deceased and as such the
conviction of the appellant by the learned trial court and the reason of
death of the deceased is not beyond any reasonable doubt. Further Mr.
Gogoi submits that a duty was cast upon the prosecution side at least to
verify and come to the conclusive finding as to how the injuries occurred on
her body. Having not done so, the finding of the learned court below
cannot be considered to be proper and beyond all reasonable doubt, so he
prays for setting aside the judgment of conviction and sentence awarded
against the present appellant.
11]           Mr. BB Gogoi, learned Addl. Public Prosecutor, Assam on the
other hand submits that there is nothing to show that there is failure on the
part of the prosecution in proving the cause of the death of the deceased
beyond any reasonable doubt. Mr. Gogoi submits that the confessional
statement is recorded as per law and PW 10 who recorded the statement
has adhered to the rules prescribed by the law and within the parameters
of Section 164 of the Cr.P.C. The confessional statement is made on the

                                        7
own volition of the appellant and there is nothing wrong in considering the
said confessional statement and subsequent corroboration with respect to
injuries as per the post-mortem report wherein it has been specifically
mentioned that in the opinion of the doctor, the deceased died due to head
injury leading to cardio respiratory failure which is ante- mortem in nature.
12]            Mr. BB Gogoi also submits that as the learned trial court
considered the voluntary statement on its full face value, under such
circumstances, the learned trial court is correct in holding that the appellant
is liable to be convicted for the offence of culpable homicide not amounting
to murder inasmuch as it was held by the learned trial court that he hit the
deceased with torchlight in the heat of passion. Accordingly Mr. Gogol
submits that there is no requirement of any interference by this court in the
present appeal.
13]            Mr. BB Gogoi also going through the record further submits
that the appellant has already completed the sentence inasmuch as he was
arrested on 8.8.2007 and as per the record he was in jail hajot during the
pendency of the trial and the trial court has directed the period of hajot to
be set off. In such a situation, the appellant has already completed the

                                      8
sentence and there is no further necessity keeping the said appellant
behind the bar.
14]    Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels. This court
do not find any wrong in the findings of the trial court. However, as
submitted by the learned counsels that he has already undergone the
sentence so awarded, he be released immediately on receipt of the copy of
the order of this judgment. However, it is specifically mentioned that this
court has not find any wrong in passing the judgment and conviction.
15]           Mr. BN Gogoi, learned Amicjus Curiae has rendered his
valuable assistance while conducting this appeal and as such a sum of Rs.
7,500.00 be paid to him as his professional fees by the Assam State Legal
Services Authorities.
16]           Accordingly, this appeal is disposed of. Send back the LCR.
                                                         JUDGE
 Eam…


