                            IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                      Criminal Appeal No. 183/2014
                             1. Alim Uddin
                             2. Musstt. Anwara Begum,
                                 M/o Appellant No. 1
                                                            ----- Appellants
                                         – VERSUS –
                             1. State of Assam
                             2. Abdul Hamid,
                                 S/O Late Sirajuddin,
                                 R/O Chirnal,
                                 P.O. Dargaband,
                                 Ram Krishna Nagar P.S.,
                                 Dist:- Karimjang, Assam, Pin-788166
                                                            ----- Respondents
                                              BEFORE
                 Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                  Advocate for the appellants                  : Mr. DK Bagchi.
                  Advocate for Respondent No. 1                : Ms. S Jahan, Addl. PP.
                  Advocate for Respondent No. 2                : None appears.
                  Date of hearing                               : 20th of July, 2017.
                  Date of Judgment                              : 1st of August, 2017.
                                JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)
                  This is an appeal filed under Section 374(2) of the Cr.PC against
     the judgment and order, dated 27.11.2013, passed by the learned Sessions
     Judge, Karimganj, in Sessions Case No. 126/2011, whereby the accused
        Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                                       Page 1 of 14

appellants were convicted, under Sections 304-B IPC, and sentenced them
to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for 10 (ten) years each.
2.            Heard Mr. DK Bagchi, learned counsel for the appellants. Also
heard Mrs. S Jahan, learned Additional Public Prosecutor, appearing for the
State of Assam/respondent No.1. None appears for the respondent No. 2.
3.            The prosecution case, briefly stated, is that, the deceased
Monowara Begum got married with accused No. 1 Alim Uddin on
18/09.2017 and thereafter, they started living together as husband and wife.
After about 2 (two) months of their marriage, the accused No. 1 and his
mother, Musstt. Anwara Begum demanded Rs. 2,000/- from the deceased.
The deceased came back to her parental home and informed her family
members about the demand. Since they were unable to meet the demand
aforesaid, she became reluctant to go back to the company of her accused
husband. She stayed at her parental home for about 5 (five) months.
Thereafter, she lodged an FIR with the Police, in connection with the
harassment caused to her by the accused persons by way of demanding
money. However, this matter was settled between herself and her accused
husband on being mediated by some co-villagers. After such settlement, she
went to her in-laws home. After about one month of her stay in her in-laws
house, she died in unnatural circumstances.
4.            On receipt of the FIR, dated 11.06.2009, on such facts, the Ram
Krishna Nagar Police Station registered a case being No. 45/2009 under
Section 304-B of the IPC.
5.            On receipt of the case, on being committed to it, the learned
Sessions Judge framed a formal charge against the accused appellants under
Sections 302/34/304(B) of the IPC. The trial commenced as the accused
appellants pleaded innocence.
    Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                         Page 2 of 14

6.            In their statements recorded under Section 313 of the Cr.PC, the
accused appellants stated that the deceased committed suicide. They denied
the accusation against them.
7.            The prosecution examined 10 witnesses to substantiate the
charges under Section 302/304-B/34 IPC. It is revealed from the evidence
on record that the entire case of the prosecution hinges on circumstantial
evidence.
8.            Let us now scan and discuss the evidence on record to find out
whether the evidence led by the prosecution has substantiated and proved
the accusations levelled against the accused appellants.
9.            Of the witnesses examined by the prosecution, PW1 Abdul
Hamid and PW9 Abdul Ahad, are the brothers of the deceased, PW2,
Fulon Bibi is the mother of the deceased. The rest of the witnesses knew the
deceased. A bare reading of the evidence tendered on record would show
that except the evidence of PW1 Abdul Hamid, PW2, Fulon Bibi and PW9
Abdul Ahad none of the witnesses have deposed to any incriminating
circumstances.
10.           It would be necessary to analyse the incriminating circumstances,
if any, in the prosecution case.
11.           PW1, Abdul Hamid, deposed that his sister (deceased) married
the accused Alim Uddin on 18.3.2008 and that the first two months of their
marriage was peaceful. Thereafter, the accused Alim Uddin started
demanding dowry of Rs. 30,000/- from the deceased. The deceased
reported the matter to PW1, and since he was unable to provide the
money, it was decided that deceased would not return to the society of the
accused husband, Alim Uddin. After about 5 months, when the accused
husband did not take the deceased into his society, an FIR was lodged at
Kalibari Police Out Post. The then Incharge of the Police Out Post along
    Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                          Page 3 of 14

with two villagers, namely Abdul Nur and Ismail Ali settled the dispute and
the deceased started residing with the accused husband. PW2 further
deposed that on 11.6.2009 he heard about the death of his sister. He rushed
to the residence of accused persons but on the way at Dargabond Bazar he
found the dead body of his sister lying on the road. He noticed blood
oozing out from the ear of the deceased. PW1 also deposed that he noticed
an injury mark on the thigh of the deceased.
12.           PW2, Fulon Bibi, the mother of the deceased, deposed that while
her daughter was residing in the house of one Nur Islam the people of
locality had filed a case against them. After this incident Nur Islam asked
accused Alim Uddin and the deceased to shift elsewhere. The accused
shifted to a different place but the deceased remained in the house of PW2
for about 6 months. During the period of stay of the deceased at her
paternal house accused Alim Uddin did not take steps to take her back to
his society, and hence, an FIR was lodged with Kalibari Police Out Post.
The dispute was, however, settled at the instance of the then Incharge of
the Police Out Post with the help of mediators. Thereafter, deceased started
to cohabit with the accused husband. According to PW2, four months after
the resumption of marital ties, one day Anowara Begum, the other accused,
came to her house crying that deceased had consumed Aldrin, a poisonous
substance. PW2 then rushed to the residence of accused persons and found
her daughter lying with the accused husband holding her. PW2 also
deposed about the bleeding from ear of the deceased and injury marks on
foot. PW2, however, made a categorical statement that the deceased told
her that she did not consume poison. In the later part of the evidence PW2
also deposed that accused persons pressurized her daughter for purchasing a
piece of land.
13.           PW9, Abdul Ahad, is also one of the brothers of deceased. PW9
deposed that her sister, the deceased, married the accused Alim Uddin
about 4 ½ years back. After few months of the marriage the accused Alim
    Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                       Page 4 of 14

Uddin started demanding dowry of Rs. 30,000/- from the deceased as
dowry whereafter the deceased lodged an FIR though at the initiative of
Police the dispute was settled and the deceased started residing with the
accused husband. PW1 further deposed that when he heard that his sister
was in danger he rushed to the residence of accused persons but by that
time the deceased was taken to Dargabond bazar. According to PW1, by
the time he reached Dargabond bazar, his sister had died. PW1 deposed
that he noticed blood oozing out from the ear of the deceased and an
injury mark on the front side of the head.
14.           The incriminating circumstances deposed to by the three material
witnesses, as reproduced above, may be stated as follows;
                            i. That the marriage of the deceased with the accused
                               Alim Uddin took place on 18.3.2008
                           ii. That the deceased died on 11.6.2009 which would
                               mean that the death occurred within 7 years of
                               marriage
                          iii. That the accused husband had demanded cash of Rs
                               30,000 from the deceased.
                          iv.  That the deceased died of consumption of Aldrin, a
                               poisonous substance.
                           v.  That the marital life of the deceased, prior to her
                               death, had two distinct phases. One soon after the
                               marriage and before the lodging of FIR at Kalibari
                               O.P and the other phase beginning after the
                               disputes were settled and marital ties were
                               resumed. The death of Manowara, the deceased,
                               took place during the second phase of her stay with
                               the accused persons.
    Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                             Page 5 of 14

15.       The question, which arises, is whether these circumstances have
been proved by reliable evidence, and if so, whether these
circumstances are sufficient to establish the charge under Section 304-B
IPC against the appellants.
16.       It is noticeable that there is a lack of coherence in the prosecution
case, about the cause due to which the deceased had to stay in her
paternal residence for a period of 6 months. According to the evidence
of PW1 and PW9, the two brothers, the deceased returned to her
paternal house because the accused husband had demanded a cash of
Rs. 30,000/- from the deceased and since they were reluctant to pay the
amount it was decided that deceased would stay back. When the
accused husband did not take the deceased back to his society the FIR
was lodged which, of course, was not prosecuted later due to
settlement arrived at between both the parties.
17.       The evidence of PW2, so far as the events leading to the lodging
of FIR is concerned, is entirely different. According to PW2 while her
daughter was residing in the house of one Nur Islam the people of
locality had filed a case against them. After this incident Nur Islam asked
accused Alim Uddin and the deceased to shift elsewhere. The accused
shifted to a different place but the deceased remained in the house of
PW2 for about 6 months. During the period of stay of the deceased at
her paternal house, accused Alim Uddin did not came to take her back
to his society and hence an FIR was lodged with Kalibari Police Out
Post.
18.       Now, even though PW2 has also deposed about the demand for
money made by the accused persons her evidence is entirely vague as to
whether the demand was made soon after the marriage or after the
resumption of marital ties. The prosecution, on one hand, has relied on
the evidence of PW1 and PW9 who have categorically deposed that
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                              Page 6 of 14

deceased returned to their house soon after the marriage and reported
them about the demand for cash made by the accused, whereas
according to PW2 the deceased returned to her house because she was
asked to shift from the residence of Nur Islam.
19.       When the principal prosecution witnesses are at variance on
cruelty, one of the most material aspects of dowry death, it would
necessitate a corroboration of allegation of dowry demand.
20.       PW3, Nur Islam is the person in whose house the deceased was
residing soon after marriage with accused Alim Uddin. His evidence is
entirely silent on any of the aspects of dowry demand. Infact, on a
query made by the trial Court, PW3 deposed that he knew the deceased
from her childhood but so far as the accused persons are concerned he
knew them for about 6 months only. In view of the long acquaintance
with the deceased vis-à-vis the accused persons it seems very unlikely
that PW2 has suppressed any material fact which could point towards
the dowry demands, as alleged.
21.       PW 4, Abdul Nur, whose name finds mention in the evidence of
PW1, as one of the mediators who settled the dispute between the
deceased and accused persons, deposed that two months after the
marriage trouble started and thereafter deceased left for her paternal
residence. Later, he mediated in the settlement of disputes. In his cross-
examination, PW4, specifically deposes that the dispute was a family
dispute.
22.       PW5, Ismail Ali, is another mediator who was instrumental in
settling the dispute between the deceased and the accused persons. He
too deposed in the lines of PW4 and hence his evidence needs no
repetition.
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                       Page 7 of 14

23.       PW7, Alfu Bibi, is related to deceased as well as the accused
persons. In her examination she too deposed that she noticed accused
Anowara Begum crying aloud that deceased had consumed poison. In
her cross examination she deposed that she had noticed normal
relationship between deceased and the accused persons.
24.       It will be seen from the evidence of PWs 3, 4, 5 & 7 that none of
these witnesses have supported the evidence of PW1 and PW9 about
the demand for dowry or any piece of land.
25.       Let me now turn to the compromise deed, Ext 2. A reading of
Ext 2 shows that deceased and accused Alim Uddin promised to settle
their dispute and prayed for dismissal of the FIR. Ext 2 contains no
reference as to any demand for cash.
26.       The learned trial Court having reproduced the entire evidence on
record summarized his appreciation, in paragraph 19 of the impugned
judgment, as follows:
                     “From the above discussion of evidence the following
                     facts are found to be established either by direct or
                     indirect admission or by corroborative reliable evidence
                     (i) Death of Monowara Begum was due to consumption
                     of poison; (ii) The death was within the period of around
                     one year of her marriage with the accused Alim Uddin;
                     (iii) The incident of consumption of poison was happened
                     (sic) in her matrimonial house when both the accused
                     were also there in the house; (iv) There was a previous
                     ejahar lodged by the deceased Monwara on 6.5.2009 on
                     the allegation of torture of demand of dowry amounting
                     to Rs 30,000/- (v) The same dispute was settled between
                     the parties at the instance of mediator and an Aposhnama
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                               Page 8 of 14

                     was executed by both Monwara Begum and her husband
                     Alim Uddin; (vi) The death was occurred around one
                     month after the above settlement and Aposhnama (vii)
                     Name of pw 7 found as named accused in the previous
                     FIR by deceased Monowara Begum on 6.5.2009”.
27.       So far as the first circumstance mentioned by the learned trial
Court is concerned, there appears no direct evidence on this point that
any of the prosecution witnesses have seen the deceased consuming
poison. Infact, there is no evidence at all as to what deceased had
consumed. PW2, in her evidence deposed that when she asked the
deceased the latter had categorically stated that she had not consumed
poison. Thus, the only manner in which such a finding could have been
arrived at was by circumstantial evidence. In this regard I have analysed
the evidence of PW6, Medical Officer who had conducted the post
mortem examination. His evidence reveals that cause of death could not
be ascertained. Apparently, no trace of poison was noticed in terms of
physical symptoms. The evidence of PW6, Medical Officer as well as the
evidence of PW10, Investigating Officer, reveal that after the post
mortem, the viscera was sent for Forensic examination. The forensic
examination report of the viscera is found on record. The report,
communicated vide Letter No. DFS.481/3294/TOX-1047/20009 dated
15.6.2009, disclosed that examination of stomach, liver, spleen, kidney,
heart and lung of the deceased revealed no trace of any poison. It is
thus established that there exist neither any direct evidence nor any
circumstantial evidence to sustain the finding that the deceased died due
to consumption of poison.
28.       The second and third circumstances are admitted facts and these
circumstances alone do not answer the charge.
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                        Page 9 of 14

29.       The fourth circumstances, so far as the fact of lodging of FIR is
true, but it does not necessarily prove that the facts stated in the FIR
were true. The FIR was never taken to its logical conclusion with proper
investigation rather; nipped at the bud by a settlement between the
parties. Hence the mere lodging of FIR is no proof of the facts that its
contents are true.
30.       The sixth and seventh circumstances as mentioned in the
judgment of learned trial Court are of no relevance.
31.       In Mustafa Shahadal Shaikh vs State of Maharashtra, reported
in (2012) 11 SCC 397, the Hon’ble Supreme Court while outlining the
ingredients of Section 304B IPC held as under:-
                     “9. In order to convict an accused for the offence
                     punishable under Section 304-B IPC,        the following
                     essentials must be satisfied:
                     (i) the death of a woman must have been caused by burns
                     or bodily injury or otherwise than under normal
                     circumstances;
                     (ii) such death must have occurred within seven years of
                     her marriage;
                     (iii) soon before her death, the woman must have been
                     subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any
                    relatives of her husband;
                    (iv) such cruelty or harassment must be for, or in
                    connection with, demand for dowry”.
                     When the above ingredients are established by reliable
                     and acceptable evidence, such death shall be called dowry
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                              Page 10 of 14

                     death and such husband or his relatives shall be deemed to
                     have caused her death.
32.       It was further held in Mustafa (supra), that to attract the
provisions of Section 304-B, one of the main ingredients of the offence
which is required to be established is that “soon before her death” she
was subjected to cruelty or harassment “for, or in connection with the
demand for dowry”. The expression “soon before her death” used in
Section 304-B IPC and Section 113-B of the Evidence Act is present with
the idea of proximity test. It was also held that though the language
used is “soon before her death”, no definite period has been enacted
and the expression “soon before her death” has not been defined in
both the enactments. Accordingly, the determination of the period
which can come within the term “soon before her death” is to be
determined by the courts, depending upon the facts and circumstances
of each case. However, the said expression would normally imply that
the interval should not be much between the cruelty or harassment
concerned and the death in question. In other words, there must be
existence of a proximate and live link between the effect of cruelty
based on dowry demand and the death concerned. If the alleged
incident of cruelty is remote in time and has become stale enough not
to disturb the mental equilibrium of the woman concerned, it would be
of no consequence.
33.       In Bansi Lal vs. State of Haryana, reported in (2011) 11 SCC 359
the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that while considering the case
under Section 304-B, cruelty has to be proved during the close
proximity of the time of death and it should be continuous and such
continuous harassment, physical or mental, by the accused should make
life of the deceased miserable which may force her to commit suicide.
The Supreme Court further held that where the cruelty has been proved
during the close proximity of the time of death then the provisions
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                               Page 11 of 14

of Section 113B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 providing for
presumption that the accused is responsible for dowry death, have to be
pressed in service.
34.       In paras 19 and 20 of the judgment, the Supreme Court has
further held as follows:-
                     “19. It may be mentioned herein that the legislature in its
                     wisdom has used the word “shall” thus, making a
                     mandatory application on the part of the court to
                     presume that death had been committed by the person
                     who had subjected her to cruelty or harassment in
                     connection with any demand of dowry. It is unlike the
                     provisions of Section 113-A of the Evidence Act where a
                     discretion has been conferred upon the court wherein it
                     had been provided that court may presume abetment of
                     suicide by a married woman. Therefore, in view of the
                     above, onus lies on the accused to rebut the presumption
                     and in case of Section 113-B relatable to Section 304-
                     B IPC, the onus to prove shifts exclusively and heavily on
                     the accused. The only requirements are that death of a
                     woman has been caused by means other than any natural
                     circumstances; that death has been caused or occurred
                     within 7 years of her marriage; and such woman had been
                     subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any
                     relative of her husband in connection with any demand of
                     dowry.
                     20. Therefore, in case the essential ingredients of such
                     death have been established by the prosecution, it is the
                     duty of the court to raise a presumption that the accused
                     has caused the dowry death. It may also be pertinent to
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                              Page 12 of 14

                     mention herein that the expression “soon before her
                     death” has not been defined in either of the statutes.
                     Therefore, in each case, the Court has to analyse the facts
                     and circumstances leading to the death of the victim and
                     decide if there is any proximate connection between the
                     demand of dowry and act of cruelty or harassment and
                     the death.”
35.       In Baijnath v. State of M.P., reported in (2017) 1 SCC 101 the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, while referring to presumptions under Section
113B of Evidence Act, held that the presumption is founded on the
proof of cruelty or harassment of the woman dead for or in connection
with any demand for dowry by the person charged with the offence.
The presumption as to dowry death thus would get activated only upon
the proof of the fact that the deceased lady had been subjected to
cruelty or harassment for or in connection with any demand for dowry
by the accused and that too in the reasonable contiguity of death. Such
a proof is thus the legislatively mandated prerequisite to invoke the
otherwise statutorily ordained presumption of commission of the
offence of dowry death by the person charged therewith.
36.       What was necessary for the trial Court was to arrive at a finding
whether prosecution evidence establishes the charge of cruelty soon
before the death. The presumptions under Section 113B Evidence Act
could have been drawn only when the elements of cruelty soon before
the death would have been established. On an analysis of the law as
reproduced above in the light of the facts of the present case it is found
that the prosecution case regarding demand for dowry lacks credence in
view of the incoherent depositions of PW1, PW2 and PW9 on the point
of demand for cash. There is absolutely no corroboration either from
any quarters that accused persons had demanded any cash or had made
any unlawful demand from the deceased. Even if, for a moment a
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                              Page 13 of 14

reliance is placed on the evidence of PW1 and PW9 regarding demand
for cash, it is equally a categorical statement coming from their own
mouth that such a dispute was settled in presence of villagers and the
marital ties between the deceased and accused husband had resumed.
The evidence of PW1 and PW9 are absolutely silent on the point that
after the resumption of marital ties there was any unlawful demand
made by the accused persons. If no demand was made after the
resumption of marital ties, it hits out at one of the most essential
attribute of Section 304-B IPC which provides that acts of cruelty must
take place soon before the death of deceased. In view of the inherent
improbabilities in the version of material witnesses PW1, PW2 and PW9,
the allegations of demand of cash amount of Rs 30,000/- is found to be
not reliable and consequently the essential ingredient of cruelty upon
the deceased soon before her death stands not established.
37.       In view of the discussions, made above, this appeal deserves to
allowed. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.
38.       The order of conviction and sentence passed against the
appellants by the impugned judgment are set aside. The appellants are
set at liberty forthwith.
39.       Send down the LCR along with the copy of this judgment.
                                                                JUDGE
 Nilakhi
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2014                                        Page 14 of 14


