                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                          Criminal Appeal No. 31 of 2008
                              Achit Debnath
                                                                     ----- Appellant.
                                         – VERSUS –
                              The State of Assam.
                                                                     ----- Respondent.
                                               BEFORE
                      Hon’ble mr. Justice HITESH KUMAR SARMA
                   Advocate for the appellant       : Mr. G Baishya,
                                                      Mr. R Baruah, Advocate.
                   Advocate for Opposite Party : Mr. NJ Dutta, Addl. Public Prosecutor.
                    Date of hearing and Judgment & Order ::              13th of July, 2017.
                                     JUDGMENT & ORDER
                                                  (oral)
                   This appeal is preferred against the judgment and order dated
        26-12-2007, passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Fast Track
        Court, Sonitpur, Tezpur, in Sessions Case No. 58 of 2005, convicting the
        accused/appellant, under Section 304 Part-II of the Indian Penal Code
        and sentencing him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and
        also to pay a fine of Rs. 25,000/-, in default, further simple
        imprisonment for a period of 6 months.
        2.         I have heard Mr. G Baishya, learned counsel appearing on behalf
        of accused-appellant and Mr. NJ Dutta, learned Additional Public
        Prosecutor, Assam, for respondent.
        Crl. A. No. 31 of 2008                                                        Page 1 of 7

3.         The facts giving rise to the prosecution case is that the deceased
Lakhimoni Patar was in advance stage of pregnancy. Her husband,
Abhilal Patar, examined as PW3, called the accused-appellant, who was
a Pharmacist and used to treat patients with gynaecological problem,
for treatment of his wife. The accused-appellant visited the house of the
informant and advised him to take his wife to his chamber. The
informant brought his wife to the chamber of the accused-appellant. She
was admitted there on 19-07-2003. Due to failure to provide adequate
medical treatment, she died on 20-07-2003 there.
4.         The informant, examined as PW3, lodged the FIR, on the above
facts, with Itakhola Police Outpost, under Sootea Police Station. On
receipt of the FIR, police registered a case, investigated into it, collected
evidence, and finally, submitted charge-sheet against the accused-
appellant, under Section 304 Part-II of the IPC.
5.         The learned Sessions Judge framed a formal charge against the
accused under Sections 304/420 of the IPC, to which the accused-
appellant pleaded innocence and claimed to be tried. Therefore, the
trial was held before the learned Additional Sessions Judge.
6.         During the course of trial, the prosecution examined as many as
12 witnesses and the defence examined 2. In his examination under
Section 313 Cr.P.C, the accused-appellant is found to have denied the
accusations levelled against him.
7.         In view of the facts of the case, as well as the accusation, this
Court is required to decide whether the accused-appellant committed
culpable homicide not amounting to murder in respect of the deceased
wife of the informant with the child in her womb.
8.         In the instant case, for determination of the above issue, this
Court has scanned the evidence of the witnesses led by prosecution and
Crl. A. No. 31 of 2008                                              Page 2 of 7

the defence. It is found that the evidence of PW3, i.e., the informant
and the evidence of PW12, the doctor, who performed the post
mortem examination of the deceased, is of vital importance. Therefore,
before discussion of the evidence of the other witnesses, it would be
appropriate to take up the evidence of informant, PW3 and the doctor,
PW12.
9.         PW3/informant is heard saying that his wife, Lakhimoni Patar
was at the advanced stage of her pregnancy and she felt pain. This
witness called the accused-appellant to his house for treatment of his
wife. While visiting the house of the informant/PW3, the accused-
appellant advised him to take his wife to his chamber. That was on 19-
07-2003. At about 6.00 pm, PW3 took his wife/deceased to the
chamber of the accused-appellant. The accused-appellant assured PW3
that result would be available in the midnight and in case the pain
continues to increase and his wife did not deliver, he would take the
patient to doctor. Subsequently, he assured PW3 that it was not
necessary to take her anywhere and she would be alright in his chamber
itself. But the wife of PW3 died on the next day at about 4.00/5.00 pm.
It is an admitted position, found from the cross-examination of PW3,
that while his wife was brought to the accused-appellant, she was in
serious condition and she was brought to the accused-appellant as the
PW3 did not find any doctor.
10.        There is no dispute that the accused-appellant was a pharmacist
and not competent to offer treatment to any patient on his own. But, in
the instant case, although there is an attempt by the defence to say that
the accused-appellant did not offer any treatment to the deceased, yet
the fact remains that till death, she was in his chamber has no where
been disputed during the course of trial. A patient with child in her
womb, at the last stage of pregnancy, cannot be expected to be in the
Crl. A. No. 31 of 2008                                           Page 3 of 7

chamber of the pharmacy from the evening of 19-07-2003 till the late
evening of 20-07-2003 without any treatment.
11.        The evidence on record makes it crystal clear that the accused-
appellant used to treat patient for genealogical problem. Such evidence
as well as the position, as discussed above, coupled with the evidence of
the doctor, examined as PW12, who conducted the post mortem
examination of the deceased, shows that the deceased sustained severe
injury on her genital, both external and internal, which was ante
mortem in nature. The uterus, which was found, ruptured, containing a
dead male fetus. In his cross-examination, PW12 is heard saying that the
injuries found in the genital of the deceased could have been caused due
to handling of the deceased by untrained mid wife or ‘dhai’.
12.        The undisputed fact that the deceased was brought to the
chamber of the accused-appellant, remained there till her death, and
that the injury found in her genital was during that period, leaves this
Court with no doubt that the accused-appellant treated her during that
period of time.
13.        The evidence of PW4 is to the effect that the deceased was taken
to the chamber of the accused-appellant on the advice of the accused-
appellant himself.
14.        The evidence of PW1 is also that the accused-appellant was called
to the house of the informant/PW3 on 19-07-2003 for treatment of the
deceased as she was in advance stage of pregnancy, and on the advice
of the accused-appellant, she was brought to his chamber.
15.        The evidence of PW7 is categorical to the effect that the accused-
appellant treated the deceased in his chamber. Important evidence is
further led by PW2, who is heard saying that while he went to the
pharmacy of the accused-appellant for some medicines, he was asked to
Crl. A. No. 31 of 2008                                             Page 4 of 7

wait for some time as the accused-appellant was busy in treatment of a
serious patient. This evidence of PW2 supports the combined evidence
of PW3 and PW12, discussed above.
16.        The evidence of PW8 and PW9, who were declared hostile
during the course of recording their evidence, appears to be not
necessary for the decision in this case as corroborative and consistent
evidence of PW3, PW2, PW7 and PW12 prove the factum of treatment
of the deceased by the accused-appellant in his chamber, beyond all
reasonable doubt. It is not the quantity of evidence, but the quality that
costs for the decision of a case.
17.        Therefore in view of the unshaken evidence of PW2, PW3, PW4,
PW7 and PW12, this Court is of the view that the accused-appellant,
inspite of the fact that he is not a doctor, treated the deceased resulting
in her death along with the child in her womb.
18.        Now, let us scan the evidence of defence witnesses and whether
they have been able to disprove the prosecution story.
19.        The accused-appellant tried to stage a story, with the help of the
defence evidence that the deceased was found in the pharmacy of the
accused-appellant alone. There was none at the pharmacy except him.
Even PW3 was not present there. The evidence of DW1 appears to be
an attempt to show that it was not at the instance of the accused-
appellant that the deceased was brought to her pharmacy; rather, she
came on her own. There is no evidence led by DW1 that DW2 was
present at the place of occurrence at the relevant point of time when
the deceased was brought there. But DW2 wanted to make it appear
that he was present there. In respect of this fact, that DW1 himself
deposed that there was none except him at the place of occurrence.
Crl. A. No. 31 of 2008                                             Page 5 of 7

That being so, the evidence of DW1 and DW2 do not appear to inspire
confidence and appears to be unrealistic.
20.        In view of above discussions on the evidence on record, this
Court is of the firm view that it is because of the treatment given by the
accused-appellant, without being a doctor and not authorised to deal
with patients with genealogical problem, yet he had treated the
deceased causing the death of both the child and the deceased aforesaid.
It deserves a mention that during the course of treatment of the
deceased by the accused-appellant, she sustained injury in her genital
part, which is evident from the evidence of the PW12. It appears from
the evidence on record that the accused-appellant was a diploma holder
in pharmacist and in that area, he used to treat patients with pregnancy
and till delivery of the child. Therefore, since he was used to doing it, he
could not be said to have intended to cause death of the deceased in
the instant case. Therefore, apparently, there was no intention on the
part of the accused-appellant to cause death of the deceased and
therefore, the offence committed by the accused-appellant falls under
Section 304 Part-II of the IPC.
21.        The evidence being as above, the finding of guilt of the accused-
appellant under Section 304 Part-II by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, FTC, Sonitpur, Tezpur, appears to be on proper appreciation of
evidence.
22.        The learned trial Court convicted the accused-appellant under
Section 304 Part-II of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and also to pay a fine of Rs.
25,000/-, in default, further simple imprisonment for a period of 6
months.
Crl. A. No. 31 of 2008                                            Page 6 of 7

23.        In the facts and circumstances of the case, after hearing the
accused-appellant and the learned Additional Public Prosecutor, at
length, this Court is of the view that rigorous imprisonment for 2 years
and a fine of Rs. 10,000/-, in default for payment of fine, further simple
imprisonment for a period of 3 months will meet the ends of justice.
Accordingly, the sentence imposed by learned trial Court is reduced to
rigorous imprisonment for 2 years and a fine of Rs. 10,000/-, in default
for payment of fine, further simple imprisonment for a period of 3
months. The fine, if realised, be given to the informant as
compensation.
24.        The appeal is, accordingly, partly allowed.
25.        Send down the LCR with a copy of this order.
26.        The accused-appellant will surrender before the trial Court to
serve out the sentence within one month.
                                                                JUDGE
Paul
Crl. A. No. 31 of 2008                                          Page 7 of 7


