                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     Criminal Appeal No. 183 of 2008
                              State of Assam.
                                                                ----- Appellant
                                          – VERSUS –
                                  1. Abdul Jalil Laskar,
                                  Son of Mosabbir Ali.
                                  2. Nanu Mia
                                  3. Mustt. Asarunnessa,
                                  Wife of Nanu Mia,
                                  All are resident of village-Dakhin Mohanpur Part-VII,
                                  P.S. Sonai in the district of Cachar, Assam.
                                                                ----- Respondent.
                                               BEFORE
                 Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                   Advocate for the appellant        : Mr. SC Biswas, learned counsel.
                   Advocate for Respondent            : Mr. NJ Dutta, Addl. P.P.
                    Date of hearing and Judgment & Order               11th of July, 2017.
                                      JUDGMENT & ORDER
                                                   (oral)
                   This is an appeal, preferred under Section 378 Cr.P.C. by the
        State of Assam, against the judgment and order dated 25-06-2008,
        passed by the learned Assistant Sessions Judge No. 1, Cachar, Silchar, in
        Sessions Case No. 66/2005, acquitting the accused-respondents of the
        charges under Sections 498(A)/313/34 of the IPC.
        Crl. A. No. 183 of 2008                                                        Page 1 of 4

2.         I have heard Mr. NJ Dutta, learned Additional Public Prosecutor,
for the appellant, State of Assam, and Mr. SC Biswas, learned counsel
for accused-respondents.
3.         I have scanned the evidence on record as well as the judgment
passed by learned trial Court, which is impugned in this appeal.
4.         Prosecution case, as it appears, is that the sessions case, in which
the impugned judgment was passed, arose out of a complaint filed by
the PW1/complainant before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Cachar, Silchar.
5.         On examination of the witnesses for the complainant, the
learned Magistrate found grounds to proceed against the accused-
respondents, under Sections 498A/313/34 IPC. Since Section 313 IPC is
triable exclusively by the Court of Sessions, the learned Magistrate
committed the case to the Sessions Judge, Cachar, Silchar after observing
necessary legal formalities. The learned Sessions Judge, Cachar, Silchar,
made over the case for trial to learned Assistant Sessions Judge No. 1,
Cachar, Silchar.
6.         After exhausting the procedure, the learned Assistant Sessions
Judge No. 1, Cachar, Silchar, framed formal charge against the accused-
respondents, under Sections 498A/313/34 of the IPC, to which the
accused-respondents, pleaded innocence. Hence, the trial proceeded
before the learned Assistant Sessions Judge No. 1, Cachar, Silchar. During
the course of trial, prosecution examined as many as 7 witnesses and the
defence examined 2 witnesses. The defence plea was of complete
denial, in their statements, recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
7.           On the basis of the charge and the evidence led by prosecution,
this Court is required to decide the following points:
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2008                                             Page 2 of 4

           (i) Whether the accused-respondents, in furtherance of their
           common intention, subjected the complainant/PW1 to cruelty on
           her failure to meet their demand for a television.
           (ii) Whether the accused-respondents caused miscarriage of the
           child of the complainant/PW1 by forcefully administering
           medicine.
8.         Mr. NJ Dutta, learned Additional Public Prosecutor has referred
the evidence of Medical Officer, Dr. Arun Paul Choudhury, examined as
PW7. The evidence of PW7 makes it appear that the victim/PW1 was
admitted in the Gynochology Department of Silchar Medical College
Hospital, on 17-08-2002. As per hospital record, at the time of her
admission in the hospital, she was bleeding. On investigation by the
doctor in the hospital, it was found to be a case of abortion. She was
discharged from hospital on 22-08-2002. As per hospital record,
marked as Ext.4, in connection with discharge, the gynosis was
incomplete abortion.
           During his cross-examination, he referred to the Ext. A, a
certificate, issued by Dr. KR Dey, who was working as Medical Officer
under him in Silchar Medical College Hospital. Since he knew his
handwriting and signature, the same was identified by him as Ext. A,
wherein Ext. A(1) is the signature of aforesaid Dr. KR Dey. In Ext. A, the
opinion of the doctor was that “it may be a natural occurrence.”
9.         From such evidence of the doctor, it appears that the forced
abortion, alleged in the instant case, was natural.
10.          Learned Additional Public Prosecutor, Mr. Dutta, has also
referred to the evidence of PW1, and has submitted that the evidence of
PW1 is succinct enough to show that she was assaulted by the accused-
respondents while she was carrying pregnancy. This occurrence of
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2008                                        Page 3 of 4

assault on the person of the complainant/PW1, as per the evidence on
record, happened on 16-02-2008, and she was evidently hospitalised on
17-02-2008. But the medical evidence on record is found to be silent of
any mark of assault on the person of the victim/PW1. It is definitely
because of the fact that the doctor did not find any mark of violence or
assault on the person of the PW1/victim/complainant, which negates the
evidence of PW1/victim that she was assaulted by the accused-
respondents. There is no other eye witness account on the alleged
assault on the person of the victim/complainant/PW1. The evidence on
record also indicates that there used to be quarrel and differences
between the accused-respondents and the complainant/PW1. None
witnessed the occurrence of assault is a fact emerged from the evidence
on record.
11.        The evidence of PW1/complainant and the evidence of the
doctor examined as PW7, read in combination, do not make it appear
to be a case of causing miscarriage by the accused-respondents by
assaulting her/complainant/PW1.
12.        The learned trial Court also, in the judgment, while discussing the
evidence of the witnesses, in details, recorded the finding that the
prosecution failed to prove the case against the accused-respondents
beyond all reasonable doubt.
13.        On scrutiny of the judgment, particularly, the discussions on the
evidence of the witnesses, examined by both sides, there does not
appear any reason to interfere with the order of acquittal recorded by
the learned trial Court.
14.        In view of above, the appeal is dismissed.
15.        Send down the LCR to the Court below with a copy of this
judgment and order immediately.
                                                                     JUDGE
Paul
Crl. A. No. 183 of 2008                                           Page 4 of 4


