                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     Criminal Appeal No. 50 of 2008
                            Md. Nazimuddin Laskar,
                            Son of Abdul Matin Laskar,
                            Resident of Village Rajyeswarpur Part-VII,
                            P.O. Katagaon, P.S. Lala, Dist. Hailakandi, Assam.
                                                           ----- Appellant
                                       – VERSUS –
                            State of Assam.
                                                           ----- Respondent.
                                             BEFORE
                 Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                 Advocate for the Appellant : Mr. MA Sheikh, Mr. HR Khan, Ms. A Begum,
                                                  Mr. MH Choudhury, Advocates.
                 Advocate for Respondent        : Mr. PS Lahkar, Addl. P.P.
                 Date of hearing and Judgment & Order ::            1st of August, 2017.
                                JUDGMENT & ORDER (Oral)
                 This appeal, under Section 374(2) of the Cr.P.C., is preferred
       against the judgment and order, dated 04-12-2007, passed by learned
       Sessions Judge, Hailakandi, in Sessions Case No. 22 of 2006, convicting
       the accused-appellant, under Sections 366 of the IPC, to undergo
       rigorous imprisonment for 3 years and to pay a fine of Rs.1000/-, in
       default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 1 month.
       2.        None appears on behalf of accused-appellant on call for last
       several days. Therefore, the appeal is taken up for disposal on merit after
       examining the evidence on record as well as the judgment of the
       learned trial Court. However, heard Mr. PS Lahkar, learned Additional
       Public Prosecutor, Assam.
       Crl. Appeal No. 50 of 2008                                                     Page 1 of 5

3.        The prosecution case, in brief, is that one Nurema Begum, the
victim, examined as PW4, was kidnapped by accused Md. Nazim Uddin,
on 27-01-2006, at about 7.00 p.m., from infront of her house while she
came out for throwing water outside her house after chopping
vegetable etc. in their kitchen along with her two sisters. She was
kidnapped by the accused-appellant, who was accompanied by 2/3
other persons. Her father/PW1 came home back. She was found missing.
He was searching the victim/PW4/his daughter upto 02-02-2006 and
when she could not be traced out, PW1 lodged the FIR with Lala Police
Station.
4.        Lala Police Station registered a case, being No. 13/2006, under
Section 366(A) of the IPC, investigated into it, collected evidence,
arrested the accused and, finally, submitted the charge-sheet against
the accused-appellant for commission of an offence, under Section
366(A) of the IPC.
5.        During the course of investigation, police got the statement of the
victim recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and also she was examined
by a doctor in the hospital.
6.        Charge was framed under Section 366 of the IPC against the
accused-appellant,         to  which    the   accused-appellant     pleaded
innocence.
7.        In this case, prosecution examined as many as 7 witnesses,
including the Medical Officer and the Investigating Police Officer. The
defence examined none. The defence subjected the prosecution
witnesses to cross-examination. The defence case is of total denial. In his
statement, recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C., the accused-appellant
denied the fact of commission of the offence alleged.
8.        On completion of the trial, the accused-appellant was convicted
and sentenced by the learned Sessions Judge, Hailakandi, as indicated
above.
Crl. Appeal No. 50 of 2008                                          Page 2 of 5

9.          Now, in view of the evidence on record, let us see whether
prosecution has been able to substantiate the charge against the
accused-appellant for commission of the offences of kidnapping of the
victim/ PW4 by the accused-appellant with intent that she may be, or
knowing that it is likely that she will be compelled to marry any person
against her will.
          For determination of the above noted point, this Court has
examined the evidence on record.
10.       In this case, it is found that out of 7 witnesses, examined by the
prosecution, PW6 and PW7 are respectively the Medical Officer and the
Investigating Police Officer. PW1 is the informant. PW2 and PW3 are the
sisters of the victim. PW4 is the sister of PW2 and PW3 and the victim
herself. PW5 is the elder brother of PW2, PW3 and PW4.
11.       It appears from the evidence of PW1, PW2, PW3 and PW5 that
none of them are the witnesses to the occurrence. PW2 and PW3 only
stated, during their evidence, that they heard the victim/PW4 shouting
with the word ‘didi’ from outside their house at about 7.00 pm, when she
went out of her house.
12.       PW4, the victim, herself also deposed in her evidence that once
she raised alarm, but after putting clothes in her mouth by the accused-
appellant, she could not raise alarm any further. Therefore, the evidence
of PW2 that PW4 shouted as ‘didi’ appears to have been supported by
PW4 as she herself also deposed that once she shouted raising alarm.
But, so far the accusation that the accused-appellant abducted or
kidnapped her, she has no independent knowledge, and even her
evidence does not reveal that she was reported about such fact by
PW4. Similar is the evidence of PW4 with that of PW2, therefore, needs no
repetation.
13.       The evidence of PW5 is that he is the elder brother of PW2, PW3
and PW4. According to him, police recovered the victim from the house
Crl. Appeal No. 50 of 2008                                          Page 3 of 5

of the accused-appellant after 22 days, which is in tune with the
evidence of victim/PW4 as she also deposed that she was recovered
after 22 days from the house of the accused-appellant.
14.       PW1        is   the informant, who lodged the    FIR  finding     her
daughter/PW4 missing from her house. The FIR was lodged on 02-02-2006,
i.e., after about 4 days from the date of occurrence, as the occurrence
took place on 27-01-2006. He has explained, in his evidence that the
delay was due to the fact that he was in search of his daughter/PW4
during these days and only when he could not trace out her, lodged the
FIR.
15.       Therefore, from the evidence discussed above, it appears that to
hold that the accused-appellant to have committed the offence, this
Court has to rely upon the only evidence of victim/PW4.
16.       PW4, in her evidence, on oath, before the Court made a
categorical statement that the accused-appellant, along with 2/3
others with him, kidnapped her from infront of her house and kept her in
his house for 22 days till she was recovered by police. She also deposed
that she was kidnapped and even she was prevented to raise alarm by
putting clothes in her mouth by the accused-appellant. There is no
corroborative evidence to support such statement of the evidence of
PW4 by any other witness, as discussed above.
17.       In the evidence of PW7 as well as of PW4 herself, it is found that
her statement was recorded, on oath, by the learned Magistrate, under
Section 164 Cr.P.C., which is available on record. In her statement before
the learned Magistrate, under Section 164 Cr.P.C., the victim claimed
her age to be 17 years. She categorically stated before the learned
Magistrate, in her such statement, that she was taken by the accused to
his house about 25 days back. She visited the shop of the accused-
appellant at about 7.00 pm on the date of occurrence, and therefrom,
both of them left for the house of the accused-appellant. They were in
Crl. Appeal No. 50 of 2008                                          Page 4 of 5

love for last 5 years. Her brother went to the house of the accused-
appellant to take her back, but she did not come. They also got married.
18.       The fact that has come out from the statement of the victim,
under Section 164 Cr.P.C., is that she has not alleged that the accused
kidnapped or abducted her. The remaining part of the offence under
Section 366 IPC will come only when the first part, i.e., kidnapping or
abduction is proved. In the statement made under Section 164 Cr.P.C.,
the victim herself has deposed that she went to the house of the
accused-appellant on her own from his shop on the date of occurrence
at the time she was alleged to have been kidnapped.
19.       The statement of the victim, under Section 164 Cr.P.C., and in her
evidence, on oath, recorded by the learned trial Court leaves this Court
with no doubt that she is not reliable in her version as she shifted from
one version to another in her both the statements.
20.       That being so, the evidence of victim/PW1 is not found reliable
and there is doubt about the correctness of the version put forth by her
in her evidence before the Court.
21.       Therefore, in view of the discussions on the evidence above, in
the considered view of this Court, the appeal deserves to be allowed.
22.       Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.
23.       Send down the LCR along with a copy of this judgment and
order.
                                                                   JUDGE
Paul
Crl. Appeal No. 50 of 2008                                         Page 5 of 5


