                      IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM : NAGALAND : MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.68 OF 2008
                            Sri Abdul Haque
                            S/o. Abdul Latif
                            Vill- Mugrapur
                            P.S. Badarpur
                            Dist- Karimganj, Assam
                                                         ...........Appellant
                           - VER SUS -
                            The State of Assam
                                                         ..……. R espondent
                                             BEFORE
                   HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE HITESH KUMAR SARMA
      Advocate for the Appellant           :- Mr. A D Choudhury
                                              Mr. S Deka
      Advocate for the Respondent          :- Mr. H Sarma, Addl. Public Prosecutor, Assam
      Date of Hearing & Judgment           :- 12.07.2017
                                                                        Page 1 of 4

                           JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
            This is an criminal appeal, filed under Section 374(2) of the Cr.P.C., against
the judgment and order dated 21.02.2008, passed by the learned Sessions Judge,
Karimganj in Sessions Case No.66/2006 convicting and sentencing the accused
appellant with Rigorous Imprisonment for 10 (ten) years and a fine of Rs.5000/- with a
default clause.
2.          The prosecution case is that on 04.06.2006, the accused appellant set
ablaze the dwelling house of the informant/PW1 in the midnight while she was
sleeping. While the burning roof of the house was about to fall on her, she woke up,
came out and found the accused appellant leaving the place of occurrence.
3.          On the basis of the FIR lodged on the said facts, the police registered a
case, investigated into it, collected evidence, and finally, submitted Charge-Sheet
against the accused appellant under Section 436 of the IPC.
4.          Occurrence under Section 436 of the IPC being triable exclusively by the
Court of Sessions, the same was committed to the learned Court of Sessions Judge,
Karimganj by the learned Committing Magistrate. After exhausting all the formalities,
a formal Charge against the accused appellant was framed under Section 436 of the
IPC, and then, the learned Trial Court proceeded to record evidence and completed
the trial.
5.          In this case, the prosecution examined as many as 6 witnesses, including
the Investigating Police Officer.   The defence examined none.        From the trend of
cross-examination, it appears that the defence pleaded not only innocence but also
denied the accusation leveled against the accused appellant.
                                                                    Page 2 of 4

6.           On the basis of the evidence on record, this Court is required to see
whether the accused appellant committed mischief by setting fire on the dwelling
house of the informant/PW1.
7.           For the decision of the above issues, the evidence on record has been
carefully scanned.
8.           It is found from the evidence of the PW1 herself that she did not see the
accused appellant setting fire in her house. But, while she came out, she saw the
accused fleeing from the place of occurrence. The other witnesses, PW2 and PW3 are
the daughters of the PW1/informant residing in the same campus but in separate
house.    They came out of the house after hearing alarm raised by their mother
PW1/informant.
9.           From the evidence on record, it is found to be in admitted position that
there is no eye witness account of the occurrence. PW1/informant saw the accused
fleeing from the place of occurrence, which is a circumstance supported by another
circumstance that two days before the date of occurrence, the accused appellant
threatened the PW1 that he would cause damage to them. This was because of the
refusal of the second daughter of the PW1/informant to live with the accused appellant
who has already married her elder sister. That means, the accused appellant wanted
to keep his sister-in-law with him with a view to live together and refusal to such a
proposal made the accused to cause damage to the dwelling house of the
informant/PW1.
10.          The evidence of the PW2 and PW3 appears to have not been assailed
during the cross-examination and the same remained intact and unshaken. That being
so, in spite of the fact that there is no eye witness account of the occurrence, the
above two circumstances leads this Court to an irresistible conclusion that it was none
                                                                   Page 3 of 4

but the accused appellant who set dwelling house of the informant/PW1 ablaze
thereby attracting the provisions of Section 436 of the IPC.
11.         In view of the above, I do not find any such infirmity in the judgment
passed by the learned Trial Court in the aforesaid Sessions case necessitating
interference by this Court.
12.         Therefore, the judgment, aforesaid, passed by the learned Sessions Judge,
Karimganj is affirmed. The appeal is dismissed.
13.         Return the LCR along with a copy of this judgment.
                                                                          JUDGE
Pratibha
                                                                  Page 4 of 4


