                       THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
     (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                             ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                            Criminal Appeal (J) 17/2016
                                Dilip Deka
                                     Vs
                              State of Assam
                                       BEFORE
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE HITESH KUMAR SARMA
        Advocate for the Appellant          : Ms. B Sarma, Amicus Curiae.
        Advocate for the Respondent         : Mr. N K Kalita, Additional PP.
        Date of hearing                     : 28.06.2017.
        Date of judgment                    : 10.07.2017
                          JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
        This is an appeal from jail, preferred by accused/appellant, Sri. Dilip Deka,
who has been convicted by judgment and order dated, 19.12.2015, passed by the
learned Sessions Judge, Morigaon, in Sessions Special Case No. 22/2014, arising
out of Jagiroad PS Case No. 343/2014 (corresponding to GR Case No.
2250/2014), under Sections 448/376 (2) (h) IPC, read with Section 4 of the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences         Act, (hereinafter referred to as
                                                                          Page 1 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

POCSO Act), to suffer S/I for 10 (ten) years and to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-
(rupees five thousand), i/d, to suffer S/I for another 6 (six) months.
2)      I  have      heard   Ms.    B  Sarma,    learned   Amicus-Curiae   for   the
accused/appellant.      I have also heard Mr. N K Kalita, learned Additional PP for
the state.
3)      The victim, PW3, is a minor daughter of the informant. On 27.10.2015,
at about 3:00 pm, while the father of the victim went out for work and the
mother went to the house of the accused/appellant, the elder brother of the
father of the victim, came to the house of the informant. The victim was alone
in her house. He gagged her and penetrated his finger into the vagina of the
victim. After putting off her clothes, when she raised alarm, the neighbours came
out and the accused/appellant fled away from the place of occurrence. On the
basis of such facts, the informant/PW2, lodged the FIR with the Jagiroad Police
Station, which after registration of the case under Section 448/370(2)(h) read
with Section 4 of the POCSO Act, investigated into it, collected evidence and
finally submitted charge-sheet against the accused/appellant under the aforesaid
sections of law.
4)      The learned trial court, framed charge against the accused/appellant under
Section 448 IPC and Section 4 of the POCSO Act.               The accused/appellant
pleaded innocence to the charge.
5)      The prosecution, in this case, examined as many as 8 (eight) witnesses.
The defence examined 1 (one) witness.
                                                                         Page 2 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

6)      In his statement, recorded under Section 313 Cr.PC, the accused/appellant
has taken the plea that there is a boundary dispute between the parties, and as
warned earlier, with a view to teach the accused/appellant a lesson, they have
filed this false case. He denied the accusation in his such statement.
7)      Now, the issues for decisions are : whether the accused/appellant
committed trespass into the house of the informant with a view to commit an
offence, and, whether he has committed penetrative sexual assault on the person
of the victim, a minor ?
8)      For the decision of the above issues, let us look into the evidence on
record.
9)      PW3 is the victim. The learned trial court did not record her evidence on
oath, as she was found to be not able to understand the consequence of oath.
        On her examination, she is found to have stated very categorically that
while she was sleeping with her sister in her house, the accused/appellant came,
gagged her with his right hand, and penetrated one of his left hand fingers in her
vagina. She felt pain and started crying.     The accused told her that he would
pay her some money and asked her not to cry. He also did bite on her left
thigh.    It further came out from her evidence that at the relevant time of
occurrence, her father was out for work and her mother went to the house of
the accused/appellant. The accused/appellant is the elder brother of her father.
In her cross-examination also, she is found to have stated that at the relevant
time of occurrence, her sister was sleeping and she woke up later. She came out
                                                                       Page 3 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

from the room crying, and then, met her mother who was coming back to her
house. She informed her mother about the occurrence. Another lady was also
with her mother. She also stated that there is a quarrel existed between her
family and the accused/appellant prior to the occurrence. She answered in the
negative that she falsely implicated the accused/appellant due to enmity and on
being tutored. She also denied that the accused did not penetrate his finger into
her vagina.       The evidence of PW3, as regards the accusation, that the
accused/appellant entered their house, gagged her and penetrated his finger in
her vagina remained intact in her cross-examination also. PW2 is the informant
and mother of the victim. She deposed that the victim was 12 years of age on
the date of occurrence, and that the accused/appellant is the brother of her
husband.     She was in the house of the accused/appellant at the time of
occurrence, and her daughter/victim was sleeping in her house with her younger
daughter. She rushed back to her house after hearing the cry of the victim, and,
on being asked, the victim narrated to her that the accused/appellant penetrated
his finger into her vagina continuously for which she felt pain on her lower
abdomen. This witness saw the accused/appellant going out of their house at the
relevant time.       The accused/appellant also denied the accusation while the
informant asked her about the occurrence. The father of the victim and husband
of this PW2 was not present in the house. There was a meeting in her house
about 4:30 pm on the same day, where Prabhat Medhi, Dimbeswar Medhi,
Manto Medhi, Dip Deka and some others gathered for a “bichar” on the matter.
The accused/appellant was also present there. In presence of the said persons,
                                                                      Page 4 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

the accused/appellant, according to PW2, said that he only kissed the victim.
This witness filed the FIR, marked Ext.3. So, the evidence of PW3, victim and
PW2, as regards the sequence of occurrence, corroborates each other.
10)     Let us now look into the evidence of PW1, the Senior Medical Health
Officer, Morigaon Civil Hospital. She examined the victim on 28.10.2014, on
the requisition of the police, in connection with the instant case, and her report
is marked Ext.2. The victim went to her with the history of sexual assault and
forceful entry of fingers into her vagina at her home on 27.10.2014, by her own
relative.    As per her evidence, the X-Ray examination was done for
determination of the age of the victim and as per the X-Ray report, the age of
the victim is 12-14 years. She is also found to have stated that as per her opinion,
on the basis of the Clinical, Radiological and Laboratory examination, the age of
the victim would be between 12-14 years. She also detected no injury except
mild tenderness her lower abdomen and the private part, at the time of
examination of the victim. The evidence of PW4 and PW5 also makes it appear
that the victim was about 12 years of age. So, the evidence of the aforesaid
witnesses, makes it more than clear that the victim was a minor at the relevant
time of the occurrence, and, in any case, she was below 18 years of age. The
victim claimed, in her evidence, that she felt pain due to penetrating finger in her
vagina by the accused/appellant. The doctor, examined as PW1, also found that
the victim had some tenderness in her lower abdomen and in the private part.
Therefore, the consistent evidence of the PW1, PW2 and PW3, leaves no doubt
that the victim was sexually assaulted.
                                                                          Page 5 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

11)     Now, the question is, whether it was the accused/appellant who
committed penetrative sexual assault on the victim ?
12)     PW4 appeared in the place of occurrence after hearing hue and cry, and
she saw the victim crying. The victim stated to her that the accused/appellant
had penetrated his finger in her private parts, and also did bite on her right
thigh.   Similar is the evidence of PW5, who also appeared at the place of
occurrence, after hearing hue and cry. There he found some persons and the
victim narrated to them that while she was sleeping, the accused/appellant
entered into her house, gagged her, put off her pant, and then, penetrated his
finger inside her private parts. PW6 also found the victim crying and when he
asked for the reason, she also narrated to him about the occurrence to the effect
that the accused/appellant embraced her, gagged her, kissed her and penetrated
his finger in her private parts. From such evidence, it is more than transparent
that the accused/appellant committed sexual assault on her. That apart, when the
informant rushed to her house back, she saw the accused/appellant leaving their
house. So, the evidence of the victim to the effect that the accused/appellant
sexually assaulted her and the evidence of such fact is corroborated by PW2,
PW4, PW5 and PW6. The evidence of PW4, PW5, PW6 corroborates each
other to the effect that they were narrated about the facts of the case by the
victim herself, naming the accused/appellant as the person who did the
penetrating sexual assault on her. PW7 also corroborates the evidence of PW4,
PW5 and PW6. She appeared at the place of occurrence immediately after the
occurrence. She was also narrated about the facts of the case by the victim.
                                                                      Page 6 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

PW8 is the Investigating Officer. He investigated the case, recorded statements
of the witnesses and got the victim examined by doctor as well as got the
statement of the victim recorded by the Magistrate, under Section 164 Cr.PC. In
her statement, under Section 164 Cr.PC also, the victim appears to be consistent
with her evidence in the court.     So, there is abundance of evidence to support
and corroborate the evidence of the victim (PW3) as well as the PW1, as
indicated above. On the other hand, even if, for a moment, the evidence of the
witnesses for the prosecution are not believed, there is no reason to disbelieve
the evidence of the victim/PW3, because her consistent evidence remained intact
even after cross-examination by the defence. On the other hand, this court finds
that the evidence of the victim, examined as PW3, inspires confidence because of
the consistency in her evidence. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State
of Himachal Pradesh –vs- Sanjay Kumar alias Sunny, reported in (2017) 2 SCC 51,
in paragraph 31 observed as follows :
            “………………………By now it is well settled that the testimony of a
            victim in cases of sexual offences is vital and unless there are
            compelling reasons, which necessitate looking for corroboration of a
            statement, the courts should find no difficulty to act on the testimony
            of the victim of a sexual assault alone to convict the accused. No
            doubt, her testimony has to inspire confidence. Seeking corroboration
            to a statement before relying upon the same as a rule, in such cases,
            would literally amount to adding insult to injury. The deposition of
            the prosecutrix has, thus, to be taken as a whole. Needless to reiterate
                                                                         Page 7 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

            that the victim of rape is not an accomplice and her evidence can be
            acted upon without corroboration. She stands at a higher pedestal
            than an injured witness does. If the court finds it difficult to accept her
            version, it may seek corroboration from some evidence which lends
            assurance to her version. To insist on corroboration, except in the
            rarest of rare cases, is to equate one who is a victim of the lust of
            another with an accomplice to a crime and thereby insult
            womanhood. It would be adding insult to injury to tell a woman that
            her claim of rape will not be believed unless it is corroborated in
            material particulars, as in the case of an accomplice to a crime. Why
            should the evidence of the girl or the woman who complains of rape
            or sexual molestation be viewed with the aid of spectacles fitted with
            lenses tinged with doubt, disbelief or suspicion? The plea about lack of
            corroboration has no substance (See Bhupinder Sharma v. State of
            H.P). Notwithstanding this legal position, in the instance case, we
            even find enough corroborative material as well, which is discussed
            hereinabove.”
13)     Therefore, on the basis of the evidence discussed above, this court has
absolutely no hesitation to hold that the accused/appellant committed sexual
assault on the person of the victim.
14)     Now, let us see as to whether the defence has been able to disprove the
prosecution case.
                                                                             Page 8 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

15)     The defence examined one witness, namely, Rupa Deka. She is found to
have stated in her evidence that the accused/appellant and the informant were
next door neighbours. The accused/appellant has been residing there since last 2
years, and the plot of land, over which he is residing, belonged to his brother.
The land was under the possession of the informant before construction of the
house by the accused/appellant. There is a dispute between the informant and
the accused/appellant in connection with demarcation of boundary, and
therefore, their relationships got strained. The accused/appellant’s daughter got
married to a muslim boy, which, people of the village did not like, and rather,
objected.    Under such facts, the people of the village conspired to frame
accused/appellant falsely with a view to teach him a lesson.          She has no
knowledge about the occurrence. She is also found to have stated in her cross-
examination that at the relevant time of occurrence, she was talking to the
informant, and accused/appellant was not at his home. Such evidence of the
DW1 is not convincing in view of the fact that neither the victim nor the
informant are found to have stated that she was with the informant/PW2 at the
relevant time of occurrence. What is most important in her evidence is that she
deposed that the accused/appellant was not at his home at the time of
occurrence. This is but natural in view of the fact that at the relevant time, the
accused/appellant was in the house of the victim. So, the non-availability of the
accused/appellant in his own house at the relevant time of occurrence rather
lends support to the story of the prosecution that the accused/appellant went to
the house of the victim and committed the offence at that time. Therefore, it
                                                                        Page 9 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

appears that the defence completely failed to disprove or to create any doubt in
the veracity of the prosecution story.
16)     Therefore, in view of the evidence on record, the prosecution has been
able to prove the commission of sexual assault by the accused/appellant on the
victim/PW3.
17)     The defence has taken the plea, during argument, that the offence, does
not fall within the purview of the provisions of Section 3, and as such, the charge
under Section 4 of the POCSO Act is incorrect. Section 4 of the POCSO Act is
the penal provision for commission of any of the offences enumerated in Section
3 of the POCSO Act. Section 3(b) of the POCSO Act, provides that, a person is
stated to commit “penetrative sexual assault” if he inserts, to any extent, any
object or a part of the body, not being the penis, into the vagina, the urethra or
anus of the child or makes the child to do so with him or any other person.
18)     The evidence of the victim is categorical to the effect that the
accused/appellant penetrated his left finger into her vagina repeatedly.
Therefore, the offence committed by the accused/appellant falls under the
category of offence narrated in Section 3(b) of the POCSO Act.
19)     Now, it appears that the accused/appellant committed the offence in the
house of the victim. This fact has been established from the evidence on record
discussed above. Therefore, that the accused/appellant trespassed into the house
of the victim with a view to commit an offence, is a fact established on the basis
                                                                       Page 10 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016

of the evidence on record. Therefore, both the charges, under Section 448 IPC
and Section 4 of the POCSO Act, have been proved in this case.
20)     In view of the above, the learned trial court rightly recorded the order of
conviction of the accused/appellant. However, the learned trial court imposed
maximum punishment prescribed by Section 4 of the POCSO Act. In the
considered view of this court, in the facts and circumstances of the case, if the
substantive sentence is reduced to simple imprisonment for 7 it years will suffice
to meet the ends of justice. In respect of punishment in the form of fine, and the
default clause, this court finds no reason to interfere with.       The substantive
sentence of simple imprisonment is reduced to simple imprisonment of 7 years.
21)     Accordingly, the appeal is partly allowed.
22)     Send down the LCR with a copy of this judgment.
23)     A copy of the judgment shall also be furnished to the Superintendent,
District Jail, Morigaon for furnishing a copy thereof to the accused/appellant.
24)     This court records its appreciation for the assistance rendered by learned
Amicus Curiae.       The learned Amicus-curiae be paid an amount of Rs. 7,000/- as
remuneration.
                                                                         2JUDGE
Basumatary
                                                                        Page 11 of 11
Criminal.Appeal (J) 17/2016


