                                                                                               1
                        IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
               CRIMINAL APPEAL (JAIL) NO.95 OF 2015
                                     HUSSAIN AHMED LASKAR
                                               -Versus-
                                                                      ……..appellant/ petitioner
                                       THE STATE OF ASSAM
                                                                …..opposite party/ respondent
                                        B E F O R E
                     HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
           For the appellant                               : Mr. Mr. SK Agarwal,
                                                             (Amicus Curiae)
           For respondents                                 : Mr. B Bhuyan
                                                             (Addl. Public Prosecutor, Assam)
           Date of Judgment & Order                         : 30-06-2017
                                     JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
                        Heard Mr. SK Agarwal, learned Amicus Curie and Ms. B Bhuyan, learned
           Addl. PP, Assam.
           2.            The appellant Hussain Ahmed Laskar has been convicted under Section
           304(B) IPC by the learned Sessions Judge, Cachar, Silchar in Sessions Case
           No.180/2013 and sentenced to imprisonment for 10 years and fine of Rs.2,000/-
           with default stipulation.
           3.            The prosecution case as unfolded during trial is that the victim Wahida
           Begum was married to the accused/appellant Hussain Ahmed Laskar. She was
Crl.Appeal (Jail) No.95 of 2015

                                                                                                     2
           subjected to torture by the accused/appellant and other members of his family
           for demand of dowry. After about 6 months of the marriage, the parents of the
           victim got the information that the victim died. It was suspected by her parents
           that death of the victim was due to administration of poison. The father of the
           victim, PW-1, lodged the FIR (Ex. 1). The police registered the case, visited the
           place of occurrence, prepared inquest report, send the dead body for post-
           mortem examination, recorded statement of the witnesses and on completion of
           investigation submitted charge-sheet against the present accused/appellant
           Hussain Ahmed Laskar and his brother Ali Ahmed Laskar.
           4.         During trial both the accused persons pleaded not guilty to the charge
           5.          In order to bring home the charges altogether six witnesses, namely
           PW1, PW2 & PW4, being father, uncle and mother respectively, of the victim,
           PW3, the doctor and PW5 & PW6 being the investigating officers have been
           examined. Learned Trial Court, on appreciation of the evidence, acquitted the co-
           accused Ali Ahmed Laskar
           6.           The accused/appellant has been convicted and sentenced u/s 304-B IPC
           by the learned Trial Court, essentially drawing a presumption under Section
           113(B) of the Evidence Act, in absence of direct evidence.
           7.         Section 304B IPC and sec 113B Evidence Act reads as under:
                                304B. Dow ry death.--(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by
                                any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal
                                circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that
                                soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by
                                her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with,
                                any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death", and
                                such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.
                                (2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment
                                for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may
                                extend to imprisonment for life.
Crl.Appeal (Jail) No.95 of 2015

                                                                                                    3
                                “113B. P resum ption as to dow ry death – When the question is
                                whether a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it is
                                shown that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by
                                such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any
                                demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person had caused
                                the dowry death.”
           8.        A bare      reading of section 304-B of the IPC and Section 113-B Evidence
           Act would show that presumption of dowry death shall be raised only on proof
           of the following essential precondition
                       (i) Death of the victim woman occurred within seven years of marriage;
                       (ii) Death was caused by burns or bodily injury or has occurred otherwise
                      than under normal circumstances;
                      (iii) Soon before her death victim had been subjected to cruelty or
                      harassment by her husband or his relatives.
                      (iv) Such cruelty or harassment was for, or in connection with any
                      demand for dowry.
           9.      Admittedly the death of the victim was within seven years of marriage. The
           PW-3, Dr. Gunajit Das performed the post-mortem examination and the PM
           report      has been proved as Ex. 6. Evidence of the doctor and the post mortem
           report (Ex. 6) transpire, that opinion regarding              cause of death was kept
           pending for want of forensic examination report of the                  vicara. From the
           testimony of PW5, the investigating officer,         it appears that the vicara preserved
           for      FSL examination was rendered unfit for forensic examination, because of
           the delay in sending the same to the FSL. Evidently death of the victim was
           neither caused by burn or other injury. As per the inquest report, Ex 2, there was
           a black mark on the arm, below the armpit. Ex 6 post mortem report disclosed
           regarding a bruise, bluish in colour, over lateral aspect of the left arm and a
           pressure abrasion on middle lateral side of left thigh. Nature and location of the
           above injuries are hardly suggestive of any intentional assault. There is also no
           reason for attributing the cause of death to such an insignificant and superficial
Crl.Appeal (Jail) No.95 of 2015

                                                                                              4
           injury. What therefore transpires is that the cause of death remained undisclosed
           in the present case.
           10.           All the PW-1, PW2 and PW4 admittedly arrived the place of occurrence
           after the death of the victim and found the body of the victim lying in the house
           of the accused/appellant. The PW1 father of the victim stated in his evidence
           that the victim died after six months of her marriage with the accused Hussain
           Ahmed.          According to him, after the marriage when the victim visited the
           parental house for the first time, she expressed happiness and stated that she
           was happy in her matrimonial home.          He has further stated that 10-15 days
           before the death, when the victim visited his house, she made complain of
           physical and mental torture for not giving TV and fridge at the time of marriage.
           She also stated that the co-accused Ali Ahmed Laskar (acquitted), the brother of
           the accused Hussain Ahmed Laskar tried to develop illicit physical relationship
           with her
           11.            Pw-2, Md. Jahan Uddin Laskar, the brother of Pw-1 deposed, that after
           receiving the information about the death of the victim over phone, he informed
           Pw-1 and thereafter, he also went to the house of the victim and found the body
           of the victim lying in the house of the accused person. This witness has also
           stated that when the victim visited her parents for the second time after
           marriage, she stated that she was subjected to torture by the accused persons
           for not giving fridge and T.V.
           12.            Pw-4, Musstt Imarun Nessa, mother of the victim deposed that after
           marriage when she visited their house for the first time she expressed her
           happiness in the matrimonial home. She further stated that after 1½ months of
           the marriage, when the victim visited her house, she complained of physical and
           mental torture by the accused person and her in-laws for not giving fridge and
           motor bike at the time of marriage. She also stated during cross-examination
           that from the marriage till her death, the victim visited her parental house 5-6
           times.
Crl.Appeal (Jail) No.95 of 2015

                                                                                                 5
           13. PW-5, the investigating officer, clearly stated that there was no allegation of
           demand of dowry or physical torture in the GD entry made on 04-08-2009, on
           the basis of which, investigation was set into motion. The cross examination of
           PWs-1, 2 and 4 as well as the testimony of the PW5 revealed, that none of
           these three witnesses had ever stated during their statement recorded under
           Section 161 Cr.P.C about any demand of dowry or physical and mental torture on
           the victim for such demand . No doubt, all omission cannot be considered as
           contradiction, but the omission of material facts constituting the offence,
           certainly amounts to contradictions. Total silence of all the prime witnesses
           regarding the physical and metal harassment and torture on the victim for dowry
           demand during their statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C, in the facts
           and circumstances of the case, by no stretch of imagination be brushed side as
           insignificant omission.
           14.            Learned trial court is found to have endeavored to rely upon Ex. 1,
           the FIR, for getting support to the allegation of torture and harassment            for
           demand of dowry.         Evidently, occurrence took place on 04-08-2009 and on the
           same day police was informed and a GD entry was made on the basis of such
           information.         The FIR, Exhibit-1 was lodged on 05-08-2009.            Pw-5, the
           Investigating Officer has stated in his evidence that the investigation of the case
           started on the basis of the GD entry No.60 dated 04-08-2009 made in the
           Kachudaram Out Post.          The categorical evidence of the PW5 was that on the
           basis of the GD entry, he visited the place of occurrence, got the inquest report
           prepared by the Magistrate, recorded the statement of the witnesses, prepared
           sketch map, send the body for PM examination and there after the FIR, Ex. 1
           was lodged on 05-08-2009.            What is apparent from the above evidence of
           thePW5 is that exhibit-1, FIR was lodged during the course of investigation and
           therefore, Exhibit-1 the FIR, could not be admitted in evidence because of the
           bar created by section 162 of the Cr.P.C.
           15.          What therefore follows is that PW1, PW2 and PW4 stated for the first
           time in their evidence in court, regarding         the physical and metal harassment
           and torture on the victim for not giving       fridge, TV etc. at the time of marriage.
Crl.Appeal (Jail) No.95 of 2015

                                                                                             6
           Admittedly the deceased visited her parental house 5-6 times from the marriage
           till her death. According to Pw-1, during the last visit of the victim to paternal
           home before 10-15 days of the occurrence, she has stated regarding demand of
           T.V and fridge and physical and mental torture for such demand.            Whereas,
           according to Pw-2 and 4, it was during second visit of the victim after 1½
           months of marriage, she stated regarding physical and mental torture for
           demand of T.V and fridge etc. According to PW1 and PW2 demand was for TV
           and fridge, whereas, according to PW4 the demand was for TV and bike.
           Therefore, the testimony of the PW1, PW2 & PW4 appears to be inconsistent and
           contradictory with regard to the date and time of complain by the victim
           regarding demand of TV fridge etc and physical and mental torture for such
           demand. What is further evident is that except a bald and omnibus statement
           that the victim was subjected to physical and mental harassment, nothing has
           been stated specifically as to the nature of physical or mental torture. In the
           above facts and circumstances, the oral testimony of the PW1, PW2 and PW3
           regarding physical and mental torture on the victim for dowry demand does not
           appear to be reliable and worthy of inspiring confidence. What therefore follows
           is that the prosecution evidence falls short of proving the essential precondition,
           for drawing presumption under section 113B of the Evidence Act, beyond
           reasonable doubt.
           16.           The Apex Court in Gurdeep Singh Vs. State of P unjab and Ors reported
           in (2011) 12 SCC 408 while dealing with the presumption under section 113(B)
           vis-a vis the offence under sec 304-B IPC, held as under:
                                “W e first take up the argum ent relating to Section 304-B and
                      the presum ption draw n under Section 113-B. A bare reading of Section
                      304-B pre supposes several facts for its applicability, they being: (i)
                      death should be of burns or bodily injury or has occurred otherw ise
                      than under norm al circum stances; (ii) W ithin seven years of the
                      m arriage; and (iii) soon before her death she had been subjected to
                      cruelty or harassm ent by her husband or his relatives. This Court in
                      Suresh K um ar Singh case (2009) 17 SCC 243; (2011) 1 SC Crl. 989 has
                      held that even if one of the ingredients is not m ade out, the
                      presum ption under Section 113(B) of the Evidence Act w oulds not be
Crl.Appeal (Jail) No.95 of 2015

                                                                                             7
                      available to the prosecution and the onus w ould not shift to the
                      defence.”
            17.          In view of what has been discussed herein above, it is abundantly
           clear that the prosecution evidence is grossly inadequate to bring home the guilt
           of the accused under section 304-B IPC by the aid of presumption under Section
           113(B) of the Evidence Act.       Accordingly, the conviction and sentence of the
           accused is set-aside and the accused be set at liberty forthwith if not required in
           any other case.
           18.            Appeal is allowed.
           19.           Appreciating the assistance rendered by Mr. SK Agarwal, learned
           Amicus Curiae, I hereby provide that he will be entitled to Rs.7500/- as fees,
           which shall be paid by the Guwahati High Court Legal Services Committee, upon
           production of a copy of this judgment.
           20.            Send down the LCR.
                                                                        JUDGE
           Smita
Crl.Appeal (Jail) No.95 of 2015


