                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
         (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 99 OF 2008
1.      Sri Lakhan Deka                -           Accused/ Appellants
2.      Sri Deepak Deka
        Son of Sri Lakhan Deka,
        Both are residents of Bor Bagan,
        P.S. Mangaldoi, District-Darrang,
        Assam.
        -Vs-
        State of Assam                -            Respondent
                                         PRESENT
                 HON’BLE MRS. JUSTICE RUMI KUMARI PHUKAN
                Advocates for the appellants :   Mr. R.L.Yadav,
                Advocates for the respondent:    Mr. B J. Dutta , Addl. PP.
                Date of hearing              :   11.7.2017
                and Judgment
                          JUDGEMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
        This Criminal Appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated
12.5.2008 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Darrang Mangaldai in Sessions Case
No.97(DM)06 (GR Case No.193 of 2006) U/Ss 498-A/304-B/34 IPC, whereby the
accused appellants were convicted and sentenced to undergo RI for 2 (two) years and
to pay fine of Rs. 2,000/- in default of payment therefore, to suffer further rigorous
imprisonment for 2(two) months each, for the offence U/S 498-A/34           IPC. Being
aggrieved with the conviction and sentence as aforesaid, the appellants preferred this
appeal.

                                             2
2.      I have heard Mr. R L Yadav , learned counsel for the accused appellants. Also
heard B.J.Dutta,, learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State of Assam. Perused
the impugned Judgment and the evidence adduced by the prosecution and the record.
3.      The gist of the prosecution case is that on 14.3.2006, one Shri Gangadhar Deka
lodged an FIR with the O/C Mangaldoi Police Station, alleging that his brother’s
daughter Anima Deka (deceased) was given marriage to Sri Dipak Deka (appellant
no.2) about 11 years ago and since her marriage, both appellant nos. 1 and 2 and
mother-in-law of the deceased used to commit torture upon her both physically and
mentally at her matrimonial home on the demand of dowry and ultimately they caused
her death on 12.3.2006.
4.      On receipt of the FIR a case was registered as Mangaldoi P.S.Case
No.103/2006 U/S 304 (B) IPC and thereafter Investigating Officer started investigation
and arrested both the appellants and later on they were released on bail. Both the
accused appellants were charge-sheeted.
5.      The learned Chief Judicial Magistrate Darrang, Mangaldoi took cognizance of
the offence in GR Case No.193/06 on the basis of the aforesaid police case and
transferred the file to the Court of Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Mangaldai for
disposal, who committed the case to the Court of Sessions, Darrang Mangaldoi under
the provisions of Section 209 CrPC.The learned Sessions Judge took cognizance of the
offence and framed the charge U/S 498-A/304(B)/34 IPC as against the accused
appellants to which they pleaded not guilty.
6.      In order to establish the charge the prosecution examined altogether 11
(eleven) witnesses and defence side also examined 3(three) witnesses in support of
their case. The plea of defence is of total denial.

                                             3
7.      At the conclusion of the trial the learned Sessions Judge held that the offence
U/S 304 (B) /34 IPC is not proved and acquitted the accused from the said charge.
However the Court held the accused appellants guilty U/S 498 (A)/34 IPC and
convicted them as a foresaid. Hence the appeal.
8.      The learned counsel for the appellants Mr. R L Yadav has submitted that in
order to convict a person U/S 498(A) the prosecution is duty bound to prove that the
demand of dowry was made to the victim and for that purpose the victim was tortured.
But in the instant case there is no proper evidence to support such contention that
victim was tortured in any manner on the demand of dowry. All the independent
witnesses were declared hostile and the evidence of parents and uncle are also vague
in nature, highly insufficient to warrant conviction. On the other hand, learned
additional P.P. Mr. B J Dutta has submitted that evidence of parents and the uncle are
sufficient to prove the offence of cruelty.
9.      Let us appreciate the evidence on record. PW 1 Shri Harender Deka is
neighbouring of the accused. From his deposition, it reveals that at the relevant time
he went to the house of the accused appellants having heard hulla baloo there and
saw the dead body of Anima Deka was lying upon the floor of the house of the
accused. That on being asked accused no.1 told him that the deceased committed
suicide by hanging in the room and her body was brought down by him from hanging
position. That accused No.2 was not found in the house at that time. PW 1 stated that
the occurrence took place at about 8 PM. PW 1 further deposed that he saw the
accused No.2 to leave his house at about 7 PM.
        In cross-examination, PW 1 stated that accused no.2 had been brought to his
house at about 12 midnight from the house of his paternal aunt. In cross-examination
he further confirmed that about 2/3 months prior to the incident accused No.2

                                           4
quarrelled with the deceased and then villages intervened and pacified both of them
and asked them to maintain a family life.
10.     PW 2, Smti Padumi Deka, PW 3, Smti Saibya Deka, PW 4, Smti Minati Deka, PW
5 Sri Daneswar Deka and PW-7 Sri Budha Deka are all co-villagers have stated nothing
save and except about finding of recovery of the dead body of the deceased after she
committed suicide. All above witnesses were declared hostile by the prosecution and
they did not extend support to the prosecution case. PW 3, Smti Saibya Deka, however
stated in her cross examination that she sometime heard quarrel between accused
appellant no.2 and his wife.
11.     PW 6, Shri Gangadhar Deka was paternal uncle of the deceased. From his
evidence, it reveals that accused no.2 was given marry to the deceased about 11 years
prior to the incident and after the marriage whenever the deceased used to come to
their residence, she used to complaint that she had been made subject of torture by
the accused persons on demand of cash amount, dowry etc. Deceased left 5 months
old daughter at the time of her death and after the delivery of the child once the
deceased was assaulted by both the accused appellants demanding dowry for which
she had to be hospitalised. The above fact of torture by the accused demanding dowry
was stated to him by the deceased alter on. That he saw injuries over thigh of the
deceased. In cross-examination. PW 6 stated that the deceased visited their residence
after two months of her delivery and then she complained that both the accused used
to torture her demanding dowry.
12.     PW 8, Shri Chintaram Saikia and PW 9 Srimoti Runu Saikia are the parents of
the deceased. From their evidence, it reveals that the deceased used to complain
before them that both the accused persons used to demand dowry from her and as
she failed to fulfil the demand she was subjected to torture. Prior to the incident, the

                                               5
deceased was tortured by both the accused persons and as such, she had to admit in
Mangaldoi Civil Hospital for her medical treatment. PW 9 has stated in her deposition
that in some occasion they gave money to the accused to keep their daughter in their
house. In cross examination. PW 8 has stated he did not file any FIR with the police
for assaulting   their daughter by the accused prior to the death of the deceased
because both the accused appellants assured him that they would not commit further
torture upon the deceased.
13.     PW 10, Dr. Nikhil Ranjan Sarma, Superintendent of Mangaldoi Civil Hospital,
conducted autopsy over the deadbody of the deceased and found the following-
                               “..........An irregular non continuous obligue ligature
                               mark was seen high up in the neck. Perchmentisation
                               was seen on cut section of the ligature mark. The cause
                               of death of Anima was due to asphyxia as a result of
                               hanging.”
14.      PW 11, Shri Kartik Baruah was the I.O. of the instant case. On sifting of his
testimony what I find is that his testimony is mostly of formal in nature and as such,
his testimony calls for non discussion in details.
15.     DW 1, Sri Kanti Ram Deka has deposed that about three months prior to the
death of the deceased, he treated her for POX and during the treatment he gave her
water purifying by recital of “Mantras”. Any way, during cross-examination, DW 1 has
admitted that he treated the deceased without seeing her.
16.     DW 2, Naimuddin Ahmed was the villager headman of the area, where the
alleged occurrence took place. During his evidence, he has only corroborated the facts
of the case and nothing more. From his evidence, it reveals that he lodged written

                                            6
information with the Mangaldoi Police Station on the following day morning about the
suicide and on the very day of the occurrence he informed the matter to the Police
Station over phone.
17.     DW 3, Smti Gandheswari Deka is the wife and mother of accused appellant nos.
1 and 2. She deposed that on the day of occurrence at the relevant time, she saw the
deceased hanging inside her house. She has further deposed that two months prior to
the death of the deceased, the deceased suffered from Small Pox and since then
behaviour of the deceased had been changed.
18.     On overall examination of the evidence on record it is apparent that save and
except the parents and the uncle of the deceased all other independent witnesses have
not supported the prosecution case. Inspite of being neighbour of the deceased they
have not uttered any sort of torture upon the deceased by the accused appellants. On
the other hand, the evidence of parents and uncle that are discussed above, it is
apparent that they have given their evidence in a very vague manner without narrating
any sort of incident of assault, torture or about time and manner of torture so as to
reflect what sort of torture was made upon her. Their evidence is absolutely silent as
regards the manner of torture or as to what sort of dowry demand was made by the
accused appellants. Though they have referred about certain incident of assault after
delivery of the child by the deceased and she was stated to be treated at hospital but
no sort of medical evidence has been produced in support of such claim. That apart,
no any complaint/FIR was made at the relevant point of time regarding such torture.
Their allegation was cryptic without any elaboration as to what sort of torture was
made upon her. The medical report also indicates about the matter of suicide as there
was a ligature mark on the neck and cause of death is asphyxia as a result of hanging.
There was no finding as about the injury about the body of the deceased. Thus

                                            7
medical report also not supportive of the allegation that the deceased was subjected in
torture by the accused appellants. The learned trial Court in its order has come to a
finding that prosecution has not been able to prove about the dowry demand and held
that the evidence of demanding dowry without specification is vague and ramble and
cannot be taken into consideration and accordingly the accused appellants were
acquitted from the charge U/S 304-B IPC. However, considering the fact that the
deceased committed suicide by leaving a baby, the Court come to finding about the
guilt of the accused appellants U/S 498(A)/34 IPC. Such a finding by the learned trial
Court appears to perverse as the main ingredient          of offence of cruelty is gist of
offence U/S 304-B IPC and the learned trial Court itself held that the said office is not
made out as against the accused appellants and accordingly finding of cruelty of
accused appellants as regards guilt cannot be maintained. As has been discussed
above, all the prosecution witnesses have not been able to prove the incident of
torture upon the victim to constitute the offence of cruelty within the purview of
Section 498(A)IPC. Leaving apart the defence evidence the prosecution itself failed to
bring home the ingredient of cruelty in the present case.
19.              Section 498A of the IPC provides as follows.
                 “498A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her
        to cruelty. – Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of
        a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with
        imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also
        be liable to fine.
        Explanation. – For the purposes of this section, “cruelty” means –
                 (a)    any willful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to
        drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to
        life, limb or health(whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
                 (b)    harassment of the woman where such harassment is with
        a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful
        demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of failure
        by her or any person related to her to meet such demand.

                                           8
                9. Extended meaning of cruelty. – (1) Clause (a). – Explanation (a)
        gives meaning of cruelty. The meaning of ‘cruelty’ for the purposes of this
        section has to be gathered from the language as found in section 498A
        and as per that section ‘cruelty’ means “any willful conduct which is of
        such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to
        cause grave injury or danger to life, etc. or harassment to coerce her or
        any other person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any
        property or valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any
        person related to her to meet such demand.
                A new dimension has been given to the concept of cruelty.
        Explanation to section 498A provides that any willful conduct which is of
        such a nature as is likely to drive a woman to commit suicide would
        constitute cruelty. Such willful conduct which is likely to take grave injury
        or danger to life, limb or health whether mental or physical of the woman
        would also amount to cruelty. Harassment of the woman where such
        harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to
        meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security would
        also constitute cruelty.
                The concept of cruelty and its effect varies from individual to
        individual, also depending upon the social and economic status to which
        such person belongs. ‘Cruelty’ for the purposes of constituting the offence
        under section 498A need not be physical. Even mental torture or
        abnormal behaviour may amount to cruelty and harassment in a given
        case.
                (2) Clause (b). – Clause (b) of Explanation to Section 498A enacts
        that the harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a
        view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful
        demand for property or valuable security or is on account of the failure by
        her or any person related to her to meet such demand would amount to
        cruelty for the purposes of section 498A. Clause (b) does not make each
        and every harassment cruelty. The harassment has to be with a definite
        object, namely to coerce the woman or any person related to her to meet
        any unlawful demand. Hence, mere harassment is not cruelty. Mere
        demand for property, etc. by itself is also not cruelty. It is only where
        harassment is shown to have been committed for the purpose of coercing
        a woman to meet the demands that is cruelty and this is made
        punishable under the section”.
20.     As has been discussed above, the prosecution has not been able to prove the
cruelty as embodied U/S 498(A) IPC and as such finding of guilt under the aforesaid
section of law cannot be sustained.

                                        9
21.    In the result the impugned judgment and order of conviction dated 12.5.2008,
passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Darrang Mangaldai in Sessions Case
No.97(DM)06 (GR Case No.193 of 2006) U/Ss 498-A/304-B/34 IPC is hereby set aside
and quashed and the accused appellants are acquitted from the charges on benefit of
doubt.
22.    Return the LCRs.
       Appeal stands allowed.
                                                               JUDGE
Nandi

10

