                     THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
      (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                          ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                           Criminal Appeal 15/2009
                            Ramavatar Sahani
                                   Vs
                              State of Assam
                                     BEFORE
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE HITESH KUMAR SARMA
        Advocate for the Appellant        : Mr. G N Sahewalla, Mr. P Bora,
                                            MD. Aslam & Ms. M Jain.
        Advocate for the Respondent       :  Ms. S Jahan, Ld. Additional PP.
        Date of hearing & Judgment        : 19.07.2017
                       JUDGMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
        This is an appeal, against the judgment and order dated 31.12.2008,
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, (FTC), Dibrugarh, in Sessions
Case No. 27/2007, convicting the accused/appellant and sentencing him to
Rigorous Imprisonment for 2 (two) years, and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/- (rupees
five hundred), in default to undergo Rigorous Imprisonment for 2 (two) months
for commission of offence under Section 25(1-B)(a) of the Arms Act.
                                                                        Page 1 of 5
Crl.A.15/2009

2.      The fact leading to the prosecution case is that, on 21.7.1997, the
complainant (PW4), while on police patrolling duty, received information that a
gang of dacoits, armed with pistols, assembled in the residence of the present
accused/appellant.    On receipt of such information, at about 3:00 am, they
rushed to the house of the accused/appellant, apprehended him and recovered a
handmade pistol with 4 rounds of .303 live ammunition from his possession.
PW4, the Investigating Police Officer, lodged an FIR with the Dibrugarh Police
Station, which was registered as Dibrugarh PS Case No. 417/1997 under Sections
399/402       IPC      read     with     Section        25(1-B)(a)     of      the
Arms Act, and entrusted the investigation to the Investigating Officer (PW4).
During the course of investigation, the Investigating Police Officer arrested the
accused persons including the present appellant, forwarded them to judicial
custody, and on completion of the investigation , submitted charge-sheet under
the aforesaid Sections of law.
3.      On receipt of the case, on being committed by the learned Magistrate, the
learned additional Sessions Judge, Dibrugarh, framed charge against the
accused/appellant under Sections 399/402 IPC read with Section 25(1-B)(a) of
the Arms Act, to which charges, the accused persons pleaded innocence, and
therefore, the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Dibrugarh, proceeded with the
trial.
                                                                        Page 2 of 5
Crl.A.15/2009

4.      The point before this court for determination is, whether the
accused/appellant was in possession with a handmade pistol in violation of the
provisions of Section 3 of the Arms Act, without holding a license ?
5.      The prosecution examined 4 (four) witnesses to bring home the charge
against the accused persons including the accused/appellant.
6.      The evidence of PW1 and PW2, who are the witnesses to the seizure, vide
Ext.1, have stated in the evidence categorically that in-spite of the fact that they
had put their signatures in the seizure list which shows seizure of the handmade
pistol from the possession of the accused/appellant yet, in fact, they were not
present at the time of conducting the search and rather they saw the seized pistol
in the hands of police in the morning, and on being asked by the police, ie.
PW4, they had put their signatures, meaning thereby, that at the relevant time of
search, they were not personally present at the place of occurrence.             The
evidence of both these witnesses are taken together, since their evidence is
harmonious on the point of their absence at the place of occurrence at the time
of conducting the search.          PW3 is the constable, who accompanied
PW4/Investigating Police Officer to the place of occurrence, where search was
made      and  the   arms    were   recovered    from   the    possession    of   the
accused/appellant. In his evidence, he stated that they visited the house of the
accused/appellant and searched the same before 12:00 midnight, whereas the
Investigating Police Officer, examined as PW4, himself is found to have stated in
his evidence that it was at 3:00 am in the wee hours of the morning, the search
                                                                           Page 3 of 5
Crl.A.15/2009

was conducted in the house of the accused/appellant. The time of conducting
search, as stated by PW3 and PW4, could have been taken as discrepancy only
had PW1 and PW2 not stated that it was in the morning only they saw the arms
at the hands of the Investigating Police Officer, and then at his instance, put their
signatures in the Ext.1.
7.      In the appeal preferred before this court, the appellant, inter-alia, has
taken the ground of failure on the part of the prosecution to prove the recovery
of the seized arms as well as the seizure itself. PW1 and PW2 are the witnesses of
the seizure as produced by the prosecution, but they are not found to have
supported the evidence on the search         in their presence and the consequent
seizure by the Investigating Police Officer, as discussed in the evidence above.
8.      That apart, there is no instance in the evidence of the prosecution to
suggest, even remotely, that there was an attempt, on the part of the
Investigating Police Officer, to comply with the provisions of Section 100(4) of
the Cr.PC, relating to search in a closed place, ie. the house of the
accused/appellant in the instance case. As the witnesses to the alleged search,
i.e., PW1 & PW2, did not support him in respect of their presence at the time of
such search.
9.      On the other hand, the learned counsel for the appellant has raised that
sanction for prosecution of accused/appellant for holding an arm without license
is a must, as mandated by the provisions of Section 39 of the Arms Act. In the
instant case, as submitted by the learned counsel for the accused/appellant, there
                                                                           Page 4 of 5
Crl.A.15/2009

was no sanction which vitiated the whole prosecution.      The learned Additional
Public Prosecutor for the State, Ms. S Jahan, has submitted that the prosecution
sanction was accorded by the District Magistrate which is available in the record
of the case although it was not produced in evidence before the court by the
prosecution, perhaps, inadvertently. Whatever it may be, the fact remains that
the prosecution sanction, even if available, was not brought on record enabling
defence to subject the same to scrutiny during the cross-examination. Therefore,
there is clear violation of the mandate of Section 39 of the Arms Act, vitiating
even the whole trial of the case.
10.     In view of the discussions made above and the findings recorded therein,
this court is of the view that the prosecution has not been able to bring home the
charge against the accused/appellant entitling him to an order of acquittal.
11.     Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.
12.     Send down the LCR along with the copy of this judgment.
                                                                           JUDGE
Basumatary
                                                                          Page 5 of 5
Crl.A.15/2009


