                      IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                           Criminal Appeal (J) No.72 of 2016
               Nur Mohammad
                                                    ……. Appellant
                       -Versus –
                The State of Assam.
                                            ….. Respondents.
                                   PRESENT
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE HITESH KUMAR SARMA
For the petitioner     :      Ms. M. Choudhury,
                              Amicus Curiae.
For the Respondent :          Mr. P.S. Lahkar,
                              Additional Public Prosecutor, Assam
Date of hearing and
Judgment               :      15.06.2017
                         JUDGMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
               This is a jail appeal, preferred by the accused-appellant from
Central Jail, Nagaon, vide his application dated 22.7.2016, against the judgment
and order, dated 15.7.2015, passed in Sessions Case No.354(N)/2011,
convicting the accused appellant under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code,
and sentencing him to rigorous imprisonment for 7(seven) years and to pay a
fine of Rs.2,000/-, in default, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for another two
months.
                                                                      Page 1 of 15

2.             The victim, Ms. X, is the daughter of P.W. 1, aged about 13
years, was raped by the appellant Md. Nur Mohammad, aged about 58 years.
On commission of repeated rape, the victim got pregnant and, ultimately, gave
birth to a female child. While she was pregnant for about 25/26 weeks, she
informed her mother about the commission of rape by the accused/appellant
and, her mother, in turn, informed her father, the P.W.1. The accused is a
relation of the victim and used to frequent to their house. The house of the
accused is near to that of the victim.
3.      On the basis of such facts, P.W. 1 lodged the FIR with the Mowamari
Police Outpost on 22.4.2011. The FIR was forwarded to the Samuguri Police
Station for registration of a case by the in-charge of the aforesaid police
outpost. Accordingly, Samuguri Police Station registered a case, being No.253 of
2011, under Section 376/493 of the Indian Penal Code, and entrusted the
investigation of the case to S.I. of Police, Shri Jagat Chandra Das. On
completion of the investigation, the police filed charge-sheet against the
accused under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code.
4.      The accused appellant was charged for commission of an offence under
Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code by the learned Sessions Judge, Nagaon in
Sessions Case No.354(N)/2011. The accused appellant pleaded innocence to
the charge.
5.      The prosecution, to bring home the charge against the accused
appellant, examined as many as 7 witnesses, who were subjected to cross-
examination by the defence.
6.      It deserves mention here that, vide Petition dated 10.1.2012, the
accused appellant prayed to the learned Sessions Judge to cause DNA test of
himself, the victim and the child of the victim. However, the learned Sessions
                                                                     Page 2 of 15

Judge, Nagaon, rejected such prayer of the accused appellant, vide order dated
22.8.2012, following which, he preferred a Criminal Revision Petition before the
High Court, being Criminal Revision Petition No.458/2012, against the aforesaid
order dated 22.8.2012. The High Court disposed of the revision petition allowing
DNA test to be conducted of the accused appellant, the victim and the child,
stated to have been born out of the crime committed by the appellant.
7.     DNA tests, in accordance with the above order of this Court, was
conducted on 29.11.2012.
8.     In his statement recorded under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, on 18.3.2012 and 19.3.2015, accused appellant denied the
accusation levelled against him as well as the fact that his blood sample and
that of the child of the victim matched as per the report of the DNA
examination.
9.     During the cross-exanimation of the witnesses also, the accused
appellant tried to make out a case that the victim had sexual relationship with
three(3) other persons, namely Gafur, Kalia and Faizul. But, the accused
appellant did not adduce any defence evidence to substantiate his such plea,
which was required in view of his denial by the victim.
10.    Now, the question for determination is whether the accused appellant
committed rape on the victim, as alleged.
11.            For determination of the above point, it would be apposite to
evaluate the evidence of the prosecution witnesses.
                                                                    Page 3 of 15

EVI DENCE
12.            P.W. 1, Ahmed Ali, is the father of the victim-X, examined as
witness by the Court on 13.12.2011, deposed that his daughter (the victim),
was 14 years of age and that the occurrence took place about a year back. The
accused used to visit his house for several months and had love affairs with his
said daughter. According to him, the victim informed her mother that the
accused is responsible for her pregnancy. The mother of the victim then
informed this fact to P.W.1. There held a meeting of the villagers (village mel),
where the accused admitted his guilt, although, subsequently, he retracted.
This witness lodged the FIR (marked as Ext.1). There was medical examination
of the victim and that her statement was also recorded under Section 164 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. Twenty-seven days before the date of recording of
her evidence, the victim delivered a female baby.
               In his cross examination, he is found to have stated that the
occurrence took place about 11 months back and he came to know after about
8 months of the pregnancy of his daughter, the victim. A panchayat was held to
settle the matter. Abdul Hye, Sattar and other respectable persons of the
locality were present in the panchayat. P.W. 1 denied that due to political
differences, he lodged the FIR against the accused. He further deposed in his
cross-examination that the other villagers also used to visit his house. He
expressed his ignorance whether the villagers suspected one Gafur, Kalia and
Faijul as the persons having illicit relationship with his daughter/victim.
13.            P.W. 2, the victim, was examined on 13.12.2011 by the Court.
She is found to have stated in her evidence that the accused appellant
frequently visited their house for about last one year and that the accused is
her relative. She is also found to have stated that the accused had intercourse
with her on several occasions and even threatened her when she refused to
have sexual intercourse with him. According to her, the accused appellant had
sexual intercourse with her in the banana plantation, as he used to call her
                                                                         Page 4 of 15

there. She became pregnant as a result of such sexual intercourse. The accused
refused to do anything when he was informed by the victim that she got
pregnant. The accused is a married man. She also stated that there held a
meeting of the villagers (village mel) in the village in respect of the occurrence,
where the accused initially admitted his guilt, but later on, ran away from the
meeting.
                In the cross-examination, she has admitted that she also used to
visit the house of the accused. She is found to have denied that there is political
difference between the father and the accused, admitting that her father is a
Congress Party man and that the accused is a member of the AGP (Asom Gana
Parishad). According to her, the accused is the only person who visited her
house. She expressed her ignorance about the persons, namely, Kalia, Gafur
and Faijuddin. She stated that there were lot many persons in the village
meeting although she was not aware of their names.               Corroborating the
evidence of P.W.1, the victim/P.W.2 is found to have deposed that she informed
her mother about the fact of commission of rape on her by the accused
appellant. She was a student of Madrassa at the time of occurrence.
14.             P.W. 3 is Makbul Hussain, who is found to have stated, in his
evidence, that he knows the victim. He further deposed that there is a fishery
(beel) near his house and the accused and the victim used to cut grass there for
cows. There is some jungle near the said water body. Both of them used to go
to the jungle, which he saw while he was also cutting grass. He also saw the
victim and the accused appellant coming out of the jungle after about half-an-
hour. Thereafter, again, after a week, he saw both of them in the jute
cultivation although he was not aware what they were doing there. This witness
has also found to have deposed that there was a meeting of the villagers
(village mel) held. There the accused agreed to keep the victim as his wife, but
later on, refused and ran away from the village meeting.
                                                                        Page 5 of 15

              The defence is found to have not been able to discredit such
evidence of the P.W.3. The father of the victim, is the paternal uncle of this
witness – P.W.3. He is also a member of the Congress Party. As admitted, there
is a quarrel between the accused appellant and his father during the election.
He has also found to have denied in his cross-examination that he has adduced
false evidence due to political differences with the accused appellant.
15.           P.W. 4 is Islamuddin. He has stated that he knows both the
accused appellant and the victim. He also deposed that while he was cutting
grass, he saw the accused and the victim going towards the jungle. They were
also cutting grass. There was a house in the jungle and both the accused
appellant and the victim entered into the house, which he saw. After about two
days, while we went to the house, he noticed a bed there, and after about six
months, the victim disclosed that she was pregnant from the accused appellant.
There was a village mel (meeting of the villagers) where this witness was also
present. This witness further deposed that in the village mel, the accused
appellant admitted his guilt and agreed to marry the victim, and subsequently,
he fled away. The victim gave birth to a female child.
              In his cross-examination, he is found to have clarified that he had
seen the accused appellant and the victim going towards the jungle about 6/7
months back and he came to know that the pregnancy of the victim about four
months back. Where were many persons present in the meeting of the villagers,
which included Abdul Hye, Councillor of the village, Rahat Ali, Abu Bakkar and
Abbas. The meeting of the villagers, was held in the house of the elder brother
of the accused appellant, where village the headman was not present. He is
found to have admitted that the persons present in the meeting were members
of the Congress Party. In the said “village mel”, the victim disclosed that the
accused appellant had taken her to the jungle/beel (natural water body).
                                                                      Page 6 of 15

16.            P.W. 5 is Dr. Madhumita Bora. He is found to have stated, in her
evidence, on 28.3.2011, that while posted as Senior Medical and Health Officer
in B.P.Civil Hospital, Nagaon, she examined the victim, on being identified by
one woman constable. She found the age of the victim to be 15/16 years on the
date of examination, on the basis of radiological examination. She also not find
any recent sexual intercourse with the victim at the time of examination and
that the victim was 25/26 weeks pregnant on the date of the examination. She
has also exhibited the medical examination report, vide Ext. 2.
               During her cross-examination, she asserted that the age of the
victim has been recorded in the medical examination report vide Ext.2 on the
basis of radiological examination.
17.            P.W.6 is Jagat Chandra Das, the investigating police officer,
conducted the routine investigation of the case. During investigation, he sent
the victim for medical examination and, thereafter, produced her before the
Court and got her statement recorded under Section 164 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. He submitted the charge-sheet against the appellant under
Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code. In his cross-examination, the
investigating police officer is found to have stated that he recorded the
statement of the witnesses, but he did not examine any of those witnesses,
who were present in the meeting of the villagers, although he was reported
about the fact that there took place a meeting in respect of the matter, under
investigation. According to him, the witnesses, examined during investigation,
did not tell him about the meeting. He is also found to have stated in his cross-
examination that the accused denied the paternity of the child and no DNA test
was done for ascertaining the paternity of the child. The parents of the victim
girl did not produce any certificate in respect of age of the victim. According to
him, none of the witnesses told him that the accused appellant was a member
                                                                      Page 7 of 15

of AGP Party and the father of the victim i.e. P.W.1 was a member of Congress
Party.
18.             P.W. 7 is Dr. Manalisha Chudhury, a Junior Scientific Officer at
DNA Typing Unit Directorate of Forensic Science, Assam, Kahilipara, Guwahati.
She is found to have stated in her evidence as follows :-
        “       On 29-11-12, I w as w orking as Scientific Officer at DN Typing Unit
        Directorate of Forensic Science, I received 3 ex hibits in Therm os Flask
        containing ice w hich w ere sealed w ith the im pression seal in connection
        w ith Sam aguri P .S. Case No.253/ 2011 U/ S 376/ 493 of the I P C vide
        m em o N o.I V/ 167/ 12/ 18400 dtd 28-11-12.
        Details of ex am ination :
        1.      One sealed EDTA vial contains 2m l (approx ) liquid blood of M ustt.
        M ashuda K hatoon collected by doctor of B.P . Civil Hospital, Nagaon w ith
        blood donar authentication card w hich m ark ed as Ex t.No.DNA 624/ 12.
        2.      One sealed EDTA vial contains 2m l (approx ) liquid blood of M ofida
        K hatoon (Baby) collected by doctor of B.P Civil Hospital, Nagaon w ith
        blood donar authentication card w hich m ark ed as Ex t.No.DNA 625/ 12.
        3.      One sealed EDTA vial contains 2m l (approx ) liquid blood of M d.
        Nur M oham m ad collected by doctor of B.P Civil Hospital, Nagaon w ith
        blood donar authentication card w hich m ark ed as Ex t.No.DNA 626/ 12.
        Result of the Ex am ination
        DNA from the source of the above ex hibits w ere isolated by organic
        ex traction m ethod and subjected to m ultiples P CR reaction of six teen STR
        loci Alleles & Am elogenin using Am p FLSTR I ndentifier K it. The am plified
        produces along w ith controls w ere run on Autom ated DNA Sequencer and
        analysis w as carried out using Genem apper I D v3.2 softw are w ith respect
        to standard ladder. The resultant allele distribution for the studied loci in
        the different ex hibits is show n in table.
                                                                         Page 8 of 15

      M arker           M aterial alleles   Child alleles      P aternal alleles
                        DNA 624/ 14         DNA 625/ 12        DNA 626/ 12
     D8S1179            11              15  11             15  15              15
      D21S11            32              32  29.2           32  27.2          29.2
      D7S820            10              10  11             12  12              12
      CSF1P O           10              11  10             13  10              13
     D3S1358            16              16  15             16  15              16
       TH01             8                 9 8                9 7                 8
     D13S317            12              12  11             12  11              12
     D16S539            11              15  10             12  11              12
     D2S1338            23              25  23             25  19              23
     D19S433            12.2          14.2  12.2           14  12              14
       vW A             15              16  15.2           18  14              18
       TP OX            8               10  8              12  8               12
      D18S51            13.2          14.2  12            13.2 12              15
      D5S818            11              13  10             11  10              12
        FGA             24              24  23             24  23              25
         From the above result it is observed that one of the m aterial allele
of the am plified loci of Ex t.No.DNA 625/ 12 (Baby) m atches w ith one of
the respective allele in the DNA profile of Ex t. No.DNA 624/ 12 (M other).
The non-m aterial allele of Ex t.N o.DNA 625/ 12 (Baby) is m atching w ith
the DNA profile of Ex t. No.DNA 626/ 12 (father).
         Ex t. 4 is the report.
         Ex t.4(1) is the signature of Director of Forensic Science Assam
w hich is know n to m e.
         Ex t. 5 is the DNA report.
         Ex t. 5(1) is m y signature.
Cross-Ex am ination (X X X ) :
To draw the blood sam ple one m edical practician (doctor) is required for
DNA report. I n m y report I have m entioned only the doctor of Nagaon
Civil Hospital as collected the blood sam ple but I have not m entioned the
                                                                     Page 9 of 15

        nam e of the doctor w ho draw blood sam ple. I n the blood sam ple tube
        there m ust be m entioned the date, tim e and subject along w ith the
        location and the anm e of collectors and cited over the case num ber. I
        have not m entioned any report as ex hibits sam ple w ere collected by
        w hom , w hen and from w hich place and the collector’s nam e and also the
        case num ber. There is not necessary to transport the blood sam ple in cool
        and dry condition. I t is not a fact that in transportation of blood sam ple
        the sam ples m ust be transported in cool and dry condition. I do not know
        w hat is terraform cylinder. I n course of ex am ination of the sam ple I have
        used standardized tubes and other plastic w ires. I have used the em drof
        tubes. I have m arked those tube according to m y ex hibits num bers. I
        have not sent the tube w hich I used at the tim e of ex am ination to the
        court alongw ith m y report. I have not m entioned in m y report to the
        effect that the sam ple w ere kept in cool and dry condition before
        ex am ination of the sam e. The test w as com pletely com puterized. I n
        com puterization of the test som e assistant w ere involved at the tim e of
        ex am ination. I t is not a fat that the sam ple w ere not properly stored and
        m arked. There is no possibility of am biguity regarding the test of
        com puterization. I t is not a fact since the sam ples w ere collected in not
        stored in a cool and dry condition and w e are not properly labeled the
        sam e. Hence there is a probability of m is labeled.”
19.             It appears from the evidence on record that accused and the
victim had sexual relationship for several months prior to lodging of the FIR. It
also appears from her evidence, as P.W.2, that she was a student of a
Madrassa. Her father, examined as P.W.1, deposed on 13.12.2011, that the age
of his daughter/victim is 14 years. The radiological examination of the victim, as
found from the medical examination report as well as the evidence of P.W. 5,
show that the victim was about 15/16 years of age. This medical examination
was done on 10.1.2012. As the victim was about 25/26 weeks pregnant, on the
date of examination, on 10.1.2012, so she might be pregnant for about six
months or slightly more than that on that day. That being so, taking the age of
                                                                         Page 10 of 15

the victim, as stated by her father/P.W.1, in his evidence, and that of the
doctor, examined as P.W.5, it would appear that, in any case, she was
somewhere around 14/15 years of age. In any case, she was below 18 years of
age. This position, as regards her age, is not found to have been disputed by
the defence during the trial. There is also no evidence to suggest otherwise. On
the other hand, the continuous sexual intercourse with the victim for several
months without being objected to by her, has no relevance in the instant case,
in view of the fact that consent of a minor for sexual intercourse is immaterial in
the eye of law. There is a village mel (meeting of the villagers) that took place
in connection with the commission of rape on the victim, causing her pregnant,
is not disputed. Rather, it has come out from the evidence of P.Ws.1, 2, 3 and 4
that in the meeting of the villagers (village mel), initially the accused appellant
admitted his guilt only to be retracted later on. It appears from the evidence on
record that regarding the meeting of the villagers, the investigating police
officer did not investigate and did not even bother to record the evidence of the
persons present in the meeting of the villagers in-spite of the fact that in the
FIR itself, it was mentioned that there took place a meeting of the villagers.
Such lapse on the part of the investigating agency is not very relevant in the
instant case since in the evidence of the victim, who is a minor girl of about
14/15 years of age, is before this Court, and unless there is anything glaring to
disbelieve her evidence, the Court can rely on the only evidence of the victim.
There is also evidence led by the victim, examined as P.W.2, that while she
refused to have sex with the accused, she was threatened and this fact
remained intact as not subjected to challenge by the defence.
20.             As has already been said, the question of consent is irrelevant,
when victim is found to be a minor. In this connection, we may rely upon the
decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Parhlad and another Vs. State of
Haryana, (2015) 8 SCC 688 . In paragraph – 11 of the said decision, it is held
that –
                                                                      Page 11 of 15

               “11.   The nex t facet relates to the facet of consent. It needs
               no special em phasis to state that once it is held that the
               prosecutrix is below 16 years of age consent is absolutely
               irrelevant and totally m eaningless. … … ”.
21.            On the other hand, it is found from the evidence on record that
the FIR was lodged when the victim was 25/26 weeks pregnant. The defence
tried to raise the issue of delay in lodging the FIR to create a doubt about
veracity of the evidence of the victim/P.W.2, and her father, the P.W.1. This has
come out from the evidence of P.W.2/victim that while the accused appellant
was informed about her pregnancy, he refused to do anything. It has further
come out from her evidence that she wanted to get married with the accused
appellant and, in the village meeting also, he initially agreed to keep her as his
wife. The delay in lodging of the FIR may be for very many reasons. She is a
minor of about 14 years of age and, naturally, she is not aware of the nitty
gritty of law. That apart, the FIR was lodged only after she divulged the fact of
commission of rape on her person by the accused appellant while she was at an
advanced stage of pregnancy, and, thereafter, only the father of the victim
lodged the FIR.
22.            When there is nothing to disbelieve the evidence of the
victim/P.W.2 that the accused had sexual intercourse with her, which amounts
to commission of rape, as she was a minor at the relevant point of time, and
when such evidence is believed by the Court and when there is no compelling
reasons to disbelieve her evidence, this Court is unable to persuade itself, to
accept that the delay in lodging the FIR, in any way, crumble the prosecution
case. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in State of Him achal Pradesh Vs. Sanjay
K um ar Alias Sunny (2017) 2 SCC 51 held that –
                                                                     Page 12 of 15

               “31.     … … … … … .. By now it is w ell settled that the testim ony of a
               victim in cases of sex ual offences is vital and unless there are
               com pelling reasons w hich necessitate looking for corroboration of
               a statem ent, the courts should find no difficulty to act on the
               testim ony of the victim of a sex ual assault alone to convict the
               accused. No doubt, her testim ony has to inspire confidence.
               Seeking corroboration to a statem ent before relying upon the
               sam e as a rule, in such cases, w ould literally am ount to adding
               insult to injury. The deposition of the prosecutrix has, thus, to be
               taken as a w hole. N eedless to reiterate that the victim of rape is
               not an accom plice and her evidence can be acted upon w ithout
               corroboration. She stands at a higher pedestal than an injured
               w itness does. I f the court finds it difficult to accept her version, it
               m ay    seek   corroboration   from     som e   evidence   w hich  lends
               assurance to her version. To insist on corroboration, ex cept in the
               rarest of rare cases, is to equate one w ho is a victim of the lust of
               another w ith an accom plice to a crim e and thereby insult
               w om anhood. I t w ould be adding insult to injury to tell a w om an
               that her claim of rape w ill not be believed unless it is corroborated
               in m aterial particulars, as in the case of an accom plice to a crim e.
               W hy should the evidence of the girl or the w om an w ho com plains
               of rape or sex ual m olestation be view ed w ith the aid of spectacles
               fitted w ith lenses tinged w ith doubt, disbelief or suspicion ? The
               plea about lack of corroboration has no substance (See Bhupinder
               Sharm a V. State of H.P .5). Notw ithstanding this legal position, in
               the instant case, w e even find enough corroborative m aterial as
               w ell, w hich is discussed hereinabove.”
23.            Apart from this, what is most important in this case is that the
accused appellant denied the paternity of the child of the victim. We have
already believed that the accused had committed rape on the person of the
victim resulting in her carrying a child in her womb. But, the accused appellant
denied this fact is apparent from the application he made before the learned
Sessions Judge, praying for DNA test, which was, however, rejected by the
                                                                          Page 13 of 15

learned Sessions Judge. Thereafter, he filed a criminal revision petition before
the High Court, being No.458 of 2012, against the order of rejection by the
learned Sessions Judge, and the High Court allowed the revision petition by
permitting DNA test, as prayed for by the accused appellant, the victim, and the
child.
24.           In the order dated 1.10.2012, passed in the revision petition, this
Court observed as follows :
              “       True, the present case is not relating to the ascertaining
              the parentage of the child. N evertheless, if after conducting the
              DNA test, it is established that the DNA profile of the accused and
              the said child can be connected, that w ould conclusively prove the
              fact of rape. On the other hand, if their profile do not m atch, the
              accused petitioner can raise certain grounds in his defence on the
              charge of rape.”
25.           It appears from the evidence of P.W. 7, a Junior Scientific Officer
at DNA Typing Unit Directorate of Forensic Science, Assam, Kahilipar, Guwahati,
that –“one of the maternal allele of the amplified loci of Ext. No.625/12 (Baby)
matches with one of the respectable allele in the DNA profile of Ext. No. DNA
624/12 (Mother). The non-maternal allele of Ext. DNA No.624/12 (Baby) is
matching with the DNA profile of Ext. No.DNA 626/12 (father).
26.           As the DNA test, in the instant case, was performed on the
demand of the accused appellant, and as the DNA profile of the accused
appellant and the female child, given birth by the victim, and also of the victim
are found to have matched, as per the unassailed evidence of P.W. 7, it has
reinforced the fact of rape on the victim by the accused appellant.
                                                                     Page 14 of 15

27.           Therefore, this Court has no hesitation to hold that the accused
appellant committed rape on the victim/P.W.2 is proved beyond all reasonable
doubt.
28.           Therefore, the conviction of the accused appellant, recorded by
the learned Trial Court, under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, and the
sentence imposed upon him, as indicated above, calls for no interference.
29.           Accordingly, the judgment of the learned Trial Court is up-held.
30.           Send a copy of this judgment to the Superintendent of Central
Jail, Nagaon for forwarding the same to the accused/appellant.
31.           Send down the LCR with a copy of this judgment.
                                                               JUDGE
ISINGH
                                                                    Page 15 of 15


