                              IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                       Criminal Appeal No. 24 of 2008
                               State of Assam.
                                                             ----- Appellant
                                           – VERSUS –
                               Md. Taleb Ali,
                               Son of Md. Sahad Ali,
                               Village-Khadanamari, Part-II,
                               P.S.-Bagribari,
                               District-Dhubri, Assam
                                                             ----- Respondent/Accused.
                                                 BEFORE
                  Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                    Advocate for the appellant                 : Mr. NJ Dutta, Addl. PP.
                    Advocate for Respondent/Accused           : Mr. HRA Choudhury, Sr. Counsel
                                                                Mr. IA Hazarika,
                                                                Mr. NS Laskar.
                     Date of hearing                          : 12th of July, 2017.
                     Date of Judgment & Order                 :   18th of July, 2017.
                                  JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)
                    This is an appeal preferred by the State under Section 378 of the
     Code of the Criminal Procedure against the judgment of acquittal dated
     31.3.2007 passed by the Sessions Judge, Dhubri, in Session Case No.
     39/2006.
         2.         The facts as unfolded during trial may be briefly summarized as
     follows:-
         a.         The prosecutrix lodged a written complaint before the Chief
         Judicial Magistrate, Dhubri, alleging that accused Taleb Ali used to love
         Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                                     Page 1 of 17

her and on allurement of marrying her,one day, committed rape upon
her and he did so on several occasions. As a result of the sexual
relationship between the accused and the victim, the latter became
pregnant. When the victim confronted the accused with the fact of her
pregnancy, the accused instead of marrying her, proposed to terminate
the pregnancy. In this regard, a village meeting was also held but the
accused or his family members did not turn up in the meeting.
Constrained by the circumstances the victim lodged a criminal complaint
before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Dhubri. The complaint was
forwarded to Officer in Charge, Bagribari P.S for investigation. Upon
investigation a chargesheet was laid against the accused for the offences
420/376 IPC.
3.         In due course, the case was committed for trial to the Court of
Session at Dhubri. The learned Sessions Judge, Dhubri, framed charges
against the accused for the offence u/s 376 IPC to which the accused
pleaded not guilty. Prosecution examined 7 witnesses to substantiate the
charges. At the closure of prosecution evidence the incriminating
materials appearing against the accused were put to him but the accused
denied the allegations intoto and also declined to adduce any evidence.
4.         By the impugned judgment, dated 31.3.2007, the learned
Sessions Judge recorded an order of acquittal. The present appeal by the
State, thus, has been preferred on the principal grounds of perversity in
the appreciation of evidence and also for misinterpreting the meaning
of ‘consent’ as provided in Section 90 of the IPC. It is also pleaded that
conduct of the accused in proposing to terminate the child shows that
he had no intention of marrying the victim from the beginning.
5.         Turning to the evidence recorded in course of the trial, the
principal witness PW 1, the victim of this case, deposed that accused
Taleb Ali once proposed her that he loves her and thus started
frequenting to her residence. In one of his visits the accused proposed to
marry her. Pursuant to such proposal of marrying the victim, established
sexual relationship with her. PW 1 also deposed that she was reluctant
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                         Page 2 of 17

to have physical relationship with the accused but he insisted on such a
relationship. PW 1 further deposed that she became pregnant as a result
of having sexual relationship with the accused. When she confronted the
accused with her pregnancy the accused proposed to terminate the
pregnancy though she did not agree. Later, when the family members
came to know about the incident there was a village meeting but the
accused kept away from the meeting and married another girl to avoid
the relationship with the victim/PW1.
6.         The cross examination of the pw 1 would reveal that defence has
principally rested its case on the major age of the victim and that she
had consented to such relationship.
7.         PW 2 Abdul Mujib is the maternal uncle of the victim. He
deposed that at the request of the mother of PW 1, he had approached
the accused person’s family. A village meeting was arranged but neither
the accused nor members of his family turned up.
8.         PW 3 Sayed Ali Sheikh is the father of the victim PW 1. He
deposed that he is working as labourer at Guwahati. He returned home
after coming to know about the occurrence. He approached the father
of the accused to arrange the marriage between the accused and his
daughter/victim. But, the father of the accused even after assurance of
considering the proposal did not do anything. He also deposed that
neither the accused or members of his family attended the village
meeting convened on the issue.
9.         PW 4 Sanowar Ali is a co-villager and he deposed that one day
the accused approached him and stated that the victim is pregnant as a
result of physical relationship with him and that he needed the
assistance of PW 4 for terminating the pregnancy of PW 1, victim. PW 4
deposed that he offered no assistance in this regard.
10.        PW 5 Ainal Hoque, also deposed in the line of PW 4 Sanowar
Ali. As is revealed from the evidence of PW 5, the accused had
approached PW 5 for assistance to terminate the pregnancy of PW 1.
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                        Page 3 of 17

11.        PW 6 Atul Rajbongshi and PW 7, Dr. A.K. Choudhury are the
Investigating Officer and Medical Officer respectively.
12.        Heard Mr. NJ Dutta, learned Additional Public Prosecutor,
Assam, appearing for the appellant as well Mr. HRA Choudhury,
learned Senior Counsel for the respondent assisted by Mr. IA Hazarika,
and Mr. NS Laskar, learned Counsel.
13.        In the course of argument Mr Dutta learned Addl. P.P referred to
the case of State of Uttar Pradesh vs Naushad, reported in (2013) 16
SCC 651 and argued that the learned trial Court arrived at a perverse
finding while recording the order of acquittal and failed to correctly
appreciate the law with respect to consent as provided in Section 90 of
the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
14.        On the other hand the learned Counsel for the respondent
argued with reference to paragraph 30, 31 of Deelip Singh vs State of
Bihar reported in (2005) 1 SCC 88, and submitted that this case is of
passive consent without any misrepresentation of facts and hence no
offence of rape is made out. The learned Counsel for the respondent
also referred to the cases of Babu v. State of Kerala, (2010) 9 SCC 189
and State of Rajasthan v. Shera Ram, (2012) 1 SCC 602                  thereby
drawing the attention of the Court to the principles of purview of
appellate jurisdiction particularly in appeal against acquittal.
15.        Before appreciating the rival arguments, it would be proper to
undertake a journey regarding the law laid down with respect to
consent.
16.        In Uday v. State of Karnataka, (2003) 4 SCC 46 the prosecutrix
was studying in a college and residing with her parents, brothers and
sisters. In her deposition, she stated that the appellant was a friend of
her elder brother. The appellant resided in the neighbourhood and used
to frequently visit her house — almost daily — and used to talk to her
also, apart from other members of the family. A friendship developed
between them and one day, the appellant proposed to her to marry
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                           Page 4 of 17

him. Later, they fell in love with each other. One day the accused talked
to her and thereafter kissed her and embraced her and promised to
marry her. He also had sexual intercourse with her. She was not willing
to have sexual intercourse, but in the circumstances she consented to the
sexual intercourse because the accused had promised to marry her. They
continued to meet thereafter and went out frequently. During this
period as well, the appellant had stated many times that he would
marry her. The prosecutrix also admitted that she had sexual intercourse
with the accused about 15-20 times and that they used to have sexual
intercourse once or twice a week.
17.        According to the prosecutrix, whenever she talked to the
appellant about the marriage, he assured her that he would marry her
after completion of the construction of the house, and that it would be
a registered marriage. This state of affairs continued till she discovered
that she was pregnant. She told the appellant about the pregnancy but
he assured her that she should not worry and that he will marry her
after some time. Eventually the marriage did not take place and a
criminal case was lodged.
18.        In this context the Supreme Court, in Uday (supra), held that the
consensus of judicial opinion is in favour of the view that the consent
given by the prosecutrix to sexual intercourse with a person with whom
she is deeply in love on a promise that he would marry her on a later
date, cannot be said to be given under a misconception of fact. A false
promise is not a fact within the meaning of the Code. The Supreme
Court, however, added that there is no strait jacket formula for
determining whether consent given by the prosecutrix to sexual
intercourse is voluntary, or whether it is given under a misconception of
fact. In the ultimate analysis, the tests laid down by the courts provide
at best guidance to the judicial mind while considering a question of
consent, but the court must, in each case, consider the evidence before it
and the surrounding circumstances, before reaching a conclusion,
because each case has its own peculiar facts which may have a bearing
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                          Page 5 of 17

on the question whether the consent was voluntary, or was given under
a misconception of fact. It must also weigh the evidence keeping in view
the fact that the burden is on the prosecution to prove each and every
ingredient of the offence, absence of consent being one of them. (Para
21).
19.        In the case of Uday (supra) the fact that the victim and the
accused belonged to two different castes was a dominant factor which
weighed upon the Supreme Court to hold that victim consented to
sexual relationship with the accused knowing fully well that social
marriage may not be possible. Hence the Supreme Court declined to
hold that the breach of promise to marry amounted to rape.
20.        In Deelip Singh v. State of Bihar, (2005) 1 SCC 88, the facts were
such that the victim girl and the accused were neighbours and fell in
love with each other, and one day, the accused forcibly raped her and
later consoled her saying that he would marry her, that she succumbed
to the entreaties of the accused to have sexual relations with him, on
account of the promise made by him to marry her and therefore
continued to have sex on several occasions. After she became pregnant,
she revealed the matter to her parents. Even thereafter the intimacy
continued to the knowledge of the parents and other relations who
were under the impression that the accused would marry the girl. But
the accused avoided marrying her and his father took him out of the
village to thwart the bid to marry. The efforts made by the father to
establish the marital tie failed and therefore she was constrained to file
the complaint after waiting for some time.
21.        In the backdrop of above facts, the Supreme Court, in Deelip
Singh (supra), considered whether the acts of the accused amounted to
rape within the meaning of clause “against the will” under clause 1 to
Section 375 IPC. On the facts of the case the Supreme Court held that
clause first to Section 375 IPC was not attracted as the testimony of the
victim was found to be doubtful.
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                           Page 6 of 17

22.        Thereafter, the Supreme Court considered the facts of the case in
the light of the second clause to Section 375 IPC i.e., “without her
consent”. It was observed by the Supreme Court that the concept and
dimensions of “consent” in the context of Section 375 IPC have been
viewed from different angles. The decided cases on the issue reveal
different approaches which may not necessarily be dichotomous. Of
course, the ultimate conclusion depends on the facts of each case.
23.        Analyzing consent from the perspective of Section 90 IPC the
Supreme Court, Deelip Singh (supra), held that the factors set out in the
first part of Section 90 are from the point of view of the victim. The
second part of Section 90 enacts the corresponding provision from the
point of view of the accused. It envisages that the accused too has
knowledge or has reason to believe that the consent was given by the
victim in consequence of fear of injury or misconception of fact. Thus,
the second part lays emphasis on the knowledge or reasonable belief of
the person who obtains the tainted consent. The requirements of both
the parts should be cumulatively satisfied. In other words, the court has
to see whether the person giving the consent had given it under fear of
injury or misconception of fact and the court should also be satisfied
that the person doing the act i.e. the alleged offender, is conscious of
the fact or should have reason to think that but for the fear or
misconception, the consent would not have been given. This is the
scheme of Section 90 which is couched in negative terminology.
24.        The Supreme Court, Deelip Singh (supra), eventually held that
while a promise to marry without anything more will not give rise to
“misconception of fact” within the meaning of Section 90, it needs to be
clarified that a representation deliberately made by the accused with a
view to elicit the assent of the victim without having the intention or
inclination to marry her, will vitiate the consent. If on the facts it is
established that at the very inception of making of the promise, the
accused did not really entertain the intention of marrying her and the
promise to marry held out by him was a mere hoax, the consent
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                         Page 7 of 17

ostensibly given by the victim will be of no avail to the accused to
exculpate him from the ambit of Section 375 clause secondly.
25.        The law laid down in Uday (supra), was distinguished in Deelip
Singh (supra), holding that in Uday (supra), the Supreme Court was
cautious enough to add a qualification that no straitjacket formula could
be evolved for determining whether the consent was given under a
misconception of fact and as such Uday (supra),does not lay down a
broad proposition that a promise to marry could never amount to a
misconception of fact.
26.        I may also profitably take the aid of ratio of Rao Harnarain Singh
v. State, (AIR 1958 P&H 123) which lays down a succinct interpretation
of submission and consent. It was held that a mere act of helpless
resignation in the face of inevitable compulsion, quiescence, non-
resistance, or passive giving in, when volitional faculty is either clouded
by fear or vitiated by duress, cannot be deemed to be “consent” as
understood in law. Consent, on the part of a woman, as a defence to
an allegation of rape, requires voluntary participation, not only after
the exercise of intelligence, based on the knowledge, of the significance
and moral quality of the act, but after having freely exercised a choice
between resistance and assent. Submission of her body under the
influence of fear or terror is no consent. There is a difference between
consent and submission. Every consent involves a submission but the
converse does not follow and a mere act of submission does not involve
consent. Consent of the girl in order to relieve an act, of a criminal
character, like rape, must be an act of reason, accompanied with
deliberation, after the mind has wished as in a balance, the good and
evil on each side, with the existing capacity and power to withdraw the
assent according to one's will or pleasure. A woman is said to consent,
only when she freely agrees to submit herself, while in free and
unconstrained possession of her physical and moral power to act in a
manner she wanted. Consent implies the exercise of a free and
untrammelled right to forbid or withhold what is being consented to; it
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                           Page 8 of 17

always is a voluntary and conscious acceptance of what is proposed to
be done by another and concurred in by the former.
27.        Reverting to Deelip Singh (supra), it would be worth reproducing
the questions formulated by the Supreme Court in the context of the
case. The questions were as follows;
28.        Is it a case of passive submission in the face of psychological
pressure exerted or allurements made by the accused or was it a
conscious decision on the part of the prosecutrix knowing fully the
nature and consequences of the act she was asked to indulge in?
Whether the tacit consent given by the prosecutrix was the result of a
misconception created in her mind as to the intention of the accused to
marry her?
29.        On the facts of the case the Supreme Court, in Deelip Singh
(supra), held that since the accused and the victim belonged to different
castes it indicates that she was fully aware of the moral quality of the act
and the inherent risk involved and that she considered the pros and
cons of the act. The prospect of the marriage proposal not materializing
had also entered her mind. Thus, her own evidence reveals that she
took a conscious decision after active application of mind to the things
that were happening. It would be seen that case of Deelip Singh (supra),
is distinguishable on facts of the present case.
30.        The analysis of the cases discussed above can be summarized in
the following manner;
    i.     A false promise is ordinarily not a fact within the meaning of the
           Penal Code. However, there is no straitjacket formula for
           determining whether consent given by the prosecutrix to sexual
           intercourse is voluntary, or whether it is given under a
           misconception of fact. In the ultimate analysis, the tests laid
           down by the courts provide at best guidance to the judicial mind
           while considering a question of consent, but the court must, in
           each case, consider the evidence before it and the surrounding
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                           Page 9 of 17

           circumstances, before reaching a conclusion, because each case
           has its own peculiar facts which may have a bearing on the
           question whether the consent was voluntary, or was given under
           a misconception of fact. It must also weigh the evidence keeping
           in view the fact that the burden is on the prosecution to prove
           each and every ingredient of the offence, absence of consent
           being one of them.
   ii.     The factors set out in the first part of Section 90 are from the
           point of view of the victim. The second part of Section 90 enacts
           the corresponding provision from the point of view of the
           accused. It envisages that the accused too has knowledge or has
           reason to believe that the consent was given by the victim in
           consequence of fear of injury or misconception of fact. Thus, the
           second part lays emphasis on the knowledge or reasonable belief
           of the person who obtains the tainted consent. The requirements
           of both the parts should be cumulatively satisfied. In other
           words, the court has to see whether the person giving the
           consent had given it under fear of injury or misconception of fact
           and the court should also be satisfied that the person doing the
           act i.e. the alleged offender, is conscious of the fact or should
           have reason to think that but for the fear or misconception, the
           consent would not have been given. This is the scheme of Section
           90 which is couched in negative terminology.
 iii.      While a promise to marry without anything more will not give
           rise to “misconception of fact” within the meaning of Section 90,
           but a representation deliberately made by the accused with a
           view to elicit the assent of the victim without having the
           intention or inclination to marry her, will vitiate the consent. If
           on the facts it is established that at the very inception of the
           making of the promise, the accused did not really entertain the
           intention of marrying her and the promise to marry held out by
           him was a mere hoax, the consent ostensibly given by the victim
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                            Page 10 of 17

           will be of no avail to the accused to exculpate him from the
           ambit of Section 375 clause secondly.
 iv.       Consent, on the part of a woman, as a defence to an allegation
           of rape, requires voluntary participation, not only after the
           exercise of intelligence, based on the knowledge, of the
           significance and moral quality of the act, but after having freely
           exercised a choice between resistance and assent. Submission of
           her body under the influence of fear or terror is no consent.
           There is a difference between consent and submission. Every
           consent involves a submission but the converse does not follow
           and a mere act of submission does not involve consent. Consent
           of the girl in order to relieve an act, of a criminal character, like
           rape, must be an act of reason, accompanied with deliberation,
           after the mind has wished as in a balance, the good and evil on
           each side, with the existing capacity and power to withdraw the
           assent according to one's will or pleasure. A woman is said to
           consent, only when she freely agrees to submit herself, while in
           free and unconstrained possession of her physical and moral
           power to act in a manner she wanted. Consent implies the
           exercise of a free and untrammelled right to forbid or withhold
           what is being consented to; it always is a voluntary and conscious
           acceptance of what is proposed to be done by another and
           concurred in by the former.
31.        In view of the discussion undertaken above, when I turn to the
evidence of PW 1, the victim, she deposed that accused used to visit her
house as he belonged to the same village. The accused initially proposed
that he loves the victim. A love affair, thereafter, grew between the
victim and the accused where-after the accused frequented his visits to
the residence of victim. In one of such visits, the accused offered to
marry the victim and naturally, by the time when the proposal of
marriage was made, a strong bonding grew between the accused and
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                             Page 11 of 17

the victim. The consent for sexual intercourse was obtained after the
promise to marry.
32.        The evidence of victim that the accused established sexual
relationship with her remained unimpeached during cross examination.
This apart, the accused and the victim belonged to the same community
and also same village and there was no barrier in their marriage. Under
these circumstances, when the victim was of marriageable age, the
allurement of the accused to marry the victim for the purpose of having
sexual intercourse was a representation deliberately made by the
accused with a view to elicit the assent of the victim without having the
intention or inclination to marry her, and accordingly, the consent is
vitiated by misrepresentation of fact and hence this is a case falling
within the ambit of Section 375 clause secondly.
33.        The learned Counsel for the respondent while referring to Babu
vs. State of Kerala, (2010) 9 SCC 189 argues that the appellate court
should not ordinarily set aside a judgment of acquittal in a case where
two views are possible, though the view of the appellate court may be
the more probable one. While dealing with a judgment of acquittal, the
appellate court has to consider the entire evidence on record, so as to
arrive at a finding as to whether the views of the trial court were
perverse or otherwise unsustainable. The appellate court is entitled to
consider whether in arriving at a finding of fact, the trial court had
failed to take into consideration admissible evidence and/or had taken
into consideration the evidence brought on record contrary to law.
Similarly, wrong placing of burden of proof may also be a subject-
matter of scrutiny by the appellate court.
34.        A similar view was expressed in the case of State of Rajasthan vs.
Shera Ram, (2012) 1 SCC 602 wherein the Supreme Court held that a
judgment of acquittal has the obvious consequence of granting freedom
to the accused and unless the judgment in appeal is contrary to
evidence, palpably erroneous or a view which could not have been
taken by the court of competent jurisdiction keeping in view the settled
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                           Page 12 of 17

canons of criminal jurisprudence, the Court shall be reluctant to interfere
with such judgment of acquittal.
35.        There is no denying the principles laid down that ordinarily the
Appellate Court should be slow in interfering with an order of acquittal
when an equally conflicting view is possible than the one taken by the
trial Court. However, this principle is subject to the another principle
that if there exists any perversity in the judgment of trial Court whereby
the trial court had failed to take into consideration admissible evidence
and/or had taken into consideration the evidence brought on record
contrary to law an interference by the appellate Court would be
justified.
36.        In the present case it is apparent from the perusal of the evidence
that trial Court did not appreciate the law laid down, as discussed
hereinbefore, with respect to consent. There is absolutely no discussion
whether the consent obtained by the accused for sexual intercourse with
the victim was a mere hoax or not.
37.        It would be necessary to point out certain aspects of the learned
trial Court’s judgment to ascertain the aspects of perversity.
38.        First of all, the trial Court found the victim to be reliable on all
material aspects. If that were to be so then discarding the categorical
statement of the victim about the fact that the accused obtained the
consent after a promise to marry her should have been equally relied
upon. The relevant observation of the trial Court is reproduced herein
below;
         14. The question is whether the evidence of the victim alone in
         respect of the alleged occurrence can safely be relied upon or not.
         She has supported the contents of the ejahar and stated that the
         accused loved her and promised to marry her and had sexual
         intercourse with her as a result of which she became pregnant. Her
         evidence does not suffer from inconsistencies on material points
         and it can be safely be relied upon and accordingly relied upon.
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                             Page 13 of 17

39.        In the same breathe, immediately after holding the victim’s
evidence to be reliable, the trial Court recorded the following
observation in the same paragraph of the judgment;
         “….In the instant case, it transpires on going through the evidence
         of the victim that the alleged occurrence was not against her ill or
         without her consent. The accused loved her and she was a major
         girl. The ejahar also reveals that the accused used to visit her house
         having been attracted by her love. The deposition of PW 1 to the
         effect that the accused visited her house and committed the alleged
         act on several occasions also shows that he had access to her
         house. Without consent or will such thing cannot happen.”
 40.       The observations of the learned trial Court that the victim had
 consented to the sexual intercourse with the accused are found to be
 contrary to his own findings that the victim is found to be reliable.
 What seems to have prevailed upon the learned trial Court is that
 victim is a major and since the accused had access to her house she had
 voluntarily consented to the sexual act. However, what was
 overlooked by the learned trial Court was that issue for determination
 was not the consent per se rather; whether the consent was obtained
 by misrepresentation of fact. In other words, whether the conduct of
 the victim reveals that her participation in the sexual act was voluntary
 participation, not only after the exercise of intelligence, based on the
 knowledge, of the significance and moral quality of the act, but after
 having freely exercised a choice between resistance and assent.
 41.       Since the learned trial Court held that the victim is found to be
 reliable on all material aspects it necessarily leads to a finding that the
 victim had given her consent only when she was assured by the accused
 of marrying her in future. The next aspect of determination, which the
 learned trial Court failed to take into account, was the conduct of
 accused. For, if the Court were to give a finding whether the
 representation made by the accused was with a view to elicit the assent
 of the victim without having the intention or inclination to marry her
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                             Page 14 of 17

 the conduct of the accused after the crime becomes relevant. The
 analysis of the evidence, tendered on record, would be necessary to
 come to a finding whether on the facts it is established that at the very
 inception of the making of promise, the accused did not really
 entertain the intention of marrying her and the promise to marry held
 out by him was a mere hoax. These findings, which are necessary to
 ascertain whether the consent given by the victim has been vitiated by
 misrepresentation of facts, cannot be determined unless the post crime
 conduct of the accused is taken into account.
 42.       In order to ascertain whether the acts of accused in establishing
 sexual relationship with the victim was induced by a some elements of
 misrepresentation of facts, in the form of promise to marry, the
 conduct of the accused at or after the occurrence of events need to be
 analyzed.
 43.       In this regard Section 8 of the Evidence Act provides as follows;
                   Sec. 8. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent
                   conduct.—Any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a
                   motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.
                   The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to
                   any suit or proceeding, in reference to such suit or
                   proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or
                   relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person an offence
                   against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if
                   such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue
                   or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent
                   thereto.
                   Explanation 1.—The word “conduct” in this section does
                   not include statements, unless those statements accompany
                   and explain acts other than statements; but this explanation
                   is not to affect the relevancy of statements under any other
                   section of this Act.
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                               Page 15 of 17

                   Explanation 2.—When the conduct of any person is
                   relevant, any statement made to him or in his presence and
                   hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant.
44.        It is the categorical statement of the PW 1, victim, that when she
confronted the accused about her pregnancy he insisted that the
pregnancy be terminated. The evidence of PW 1 finds ample
corroboration in the deposition of PW 4, Sanowar Ali and PW 5 Ainal
Hoque. Both these witnesses deposed that the accused had approached
them for assistance to terminate the pregnancy of PW 1.
45.        If the promise to marry was genuine the conduct of the accused
in proposing to terminate the pregnancy creates a strong belief that the
promise to marry the victim was a mere hoax. It explains the state of
mind of the accused that he was reluctant to own up the responsibility
of fathering a child to an unmarried woman.
46.        The second strong circumstances appearing against the accused
which explains his state of mind is that while the family of the victim
insisted on a village meeting which was eventually held neither the
accused nor his family turned up in the said meeting. This conduct
clearly establishes a repudiation of previous conscious acts of the
accused whereby he had established sexual relationship with the victim
with a promise to marry her.
47.        The third circumstance appearing against the accused and which
also explains his state of mind is those evidence on record which reveals
that while the two families were engaging in conciliatory process
whether the accused should marry the victim, the accused married
another girl. The conduct of the accused shows that he had no desire of
marrying the victim right from the beginning.
48.        All these material evidence regarding the conduct of the accused
have been ignored by the learned trial Court. These circumstances
amply establish that the accused did not really entertain the intention of
marrying the PW 1 and the promise to marry held out by him was a
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                               Page 16 of 17

mere hoax. The consent, ostensibly given by the victim, will thus be of
no avail to the accused to exculpate him from the ambit of Section 375
clause secondly.
49.        In the result, the judgment of the trial Court calls for interference
as material aspects of facts and law, which have been specifically
indicated and discussed above, have been overlooked while arriving at
the finding of acquittal. In view of the evidence tendered on record and
the circumstances as pointed out hereinbefore the inevitable conclusion
is conviction of accused for committing an offence under Section 375
IPC clause ‘secondly’ made punishable under Section 376 of IPC.
50.        Accordingly, the accused/respondent is convicted.
51.        On conviction, the accused/respondent is sentenced to Rigorous
Imprisonment for 7 (seven) years and a fine of Rs, 25,000/-, and in
default of payment of fine, Simple Imprisonment for 6 (six) months.
52.        While considering the imposition of sentence, the Court has
taken into account that this is a very old pending case and the judgment
appealed against is of the year 2007. Therefore, the statutorily
prescribed          minimum    substantive sentence    is  imposed       on      the
accused/respondent.
53.        The fine, on realisation, shall be given to the victim/prosecutrix
as compensation.
54.        The accused/respondent is directed to surrender before the
learned Sessions Judge, Dhubri to serve out the sentence within 1 (one)
month.
55.        Send back the LCR alongwith a copy of this judgment.
                                                                       JUDGE
 Nilakhi
Crl. A. No. 24 of 2008                                              Page 17 of 17


