                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
            (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                          Crl. A(J) No.79 of 2015
               Rantu Das
                                                                 ............ Appellant
                                      - Versus –
               The State of Assam
                                                                    ........ Respondent
                                              BEFORE
                           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
               For the appellant:      Mr. A. Ahmed, Learned Amicus Curiae
               For the respondents:     Mr. B.J. Dutta, Learned Addl. P.P.
               Date of Hearing :       06.07.2017.
               Date of Judgment:       06.07.2017.
                            JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
               Heard Mr. A. Ahmed, learned Amicus Curiae for the appellant and Mr.
       B.J. Dutta, learned Additional Public Prosecutor, Assam.
       2.      This a jail appeal preferred by the accused/appellant Rantu Das
       against the judgment of conviction of the learned Sessions Judge, Golaghat in
       Special (POCSO) Case No.08/2014, whereby the accused has been sentenced
       to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 10(ten) years and to pay fine of
       `1000/- (rupees one thousand) and in default of payment of fine, simple
       imprisonment for one month for committing the offence u/s 6 of the
       Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. Aggrieved by the
       aforesaid judgment, the accused/appellant has preferred this jail appeal.
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                          Page 1 of 10

       3.      The prosecution case in brief is that an ejahar dated 15.12.2013 was
       lodged by Sri Lukan Das, the father of the victim girl/prosecutrix stating that
       about 08(eight) months back, the accused/appellant namely Rantu Das had
       taken away his minor daughter, who was aged about 14 years and had
       indulged in a physical relationship with her. It was also stated in the ejahar
       that the accused/appellant had threatened the victim girl with life and
       therefore, she had not disclosed the occurrence earlier. It was stated that the
       incident came to light when the victim girl was medically examined, wherein it
       was revealed that she was pregnant.
       4.      On receipt of the said ejahar, the Officer-in-Charge of Sarupathar
       Police Station registered a case being 123/2013 u/s 376(2)(i) IPC read with
       section 4 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (in short
       POCSO Act) and started investigation. During investigation, the Investigating
       Officer visited the place of occurrence, recorded the statements of the
       witnesses, got the victim girl medically examined, recorded her statement u/s
       164 Cr.P.C, arrested the accused person and forwarded him to the Court and
       on completion of investigation, submitted charge-sheet.
       5.      During trial, the prosecution examined as many as 09(nine) witnesses,
       including the Medical Officer and the Investigating Officer and the defence
       also examined two witnesses. The accused/appellant was examined u/s 313
       Cr.P.C, wherein he pleaded his innocence and claimed to be tried.
       6.      The learned trial Court after considering the evidence of the witnesses
       and the materials available on record, found the accused/appellant guilty u/s
       6 of the POCSO Act and accordingly convicted him under the said section and
       sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment as aforesaid.
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                         Page 2 of 10

       7.       The victim girl, who was examined u/s 164 of the Cr.P.C on
       17.06.2014 had stated that the accused Rantu Das is her uncle and he had
       been indulging in a physical relationship with her since about 8 to 9 months
       prior. It was also stated that the accused/appellant had threatened the victim
       girl with her life in the event she discloses the occurrence to her parents.
       Therefore, the victim girl had not revealed about the occurrence before her
       parents. It was stated that when the statement was taken, she was carrying
       09(nine) months pregnancy.
       8.       In her deposition, the PW-1 stated that the accused person is her
       uncle being the younger brother of her father. At the time of the incident, the
       accused uncle used to reside separately along with her grandmother, which
       was at a distance of about 4 to 5 nal. The accused called the victim girl to his
       residence every night for the purpose of cooking and taking advantage of the
       same, the accused used to disrobe the victim and indulged in sexual
       intercourse with her. In the event, the victim resisted the accused, the
       accused used to threaten that he would kill her. The victim girl stated that in
       such manner, the accused uncle used to do the bad act for almost a month.
       The victim girl stated that when her menstrual cycle had stopped, she was
       taken to a doctor, who initially stated that she was suffering from some
       kidney problem, but later on, when she was taken to the hospital in Jorhat, an
       ultrasound was done and it was revealed that the victim was pregnant. The
       victim girl further stated that in this respect, a village meeting was called and
       in the said village meeting, the victim girl had narrated as to what the
       accused had done to her and that the accused had also admitted the same.
       9.        The mother of the victim girl Smti Jetuki Das was examined as PW-2.
       She also corroborated that when the menstrual cycle of the victim girl
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                           Page 3 of 10

       stopped, she was taken to a doctor, who had stated that the victim girl is
       suffering from some kidney ailment. But later on, when the victim girl was
       taken to a hospital in Jorhat, the ultrasound was done and it was revealed
       that she was pregnant. PW-2 also stated that in this respect, a village meeting
       was called, wherein the victim girl had narrated as to what was done to her
       by the accused/appellant and the accused/appellant had also admitted the
       same.
       10.      The father of the victim girl namely Lukan Das was examined as the
       PW-3 and he also corroborated the statement of the victim girl by stating that
       when the monthly cycle of the victim girl had stopped, she was initially taken
       to a nearby Public Health Centre and thereafter she was taken to a hospital in
       Jorhat, wherein the ultrasound had revealed that the victim was pregnant.
       PW-3 also refers to the village meeting, wherein the victim had narrated the
       entire incident and the accused/appellant had admitted the same.
       11.     The accused/appellant in his statement u/s 313 Cr.P.C, the
       accused/appellant merely makes a general denial of the charges made against
       him by further stating that he came to know about the pregnancy only in the
       meeting that took place in the village.
       12.     The learned amicus curiae representing the accused/appellant makes
       a submission that although the incident had taken long time back, the
       concerned ejahar was lodged only on 15.12.2013 and therefore, as there is a
       considerable delay in lodging the ejahar, the entire prosecution case against
       the accused/appellant is fatal. Apart from the said submission, the learned
       amicus curiae could not bring it to the notice of the Court at any other
       discrepancy in the evidence of the prosecution.
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                         Page 4 of 10

       13.      In order to substantiate his case, the learned amicus curiae relies
       upon a decision of this Court rendered in Nayan Jyoti Das –vs- State of
       Assam , reported in 2011 (5) GLT 788 , wherein in paragraph-9, it was
       recorded that the alleged occurrence of that case had taken place about
       06(six) months before, but the ejahar was lodged on 08.07.2005 and on
       04.06.2005 a village meeting was held as regards the occurrence and further
       the delay in filing the FIR was sought to be explained that it was caused due
       to failure of the village bichar in solving the issue. In the said circumstance
       and more particularly, in view of the factual position therein that the victim
       had sexual intercourse with the perpetrator in subsistence of a love affair and
       there was a promise on the side of the perpetrator to marry the prosecutrix,
       this Court was of the view that the delay in filing the FIR was not explained.
       14.     The factual situation involved in the said decision of the Court is at a
       variance from the factual situation involved in the present case. In the present
       case, the act of sexual intercourse was done on a minor girl of 14 years and
       the ejahar was immediately lodged upon the fact of pregnancy being revealed
       by the medical authorities, where prior to such information being revealed,
       the informant had no occasion to know about the occurrence.
       15.     The learned amicus curiae also relies upon a Division Bench judgment
       of the Hon’ble Tripura High Court rendered in Criminal Appeal (Jail)
       No.04/2011. The factual background of the said criminal appeal also revolves
       around the fact that the prosecutrix had a sexual relationship with the
       perpetrator and the ejahar was lodged by the prosecutrix only upon a
       subsequent situation, wherein the perpetrator had refused to marry the
       prosecutrix. The learned Division Bench of the Hon’ble Tripura High Court had
       relied upon a decision of the Apex Court rendered in Vijayan –vs- State of
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                          Page 5 of 10

       K erala , reported in (2008) 14 SCC 763 , wherein the prosecutrix had a
       sexual affair with the accused and the ejahar was lodged after seven months
       on being pregnant and secondly there was no DNA test conducted to find out
       whether the child that was born out of the incident was fathered by the
       accused therein. The learned Division Bench also relied upon another decision
       of the Apex Court rendered in K .P. Thim m appa Gow da –vs- State of
       K arnataka , reported in (2011) 14 SCC 475 , wherein also the factual
       situation was that the accused had assured the prosecutrix that he would
       marry her and had the sexual affair, which was repeated on several
       occasions, but when she became pregnant and the accused did not marry
       her, the ejahar was lodged after the delay of eight months.
       16.      All the aforesaid factual circumstances involved in the criminal appeal
       decided by the Hon’ble Tripura High Court, as well as the two decision of the
       Apex Court relied therein are all rendered in a factually different situation. In
       all the three cases, there was a consensual sex between the prosecutrix and
       the perpetrator with an element of marriage between them and only when
       the prosecutrix had become pregnant and there was a refusal of marriage,
       the concerned ejahars were lodged.
       17.      In the instant case, as already stated hereinabove, the factual matrix
       is different. The victim is a 14 years old girl, who was sexually exploited by
       her own uncle by taking advantage of her close proximity with him due to
       their family relation. There was neither any element of consensual sex nor
       there was any element of marriage between the parties. Further, the evidence
       of the prosecutrix shows that there was an element of threat by the
       accused/appellant by putting fear in her mind that death would be caused to
       her if the act is revealed to her parents. In the aforesaid circumstances, no
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                          Page 6 of 10

       infirmity can be attributed to the act of the prosecutrix in not revealing the
       occurrence to her parents earlier. Further evidence that has been led, shows
       that the prosecutrix had revealed the identity as well as the occurrence to her
       parents only when she was asked about it on being medically detected that
       she was pregnant. Further, the factual situation shows that the ejahar was
       lodged by the father of the victim girl immediately after it was revealed that
       the victim had become pregnant and upon the victim having informed her
       parents as to who had perpetrated the act.
       18.     In this respect, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor relies upon a
       decision of the Apex Court rendered in M d. Ali –vs- State of Uttar
       Pradesh , reported in (2015) 7 SCC 272 , wherein in paragraph 17, it had
       been held as follows:-
                         “It is apt to mention here that in rapes cases the delay
                 in filing the FIR by the prosecutrix or by the parents in all
                 circumstance is not of significance. The authorities of this
                 Court have granted adequate protection/allowance in that
                 aspect regard being had to the trauma suffered, the agony
                 and anguish that creates the turbulence in the mind of the
                 victim, to muster the courage to expose oneself in a
                 conservative social milieu. Sometimes the fear of social stigma
                 and on occasions the availability of medical treatment to gain
                 normalcy and above all the psychological inner strength to
                 undertake such a legal battle.”
       19.     Although it had subsequently been stated that in case of a pregnancy
       the application of the aforesaid allowances can be referred to an earlier
       pronouncement in R ajesh Patel v. State of Jharkhand , reported in
       (2013) 3 SCC 791 , wherein in the facts and circumstance of that case, a
       delay of 11 days in lodging the ejahar was treated as fatal, but the said
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                           Page 7 of 10

       observation of the Apex Court is also found to be inapplicable in the facts of
       this case inasmuch as, the ejahar was lodged by the father of the prosecutrix
       immediately after it was revealed that she was impregnated by the
       accused/appellant. But be that as it may, the fact that the victim girl had not
       reported the incident to the parents can also be viewed from the aforesaid
       view of the Apex Court, wherein it is provided that in rape cases, the delay in
       filing the FIR by the prosecutrix or by the parents is not of significance and
       the Courts also have to give due consideration to the trauma suffered and the
       agony and anguish that creates the turbulence in the mind of the victim to
       muster the courage to expose oneself in a conservative social milieu.
       20.      In the instant case, the victim girl is a 14 years old girl, upon whom
       sexual intercourse was done by a close relative being the uncle, who had also
       put an element of fear in the prosecutrix by threatening her with death if she
       reveals the act to her parents. The aforesaid situation also indicates the
       mental state of the victim after the act was perpetrated on her, which by
       itself, in the considered view of this Court would be sufficient enough to
       prevent the victim girl from revealing the occurrence to her parents on an
       earlier occasion.
       21.      In the aforesaid facts and circumstances and considering the law laid
       down on the issue, this Court is of the considered view that the delay in
       lodging the ejahar in the instant case is not fatal to the prosecution.
       22.      As regards the question as to whether the act was perpetrated by the
       accused/appellant on the victim girl, the statement of the victim girl both in
       her statement recorded u/s 164 Cr.P.C as well as in her deposition before the
       trial Court clearly reveals that the accused/appellant had perpetrated the act
       of sexual intercourse upon her against her will and by putting her under a fear
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                           Page 8 of 10

       of threat. The aforesaid evidence of the prosecutrix had been duly
       corroborated by the evidence of the PW-2 being the mother as well as PW-3
       being the father of the prosecutrix, who were the first persons to whom the
       prosecutrix had revealed about the perpetration of the offence immediately
       after being detected that she was pregnant.
       23.      Further, the evidence of the victim girl as well as that of the PW-2 and
       PW-3 is also corroborated by the evidence of the PW-5, being the Gaon Bura,
       who had stated that immediately after the occurrence was detected, a
       meeting was held in the village, wherein the victim girl, had narrated the
       incident that the act was perpetrated upon her and the accused/appellant in
       the said meeting had admitted that he had done the act. Although the
       evidence of the Gaon Bura as regards the events that had taken place in a
       village meeting may not itself be sufficient to arrive at a conclusion that the
       alleged act was perpetrated by the concerned accused/appellant, but when
       the said evidence corroborates the other primary evidence including that of
       the victim girl, the evidence can also be taken into consideration by the Court
       for the purpose of corroboration.
       24.      In the instant case, the accused/appellant has been tried u/s 6 of the
       Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (in short POCSO Act).
       Section 6 of the POCSO Act, inter-alia provides for the punishment for
       aggravated penetrative sexual assault, which is a rigorous imprisonment for
       term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend to
       imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. Section 5 of the said
       POCSO Act defines aggravated penetrative sexual assault, wherein Section 5
       (j) (ii) provides that whoever commits penetrative sexual assault on a child,
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                            Page 9 of 10

       resulting in a pregnancy of a female child, would amount to aggravated
       penetrative assault.
       25.     In the instant case, the evidence on record clearly indicates that the
       victim girl was aged about 14 years and therefore, she was a child at the time
       when the offence was perpetrated on her. Secondly, the medical evidence, as
       well as the evidence of the victim and the PW-2 and PW-3 clearly reveals that
       the victim girl was impregnated due to sexual assault on her and later on she
       even gave birth to a child. In the aforesaid circumstances, this Court is of the
       considered view that the offence perpetrated on the victim girl amounted to
       an act of aggravated penetrative sexual assault and as such, the
       accused/appellant is held guilty for committing an offence as described u/s 5
       of the POCSO Act.
       26.     In view of the above finding, this Court is of the considered view that
       there is no infirmity in the judgment and order of the learned Sessions Judge,
       Golaghat in convicting the accused/appellant u/s 6 of the POCSO Act.
       Accordingly, this appeal is devoid of any merit and the same stands
       dismissed.
       27.     This Court appreciates Mr. A. Ahmed, learned amicus curiae for the
       valuable assistance rendered by him and accordingly directs the State Legal
       Services Authority to pay him an amount of `7500/- as professional fees on
       receipt of a certified copy of this judgment and order.
       28.     Let the case records be sent to the learned Court below.
                                                                              JUDGE
       Alam
Crl.A(J) No.79 of 2015                                                         Page 10 of 10


