                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                      Criminal Appeal No. 51 of 2008
                            Shri Saju Mia @ Abdul Karim,
                            Son of Jwaid Ali,
                            Resident of Village Nischintapur Pt-I,
                            P.S. & Dist. Hailakandi.
                                                             ----- Accused/Appellant
                                         – VERSUS –
                            The State of Assam
                                                             ----- Respondent.
                                              BEFORE
                 Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                  Advocate for the appellant        : Mr. NS Laskar, Sr. Advocate.
                  Advocate for Respondent            : Mr. BJ Dutta, Addl. P.P.
                   Date of hearing               ::    18th of July, 2017.
                   Date of Judgment & Order ::          20th of July, 2017.
                                     JUDGMENT & ORDER
                  This appeal, under Section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal
       Procedure, is directed against the judgment and order dated 19-12-2007,
       passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Hailakandi, in Sessions Case No.
       51/2006, convicting the accused-appellant under Section 366 of the IPC
       and sentencing him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for three years and to
       pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/-, in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 15
       days.
       2.         I have heard Mr. NS Laskar, learned counsel appearing on behalf
       of accused-appellant, and Mr. BJ Dutta, learned Additional Public
       Prosecutor, Assam.
       Crl. A. No. 51 of 2008                                                       Page 1 of 7

3.         The prosecution case, in brief, is that on 17-02-2006, at about 8.00
p.m., while, Nazira Begum, the minor daughter of the informant/PW1
came out of her house for easing out, she was kidnapped by the present
accused-appellant, with the help of Jawaid Ali and Basiruddin, and
concealed her in some unknown place. The informant/PW1 and her
husband, PW2 could not trace out their daughter/victim inspite of search.
Therefore, the PW1 lodged the FIR, on the above facts, with the
Hailakandi Police Station.
4.         The Hailakandi Police Station registered a case, being No.
68/2006, on 24-04-2006, under Section 366(A) of the IPC, investigated
into it, collected evidence, arrested the accused and, finally, submitted the
charge-sheet against the accused-appellant for commission of an offence,
under Section 366(A) of the IPC.
5.         On receipt of the case, on being committed by the learned
Magistrate, the trial was held by the learned Sessions Judge, Hailakandi.
6.         Charge was framed under Section 366(A) of the IPC, vide order
dated 20-11-2006, against the accused-appellant, to which the accused-
appellant pleaded innocence.
7.         In his statement, recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C., the accused-
appellant denied the fact of commission of the offence alleged.
8.         On completion of the trial, the accused-appellant was convicted
and sentenced by the learned Sessions Judge, Hailakandi, as indicated
above.
9.         The prosecution examined as many as 7 witnesses, including the
Medical Officer and the Investigating Police Officer.
10.        On perusal of the evidence on record, it is found that the victim
herself is the main witness in this case. PW1/informant and PW2/the father
of the victim were reported about the commission of the offence by the
Crl. A. No. 51 of 2008                                               Page 2 of 7

accused-appellant by the victim only. Therefore, for proper appreciation
of the evidence on record, it would be appropriate to look into the
evidence of the victim, examined as PW4.
11.        In her evidence, she has stated that while she came out of her
house for easing out, the accused-appellant, along with two other boys,
arrived at their house, took her out and the accused-appellant kept her
confined at the house of one of his relatives, for about 5/6 days and also
committed sexual intercourse with her during these days of captivity.
While the accused-appellant brought her to Hailakandi town and they
were walking on the road there, the police nabbed them and took them
to the police station. Police also got her stated recroded under Section 164
Cr.P.C and also got her examined in the civil hospital there.
           In her cross-examination, she deposed that she is not able to
disclose the area where she was kept confined and also could not say the
name any of the inmates of the said house. She is found to have admitted,
in her cross-examination, that vide Ext. A, she gave her statement before
the Magistrate, under Section 164 Cr.P.C. She denied the fact that in her
statement, under Section 164 Cr.P.C., she had stated that she was
recovered by police from the house of one of her relatives as well as the
fact that the accused performed Court marriage with her long back. She
also denied that she was in the house of her maternal grandfather, at
Narayanpur, at the relevant time of occurrence.
12.        The evidence of the mother of the victim, who is the informant in
the case, examined as PW1 and the evidence of PW2, who is the father of
the victim, makes it clearly appear that they did not intend to lodge the
FIR with the police, but subsequently, they lodged it as the father of the
accused-appellant rebuked them. The evidence of both these witnesses
also speaks of the fact that the accused-appellant kidnapped the victim
from their house. Both theses witnesses denied that they wanted their
Crl. A. No. 51 of 2008                                            Page 3 of 7

daughter/victim to marry the accused-appellant, which the father of the
accused-appellant did not agree.
13.        PW3, a witness declared hostile by the prosecution, deposed that
about 10/15 days before the occurrence the victim/PW4 was taken to the
house of her maternal grandfather by their parents, and on the date of
occurrence, the PW1 took the accused to the said house of the maternal
grandfather of the victim. He was subjected to cross-examination by the
prosecution. In his such cross-examination he is found to have deposed
that the victim eloped with the accused-appellant. In his cross-
examination by the defence also he asserted that the victim was sent to
the house of her maternal grandfather 10/15 days back.
14.        The evidence of PW5 is that the victim was kidnapped by the
accused-appellant from her house and that the victim was recovered by
her parents, after about 1 month.
15.        PW6 is the Investigating Police Officer, who has narrated as to the
various stages of investigation and the actions taken during the course of
investigation. In his evidence, he is found to have deposed categorically
that on receipt of information from his source, he recovered the victim
and apprehended the accused-appellant from Katlichera Bus Stand at
Hailakandi town.
16.        PW7 is the doctor, who examined the victim and found her to be
below 15 years of age. He did not find any evidence of rape as well as
mark of violence present over the body or private parts of the victim.
17.        It appears from the above evidence that PW1 and PW2 are
reported about the occurrence by the victim herself and the evidence of
PW5 appears to have concocted the prosecution story. As against the
materials on record, she deposed that the victim was recovered after
about one month of the date of occurrence and also the fact that the
Crl. A. No. 51 of 2008                                             Page 4 of 7

victim was kidnapped from her own house. But the evidence of PW3,
although declared hostile by the prosecution, yet can be relied upon to
the extent his evidence is reliable. His evidence that 10/15 days prior to
the occurrence, the victim was taken to the house of her maternal
grandfather, remained unshaken. On the other hand, the admitted fact is
that the victim/PW4, gave her statement before the learned Magistrate,
under Section 164 Cr.P.C., vide Ext. A. On perusal of the statement of the
victim, recorded vide Ext. A, it is succinctly found that she was in love
with the accused-appellant since last three years and that she went to the
house of her relative about 10 days back along with the accused-
appellant. She also found to have stated in her such statement that there
took place Court marriage between her and the accused-appellant and
that she was recovered from the house of her relation by the police.
When the victim herself has admitted the above facts in her statement
made under Section 164 Cr.P.C., the evidence of the Police Officer/PW6,
the evidence of PW1, PW2 and PW5 appears to have belied by her such
statement so far her recovery by police is concerned from Hailakandi
town. That apart, her statement to the effect that she went to the house
of her relation with the accused-appellant and that both of them got
married are found to be sufficient evidence to negate the evidence of
PW1, PW2 and PW5 as regards the story of kidnapping the victim by the
accused-appellant. Whatever has been stated by the victim in her
statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. is found to have been supported by
PW3, as the PW3 deposed that the victim went to the house of her
relative 10/15 days before, meaning thereby, that she was not at her
home at the relevant time, when she was allegedly kidnapped by the
accused-appellant.
Crl. A. No. 51 of 2008                                          Page 5 of 7

18.        The evidence on record, particularly the evidence of victim/PW4
herself, vide Ext. ‘A, the statement under Section 164 Cr.PC, does not
disclose commission of offence of kidnapping by the accused-appellant.
19.        That being so, the inconsistent evidence of PW1, PW2, PW5 and
PW7 makes the prosecution version doubtful whereas the evidence of
victim/PW4 herself and the evidence of PW3 leads this Court to a finding
that the accused-appellant did not kidnap the victim as alleged. The
learned trial Court is found to have ignored the statement of the victim,
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. while marshalling the evidence on record.
20.        The learned Sessions Court convicted the accused-appellant, under
Section 366(A) of the IPC. It may be mentioned here that charge against
the accused-appellant was framed under Section 366 IPC. The evidence of
the doctor shows that the victim was a minor of below 15 years of age.
But to attract the offence under Section 366(A) of the IPC, the minor girl
must be procured by the accused-appellant, by any means whatsoever
and induced her to go from any place or to do any act with intent that
such girl may be, or knowing that it is likely that she will be, forced to
seduce to illicit intercourse with another person. In the instant case, there
is absolutely no evidence that the victim was forced or seduced to illicit
intercourse with another person. There is no whisper of any such
allegation against the accused-appellant by the victim/PW4 herself.
Therefore, the accused-appellant could not have been convicted by the
learned Sessions Judge.
21.        That being so, the prosecution has not been able to bring home the
charge against the accused-appellant under Section 366 of the IPC or
under Section 366(A) of the IPC and the evidence is found to be
insufficient as well as unreliable to record the order of conviction.
22.        Accordingly, the appeal is allowed.
Crl. A. No. 51 of 2008                                             Page 6 of 7

23.        Send down the LCR along with a copy of this judgment and order.
                                                                   JUDGE
Paul
Crl. A. No. 51 of 2008                                          Page 7 of 7


