                              IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                    Criminal Appeal (J) No. 66 of 2016
                              Mosik Uddin
                              S/O Late Tunu Mia,
                              Village-Kachudram,
                              PS. Kachudaram.
                                                            ----- Accused/Appellant
                                         – VERSUS –
                              State of Assam.
                                                            ----- Respondent.
                                              BEFORE
                   Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                   Advocate for the appellant     : Ms. B Sarma, Amicus Curiae.
                   Advocate for Respondent         : Ms. S Jahan, Addl. P.P.
                   Date of hearing and Judgment & Order :: 21st of July, 2017.
                                  JUDGMENT & ORDER (oral)
                   This is an appeal from jail, preferred by accused/appellant, Sri
       Mosik Uddin, who has been convicted by judgment and order dated 20-
       04-2016, passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Cachar, Silchar, in Sessions
       Case No. 7/2013, arising out of Sonai Police Station Case No. 279/2008,
       under Section 342/376(2)(f) of the IPC, to suffer rigorous imprisonment
       for 7 years and pay a fine of Rs. 2,000/-, in default, to suffer rigorous
       imprisonment for further period of 1 month.
       2.          I have heard Ms. B Sarma, learned Amicus Curiae, appearing on
       behalf of accused-appellant, and Ms. S Jahan, learned Additional Public
       Prosecutor, Assam.
       3.          I have perused the evidence recorded by the learned trial Court in
       the case and has also perused the impugned judgment.
       Crl. A. (J) No. 66 of 2016                                                   Page 1 of 7

4.          The prosecution case, as unfolded at the trial, is that on 22-07-
2008, the victim, a 7 year old girl, was taken inside his room by the
accused-appellant after allurement and committed sexual intercourse with
her.
5.          On receipt of the FIR on the above facts, Sonai Police Station
registered a case, vide Case No. 279 of 2008, investigated into it,
collected evidence, got the victim examined in the Silchar Medical College
and Hospital, caused recording of her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C.
and on completion of investigation, finally, submitted charge-sheet against
the accused-appellant, under Section 376(2)(f) of the IPC.
6.          On receipt of the case, on being committed to it, learned Sessions
Judge, Cachar, Silchar, tried the case, and on conclusion of the trial,
convicted the accused-appellant, as indicated above.
7.          The learned trial Court framed formal charge against the accused-
appellant under Sections 366/376 IPC, to which the accused-appellant
pleaded innocence.
8.          During the course of trial, prosecution examined as many as 6
witnesses including the Medical Officer and the Investigating Officer,
whereas the defence examined 2 witnesses to dislodge the prosecution
case.
9.          From the trend of cross-examination as well as the statement of the
accused-appellant, recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C, it appears that he
has taken the stand of total denial. He has staged a case of enmity
between his family and the family of the victim in connection with some
dispute relating to land.
10.         For the decision as to whether the accused-appellant committed
rape on the victim, this Court has scanned the evidence on record.
Crl. A. (J) No. 66 of 2016                                           Page 2 of 7

11.         PW1 is the mother of the victim, who is heard saying in her
evidence that the victim was a student of Class-III, at the relevant time of
occurrence. She was busy in her kitchen. Her husband was away from
home. The victim was called and taken by the accused-appellant to his
house at the time of occurrence. This fact was reported to her husband by
PW1 on return of her husband. Her husband called the victim. The victim
came out of the house of the accused-appellant and immediately after
coming out of the house of the accused-appellant, the victim reported
that the accused-appellant sexually assaulted her. Then, the FIR was
lodged, and thereafter, the victim was examined in the Silchar Medical
College and Hospital by the police. The residence of the accused-
appellant is in the same campus with that of the victim and they share the
same courtyard.
12.          PW2 is the victim. Since she is a girl of tender age of about 7
years, the learned trial Court, after testing her level of understanding, and
on being satisfied, examined her as witness in the Court. In her evidence,
she is found to have stated that the accused-appellant called her to her
house, closed the door from inside, undressed her and penetrated his
penis into her vagina. Thereafter, on call from her father, she came out
and reported this incident to her father. In her cross-examination, the
defence does not appear to have been able to discredit her evidence in
any manner. Whatever she has stated before the learned Sessions Judge,
during the trial, appears to be reiteration of her statement made under
Section 164 Cr.P.C. and as such, her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C.
and that she gave in the Court, during the trial, appears to be consistent
on the core issue of commission of rape on her person by the accused-
appellant. She did not deviate on any of the core issues to create doubt,
even remotely, that there is any falsity in her evidence.
13.         PW3 is the father of the victim, who is heard saying that he got the
information of his daughter being called to the house of the accused-
Crl. A. (J) No. 66 of 2016                                            Page 3 of 7

appellant from his wife/PW1 and that he called the victim, who came out
from the house of the accused-appellant and reported the incident to him.
So the evidence of PW1 that she reported her husband, PW3 about the
accused-appellant’s taking the victim to his house, is corroborated by PW3
and there is no discrepancies on the evidence of PW1 and PW3 that the
victim/PW2 came out from the house of accused-appellant, that the
victim reported to PW3 about the commission of rape on her person by
the accused-appellant by penetrating his penis into her vagina.
14.         PW4 although did not witness the occurrence yet he came to the
place of occurrence after seeing a gathering there and found the victim
there in an unconscious condition and he was reported about commission
of rape on the person of the victim by the PW3, who is his brother. The
accused-appellant is his nephew.
15.         PW5 is the doctor, who reported, on the basis of radiological
examination, that the victim was 6/7 years of age. He has specifically
indicated, in his medical report, marked Ext.2, that there are marks of
violence on the person of the victim.
16.         PW6 is the Investigating Police Officer, whose evidence is of
routine nature in respect of the investigation of the case starting from
receipt of the FIR till filing of the charge sheet including examination of
the victim by doctor and recording of her statement, under Section 164
Cr.P.C. by Magistrate.
17.         It appears from above evidence, particularly, the evidence of
victim, examined as PW2 that she consistently stated in her evidence
before the Court as well as in her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C.
that the accused-appellant committed rape on her person. The medical
evidence corroborates the evidence of PW2 since he found mark of
violence on the person of the victim.
18.         There is no issue raised before this Court about the tender age of
the victim and in respect of the intelligence of the victim to understand
Crl. A. (J) No. 66 of 2016                                           Page 4 of 7

the consequence of her evidence. The learned trial Court took the pain of
examining her by putting some test questions to which she gave
reasonable answer, making the trial Court believe that her evidence were
recorded as she understood the questions, put to her and answers given
were reasonable. So the consistent and corroborative evidence led by the
prosecution witnesses, particularly, the victim and the doctor, examined
as PW2 and PW5 respectively, and also the corroborative evidence of
PW1 and PW3 in respect of sequence of events from calling of the victim
by the accused-appellant and also coming out of the victim from his
house as well as reporting about the occurrence to PW3 by PW1.
19.         That being so, it is to be seen whether the defence has been able to
disprove the case of the prosecution through the evidence of DW1 and
DW2. The evidence of DW1 and DW2, taken together, makes it appear
that they staged a story of family dispute between both the families and
taken it as shield to resist the truth proved by the victim in her evidence.
It has come out from the evidence on record that the family of the
accused-appellant and the victim reside in the same campus sharing the
same courtyard and the undisputed fact that the victim was called by
accused was known to PW1, her mother, is indicative of the fact that even
if there was a dispute between the parties, yet they were in visiting terms.
Knowing fully well that the victim was taken by the house of accused-
appellant to his room, PW1 did not object. Therefore, the story staged by
the defence to the effect that the accusation levelled against the accused-
appellant is due to previous enmity appears to have no leg to stand.
20.         In view of the discussions and the findings recorded during the
discussions of evidence of the prosecution, it has came out that there is
nothing to disbelieve the evidence of victim as well as the evidence of
Medical Officer/PW5 and corroborative evidence of parents of victim,
examined as PW1 and PW3 respectively.
Crl. A. (J) No. 66 of 2016                                            Page 5 of 7

21.         On the reliability of the evidence of victim, we may refer to the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Himachal Pradesh –
vs- Sanjay Kumar alias Sunny, reported in (2017) 2 SCC 51, wherein, in
paragraph 31, it was observed as follows:
            “31. After thorough analysis of all relevant and attendant factors,
            we are of the opinion that none of the grounds, on which the
            High Court has cleared the respondents, has any merit. By now it is
            well settled that the testimony of a victim in cases of sexual
            offences is vital and unless there are compelling reasons, which
            necessitate looking for corroboration of a statement, the courts
            should find no difficulty to act on the testimony of the victim of a
            sexual assault alone to convict the accused. No doubt, her
            testimony has to inspire confidence. Seeking corroboration to a
            statement before relying upon the same as a rule, in such cases,
            would literally amount to adding insult to injury. The deposition
            of the prosecutrix has, thus, to be taken as a whole. Needless to
            reiterate that the victim of rape is not an accomplice and her
            evidence can be acted upon without corroboration. She stands at a
            higher pedestal than an injured witness does. If the court finds it
            difficult to accept her version, it may seek corroboration from
            some evidence which lends assurance to her version. To insist on
            corroboration, except in the rarest of rare cases, is to equate one
            who is a victim of the lust of another with an accomplice to a
            crime and thereby insult womanhood. It would be adding insult to
            injury to tell a woman that her claim of rape will not be believed
            unless it is corroborated in material particulars, as in the case of an
            accomplice to a crime. Why should the evidence of the girl or the
            woman who complains of rape or sexual molestation be viewed
            with the aid of spectacles fitted with lenses tinged with doubt,
            disbelief or suspicion? The plea about lack of corroboration has no
            substance (See Bhupinder Sharma v. State of H.P). Notwithstanding
            this legal position, in the instance case, we even find enough
            corroborative material as well, which is discussed hereinabove.”
22.         During the course of discussion of the evidence on record, we have
already found that the testimony of the prosecution witnesses,
particularly, the evidence of the victim, examined as PW2 and the
evidence of Medical Officer, examined as PW5, are reliable. I find their
evidence inspiring confidence. That being so, there is no reason to
Crl. A. (J) No. 66 of 2016                                               Page 6 of 7

interfere with the judgment delivered by the learned Sessions Judge,
Cachar, Silchar, convicting the accused-appellant and sentencing him to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and pay a fine of Rs. 2,000/-, in
default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for further period of 1 month.
23.         There is no necessity of interference with the substantive sentence
imposed upon the accused-appellant by the learned trial Court as the
sentence imposed was statutorily prescribed minimum one.
24.         In view of above, the appeal is dismissed.
25.         Send down the LCR to the Court below with a copy of this
judgment and order immediately.
26.         Also send a copy of this judgment to the Superintendent of District
Jail, Cachar, Silchar, for furnishing the same to the accused-appellant.
27.         This Court records its appreciation for the assistance rendered by
learned Amicus Curiae, Ms. B Sarma. Learned Amicus Curiae be paid an
amount of Rs. 7,000/-, as honorium.
                                                                       JUDGE
Paul
Crl. A. (J) No. 66 of 2016                                            Page 7 of 7


