                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL
                                   PRADESH)
                            Crl. Appeal (J) 117/2015
                         Md. Abdul Rokib
                                                                  ………..Appellant
                                   -Versus-
                         The State of Assam
                                                                   …….Respondent
   For the Appellant       : Mr. S.K. Agarwal, Advocate
   For the Respondent      : Mr. N.J. Dutta, Addl. P.P., Assam
                                             BEFORE
                        THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
   Date of hearing                 : 30.06.2017
   Date of Judgment and order : 10.07.2017
                       JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)
           Appellant, Abdul Rokib has been convicted by the Sessions Judge,
   Karimganj under Section 498A IPC and 304B IPC and sentenced to
   imprisonment for three years and fine of Rs. 1000/- under Section 498A IPC
   and imprisonment for seven years and fine of Rs. 1000/- under Section 304B
   IPC with default stipulation.
   2.      The victim in the present case was Soma Begum, who succumbed to
   the following injuries:
       (a) A sharp cut injury on left side of the forehead measuring 3 ½”X1”X
            bone deep, cutting the bone,
       (b) A sharp cut injury on the right side of the occipital region, measuring
            4”X ½”X bone deep, cutting the bone,
       (c) A cut injury over the left maxilla, measuring 1”X ¼”X bone deep.
   Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                          Page 1 of 21

3.      The prosecution case as unfolded during trial was that the victim
Soma Begum was married to Mukitur Rahman, the son of the present
appellant. The victim was subjected to cruelty for demand of dowry. The
parents of the victim met some of the demands. Before the death of the
victim, the appellant demanded an APE vehicle and threatened with dire
consequences if, such demand was not fulfilled.
4.      On the intervening night of 19.06.2012 and 20.06.2012, the victim
was assaulted with sharp weapons causing grievous injuries as indicated
above and she succumbed to the injuries. The father of the victim (PW-4)
lodged the FIR, Ext.1 wherein six persons, i.e. the husband of the victim, his
parents, bothers and sister-in-law were named as perpetrators of the crime.
On the basis of Ext.1, police registered a case and on completion of
investigation, submitted charge sheet against the husband of the victim,
Mukitur Rahman under Section 302 IPC and prayed for release of the
remaining 5 accused persons named in the FIR, for having not found
sufficient materials against them.
5.      During trial, learned Sessions Judge framed charge against the
accused Mukitur Rahman, to which he pleaded not guilty.
6       Prosecution initially examined 4 witnesses including the informant.
The father of the victim examined as PW-4, deposed implicating all the 6
persons named in the FIR and prayed for proceeding against all of them, who
were named in the FIR. Upon such submission of the informant, learned
Public Prosecutor sought an adjournment for filing appropriate application
and on the next date, learned Public Prosecutor filed an application, which
was numbered as Pt. No. 356/2013, praying for direction to police for further
investigation. On the basis of such application, the learned Trial Court
directed the police by order dated 21.05.2013 for further investigation. The
police subsequently filed a second/additional charge sheet on 27.08.2013
against the present appellant Abdul Rokib, the father of accused Mukitur
Rahman, and eventually charge was also framed against him too, to which he
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                            Page 2 of 21

pleaded not guilty. The learned Trial Court proceeded with the trial of both
the accused jointly and examined altogether 12 witnesses.
7.      At the stage of judgment and hearing the accused person on the point
of sentence, learned Trial Court found that accused Mukitur Rahman was
suffering from mental ailment and therefore judgment in respect of Mukitur
Rahman was put on hold, whereas judgment was delivered in respect of the
present appellant convicting him and awarding sentence as indicated above.
8.      Heard Mr. S.K. Agarwal, learned Amicus Curiae and Mr. N.J. Dutta,
learned Addl. P.P., Assam.
9.      Learned Amicus Curiae has submitted that the subsequent charge
sheet submitted by police was illegal as it was on the basis of re-
investigation, which was never ordered by the learned Trial Court and, as
such, re-investigation of the case and submission of subsequent charge sheet
implicating the present appellant was illegal and therefore the trial on the
basis of such illegal charge sheet was also illegal. Further contention of the
learned Amicus Curiae is that, even the Trial Court did not have power to
order further investigation at the stage of trial. Learned Amicus Curiae also
submitted that there was no material to bring home the charge under Section
498A IPC and 304B IPC against the appellant and on that count also, the
conviction and sentence are required to be set aside.
10.     Learned Addl. Public Prosecutor, Assam, supporting the conviction and
sentence of the accused contended that the evidence brought on record were
sufficient to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt and
therefore, there is no scope for interference with the judgment. Learned Addl.
P.P. further submits that the objection with regard to illegality or irregularity
in conducting further investigation ought to have been raised at the earliest
before the trial court.
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                              Page 3 of 21

11.     Legality of the trial itself having been challenged, it would be in the
fitness of matter to address the question of legality of the investigation
carried out by police subsequently, pursuant to the order of the learned
Sessions Judge for further investigation and its consequence and effect on
the trial.
12.     Section 173(8) of the CrPC empowers the police to further investigate
a case, after filing of the charge sheet or final report. To carry out further
investigation and submit supplementary report is a statutory right and duty of
the police as enshrined in Section 173(8) CrPC, and such right of further
investigation cannot be circumscribed by any power of superintendence. Only
rider in this respect, as has been consistently held by the Apex Court is that
the police should inform the Court and seek a formal permission. The Apex
Court in Om Prakash Narang Vs. State of (Delhi Adm inistration)
reported in AIR 1979 (SC) 1791 observed that when defective investigation
comes to light during course of trial, it may be cured by further investigation
if the circumstances so permitted. It would ordinarily be desirable that police
should inform the court and seek formal permission to make further
investigation when fresh facts comes to light. The Apex Court in Vinay Tyagi
Vs. Irshad Ali @ Deepak and Ors . reported in (2013) 5 SCC 762
observed that though there is no specific requirement in the provision of
Section 173(8) CrPC to conduct further investigation or file supplementary
report with the leave of the Court, it has been procedure of propriety, that
the police has to seek permission of court to continue further investigation
and file supplementary charge sheet.
13.     When police is statutorily empowered by the provision of Section
173(8) CrPC to ‘further investigate’ after filing of reports under Section 173(2)
CrPC and submit supplementary report without any embargo, it has been a
matter of judicial concern for long time as regards power of Magistrate/Court
to order further investigation of its own, at the post cognizance stage, though
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                Page 4 of 21

power of the court to direct further investigation at the pre-cognizance stage
is well settled.
14.      The Apex Court in the case of R andhir Singh R ana Vs. State
(Delhi Adm inistration) reported in (1997) 1 SCC 361 held that when
after filing of report under Section 173(2) CrPC, Magistrate has taken
cognizance and accused entered appearance in pursuance of process issued
by the Court, Magistrate cannot of his own, order ‘further investigation’.
15.      A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Rana Sinha @ Sujit
Sinha Vs. State of Tripura & Ors . reported in 2011 (2) GLT 610 after
considering various decisions of the Apex Court including R andhir Singh
R ana (supra), Reeta Nag Vs. State of W .B . reported in (2009) 9 SCC
129 held as under:
                 “157. We have already pointed out above that in the decisions,
                 which have been rendered subsequent to Randhir Singh
                 Rana’s case (supra), the Supreme Curt has not deviated from
                 the position of law laid down in Randhir Singh Rana’s case
                 (supra), namely that a Magistrate cannot, of his own, order
                 further investigation after cognizance has been taken and the
                 accused has appeared. So long as Randhir Singh Rana (supra)
                 holds the field, as it does, indeed, even today, we are of the
                 view that there can be no escape from the conclusion that a
                 Magistrate cannot, on his own, direct further investigation, on
                 a defect or deficiency having come to his notice. Naturally,
                 therefore, the mere fact that such a defect or deficiency has
                 been brought to the notice of the Magistrate by the informant,
                 or the de facto complainant, or the aggrieved person, or the
                 victim, would not, and cannot, clothe the Magistrate with the
                 power to order ‘further investigation’ so as to advance the
                 cause of justice or to prevent miscarriage of justice or to arrive
                 at a just decision of the case. The remedy, in such a case, lies
                 in making appropriate application under Section 482 of the
                 Code inasmuch as Section 482 preserves the inherent power of
                 the High Court. ………………..”
                 “165. As against the situation, which we have visualized
                 above, relating to pre-cognizance stage, we may, now, turn to
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                Page 5 of 21

                the third situation, where further investigation at the post-
                cognizance stage, may be needed. After a court takes
                cognizance, a defect or deficiency in the investigation may
                come to the notice of the court, or such a defect or deficiency
                may be brought to the notice of the court by an informant, de
                facto complainant, aggrieved person or the victim. In neither
                case, in the face of the clearly laid down position of law, in
                Randhir Singh Rana’s case (supra), that a court cannot, on its
                own, direct further investigation, when the trial has
                commenced, it becomes clear that even on the request of an
                informant, de facto complainant, or the aggrieved person, the
                court would have no power to direct ‘further investigation’.”
16.     The Apex Court, after considering various earlier decisions including
Bhagw ant Singh v. Com m issioner of Police & Anr. [(1985) 2 SCC
537] , a three judges Bench, in Vinay Tyagi (supra) doubted the ratio of
R andhir Singh R ana (supra) and R ita Nag’s (supra) case and held as
under:
                “37. In some judgments of this Court, a view has been
                advanced, (amongst others in the case of Reeta Nag v State of
                West Bengal & Ors. [(2009) 9 SCC 129] Ram Naresh Prasad v.
                State of Jharkhand and Others [(2009) 11 SCC 299] and
                Randhir Singh Rana v. State (Delhi Administration) [(1997) 1
                SCC 361]), that a Magistrate cannot suo moto direct further
                investigation under Section 173(8) of the Code or direct re-
                investigation into a case on account of the bar contained in
                Section 167(2) of the Code, and that a Magistrate could direct
                filing of a charge sheet where the police submits a report that
                no case had been made out for sending up an accused for
                trial. The gist of the view taken in these cases is that a
                Magistrate cannot direct reinvestigation and cannot suo moto
                direct further investigation.”
                “39. The contrary view taken by the Court in the cases of
                Reeta Nag (supra) and Randhir Singh (supra) do not consider
                the view of this Court expressed in Bhagwant Singh (supra).
                The decision of the Court in Bhagwant Singh (supra) in regard
                to the issue in hand cannot be termed as an obiter. The ambit
                and scope of the power of a magistrate in terms of Section
                173 of the Code was squarely debated before that Court and
                the three Judge Bench concluded as afore-noticed. Similar
                views having been taken by different Benches of this Court
                while following Bhagwant Singh (supra), are thus squarely in
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                             Page 6 of 21

                line with the doctrine of precedence. To some extent, the view
                expressed in Reeta Nag (supra), Ram Naresh (supra) and
                Randhir Singh (supra), besides being different on facts, would
                have to be examined in light of the principle of stare decisis.”
                “40. Having analysed the provisions of the Code and the
                various judgments as afore-indicated, we would state the
                following conclusions in regard to the powers of a magistrate
                in terms of Section 173(2) read with Section 173(8) and
                Section 156(3) of the Code :
                40.1. The Magistrate has no power to direct ‘reinvestigation’ or
                ‘fresh investigation’ (de novo) in the case initiated on the basis
                of a police report.
                40.2. A Magistrate has the power to direct ‘further
                investigation’ after filing of a police report in terms of Section
                173(6) of the Code.
                40.3. The view expressed in (2) above is in conformity with
                the principle of law stated in Bhagwant Singh’s case (supra) by
                a three Judge Bench and thus in conformity with the doctrine
                of precedence.
                40.4. Neither the scheme of the Code nor any specific
                provision therein bars exercise of such jurisdiction by the
                Magistrate. The language of Section 173(2) cannot be
                construed so restrictively as to deprive the Magistrate of such
                powers particularly in face of the provisions of Section 156(3)
                and the language of Section 173(8) itself. In fact, such power
                would have to be read into the language of Section 173(8).
                40.5. The Code is a procedural document, thus, it must receive
                a construction which would advance the cause of justice and
                legislative object sought to be achieved. It does not stand to
                reason that the legislature provided power of further
                investigation to the police even after filing a report, but
                intended to curtail the power of the Court to the extent that
                even where the facts of the case and the ends of justice
                demand, the Court can still not direct the investigating agency
                to conduct further investigation which it could do on its own.”
        The Apex Court in Vinya Tyagi (supra) even went on to say in para-
51, that “it will be a travesty of justice, if the court cannot be permitted to
direct further investigation to clear its doubt and to order the investigation
agency to further substantiate its charge sheet.”
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                 Page 7 of 21

17.      For better appreciation of the above ratio laid down by the Apex
Court, it would be beneficial to have a look at the factual matrix of the case in
Vinya Tyagi (supra). Respondent Irshad Ali was allegedly working as
informer of Special Cell of Delhi Police and Intelligence Bureau and he was
falsely implicated in a criminal case. The case was investigated by Special Cell
of Delhi Police. Aggrieved by the action of the Delhi Police, brother of the
accused filed a petition before the Delhi High Court for transferring the case
to CBI. While the matter was pending before the High Court, Delhi Police
submitted charge sheet before the trial court as there was no stay on the
investigation and/or the proceeding before the court of competent
jurisdiction. Delhi High Court directed the CBI to undertake an enquiry into
the matter. After detailed investigation, the CBI filed a closure report stating
that a false case was registered against the accused. After the closure report
of the CBI, respondent No. 2 filed a petition before the trial court praying for
discharge in terms of Section 227 CrPC, in view of closure report of CBI. The
trial court rejected the petition and fixed the case for hearing on charge.
Thereafter, the respondent No. 2 filed a petition under Section 482 CrPC
before the High Court for quashing the proceeding pending before the court
of Additional Session Judge, Delhi. High Court set aside the order of the
Additional Sessions Judge rejecting the petition for discharging the accused
and remanded the case for proceeding further, after hearing the parties on
the basis of closure report filed by CBI. The accused respondent again
challenged the order of the High Court before the Apex Court. It is pertinent
to mention that because of no stay order having been passed by the High
Court, Delhi Police submitted charge sheet even before the case was handed
over to CBI. So there were two reports, one was the charge sheet submitted
by Delhi Police and the other was closure report submitted by CBI and the
matter before the trial court was at the stage of consideration of charge. The
Apex Court ultimately held as under:
                “60. Once a Report under Section 173(2) of the Code has been
                filed, it can only be cancelled, proceeded further or case closed
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                               Page 8 of 21

                by the court of competent jurisdiction and that too in
                accordance with law. Neither the Police nor a specialised
                investigating agency has any right to cancel the said Report.
                Furthermore, in the present case, the High Court had passed
                no order or direction staying further investigation by the Delhi
                Police or proceedings before the court of competent
                jurisdiction. On the contrary, the court had noticed explicitly in
                its order that it was a case of supplementary or further
                investigation and filing of a ‘supplementary report’. Once the
                Court has taken this view, there is no question of treating the
                first report as being withdrawn, cancelled or capable of being
                excluded from the records by the implication. In fact, except
                by a specific order of a higher court competent to make said
                orders, the previous as well as supplementary report shall form
                part of the record which the trial court is expected to consider
                for arriving at any appropriate conclusion, in accordance with
                law. It is also interesting to note that the CBI itself understood
                the order of the court and conducted only ‘further
                investigation’ as is evident from the status report filed by the
                CBI before the High Court on 28th November, 2007.
                61. In our considered view, the trial court has to consider the
                entire record, including both the Delhi Police Report filed under
                Section 173(2) of the Code as well as the Closure Report filed
                by the CBI and the documents filed along with these reports.
                It appears, the trial court may have three options, firstly, it
                may accept the application of accused for discharge. Secondly,
                it may direct that the trial may proceed further in accordance
                with law and thirdly, if it is dissatisfied on any important aspect
                of investigation already conducted and in its considered
                opinion, it is just, proper and necessary in the interest of
                justice to direct ‘further investigation’, it may do so.”
18.     What therefore, abundantly clear from the above is that, the Apex
Court clearly recognized the power of the trial court to order further
investigation even at the stage of trial, if such further investigation is felt
necessary in the interest of fair trial and for the ends of justice. The Apex
Court, however, held that “the power of the Magistrate to direct ‘further
investigation’ is a significant power which has to be exercised sparingly in
exceptional cases to achieve the ends of justice”
19.     What therefore follows is that Magistrate or the trial court has the
power to order ‘further investigation’ even at the post cognizance stage after
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                  Page 9 of 21

appearance of the accused in pursuance of the process issued from the court,
if interest of justice so demands. At the same time, while passing order for
further investigation, it should be borne in mind that power to order further
investigation is a significant power, which has to be exercised sparingly in
exceptional circumstances and only for the purpose of achieving the ends of
justice.
20.      Fair trial presupposes a fair investigation. If the Magistrate/Court
notices serious defects or deficiency in the investigation which is likely to
results in miscarriage of justice and there is no other way to remedy such
deficiency or defect in the primary investigation, it becomes an obligation of
the court/magistrate to direct further investigation for advancing the cause of
justice or to prevent the miscarriage of justice. At the same time, it should
also be borne in mind, that the power to direct further investigation should
not be exercised in a routine manner in absence of extreme necessity of
meeting the ends of justice. Even at the risk of repetition, I must reiterate
herein, the note of caution by the Apex Court that the power to direct ‘further
investigation’ is a significant power, to be exercised sparingly in exceptional
cases for achieving the ends of justice. Section 315 CrPC empowers the Court
to issue process against any person, not being an accused, when in the
course of enquiry into and trial of an offence, the court is satisfied from the
evidence adduced, that such person has committed an offence for which he
could be tried together with the accused already put in trial. Section 311 CrPC
empowers the court, at any stage of any enquiry, trial or other proceeding
under the code of criminal procedure, to summon any person as witness or
examine any person in attendance, though not summoned as a witness, or
recall and re-examine such person, if his evidence appears to be essential to
the just decision of the case. If the court notices that because of deficiency in
investigation, any person, who ought to have been cited as witness by the
investigation officer, has not been cited as witness or, any person, who ought
to have been proceeded against, as accused but the Investigating Officer has
not sent such person for trial, and the court/magistrate is satisfied that such
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                              Page 10 of 21

defect or deficiency in the investigation can be met and the cause of justice
can be served by resorting to the above position of law, it would be desirable
to avoid the course of ‘further investigation’. Ultimately it is the discretion and
objective satisfaction of the court/magistrate on the facts and circumstance of
a particular case, to decide, whether further investigation is required or not.
21.     In the case of R ana Sinha (supra) Division Bench of this Court while
dealing with the object of further investigation, held in para-100 as under:
                “100. In the light of what have been observed and held in Ram
                Lal Narang (supra), it becomes crystal clear that a ‘further
                investigation’ is not necessarily aimed at finding out materials
                against the accused. A ‘further investigation’ may subserve the
                interest of the prosecution and, at times, even of the defence.
                There may be fresh materials, which may, on coming to light,
                necessitate ‘further investigation’ either for strengthening the
                case against the accused or for exonerating him.”
22.     In the case in hand, the FIR, Ext.1 was lodged by the PW-4, father of
the victim, wherein allegations of dowry demand and physical and mental
torture were brought against the appellant and all other members of his
family. All the six members of the family of the appellant were named in the
FIR (Ext.1). However, after investigation police submitted charge sheet
against only the husband of the victim and prayed for releasing the others for
having not found sufficient material against them. Learned Magistrate took
cognizance and committed the case to the court of Session for trial as the
offence charged was triable by the Court of Session. In course of trial, PW-4
the informant, deposed implicating all the six persons named in the FIR and
made a prayer for proceeding against all the FIR named persons. It is on the
basis of this evidence of PW-4, learned P.P., submitted an application for
further investigation and learned Trial Court directed for further investigation.
For better appreciation, the contents of the application are reproduced below:
                   “IN THE COURT OF DISTRICT & SESSIONS JUDGE::KARIMGANJ
                                     S.C. Case No. 46 of 2013.
                356/13
                                           State
                                            Vs.
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                 Page 11 of 21

                              Mukitur Rahman        -- Accused.
                Petitioner :    Shri R.K. Dev.
                                Public Prosecutor,
                                Karimganj
                The petitioner above named most respectfully states as under.
                1. That on 21/06/2012 the informant of the instant case, Md.
                    Noor Uddin, lodges FIR at Nilambazar PS following the
                    death of his daughter, Soma Begum, at her in-laws house
                    on 20/06/2012.
                2. That the said informant named the following persons as
                    accused in the FIR.
                    I. Mukitur Rahman, son of Abdul Rakib,
                    II. Abdul Rakib, son of Late Firoj Ali,
                    III. Moymuneessa, wife of Abdul Rakib,
                    IV. Joynul Haque, son of Abdul Rakib,
                    V. Moklichur Rahman, son of Abdul Rakib and
                    VI. Piyara Bagam, wife of Moklichur Rahman.
                3. That in course of investigation the police examined
                    material witnesses, including some family members of the
                    informant.
                4. That the informant while deposing before this Hon’ble
                    Court on receipt of summons on 13/05.2013, could learn
                    that the police has submitted the Charge Sheet only
                    against his son-in-law and set free other in-laws and also
                    the Police did not cite the aforesaid material witnesses.
                5. That the informant humbly states that all the FIR named
                    in-laws of his deceased daughter were involved in her
                    murder. On extraneous considerations, police has laid the
                    C/S improperly exonerating other FIR named culprits.
                    There was sufficient evidence of their action involvement in
                    the murder of his daughter.
                6. That in view of the above, the Fir named co-culprits are
                    required to be tried and the evidence of material witnesses
                    be produced before this hon’ble court. And in the interest
                    of fair trial and justice, further investigation is also
                    necessary.
                             In the above exceptional circumstances, it is,
                         therefore prayed that your honour would graciously be
                         pleased to order further investigation in the case.
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                 Page 12 of 21

                            And for this act of kindness, the petitioner shall
                        ever pray.”
23.      From the above application for further investigation, as well as the
order, by which further investigation was directed, it transpires that no fresh
material was placed before the trial court necessitating a further
investigation, except the version of the informant (PW-4) that all the six
persons named in the FIR are required to be proceeded against, which, can
by no stretch of imagination be said to be a new fact to justify a direction for
further investigation. It is also apparent from the application that no material
was brought before the court suggestive of any bias or lack of impartiality on
the part of the Investigating Officer. The power of the Magistrate/Court to
direct further investigation, more particularly at post cognizance stage, is a
significant one, to be exercised sparingly. Therefore, before passing an order
of further investigation, the court has to come to a definite finding with
objective satisfaction and by applying judicial mind that for achieving the
cause of justice or to prevent miscarriage of justice or in the interest of fair
trial, a further investigation is necessary. From facts of the instant case as
indicated above, want of adequate material necessitating a direction for
further investigation by the court is palpable. Therefore, in facts and
circumstances of the case, I am of the considered opinion that there was no
valid ground for directing a ‘further investigation’, though it was open for the
trial court to take recourse to the provision of Section 319 or 311 CrPC,
subject to availability of the necessary pre-requirement for invoking the said
provisions.
24.      Looking from another angle, although the learned Trial Court by its
order directed the police for ‘further investigation’, the Investigating Agency
has deviated from the order of the learned Trial Court and instead of
conducting further investigation, re-investigated the case and submitted a
fresh charge sheet against the accused appellant, who was not charge
sheeted in the original report. What is more important is that, the
Investigating Officer has clearly mentioned in the charge sheet that he has
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                               Page 13 of 21

re-investigated the case and found prima facie material against the accused
appellant Abdul Rokib (exonerated in the original charge sheet) for having
committed the offence under Section 304B IPC. The Investigating Officer
further mentioned categorically in the subsequent charge sheet, that during
his reinvestigation, he has not found any material against all the other
persons named in the FIR, except the accused appellant, and prayed for
exonerating all the other FIR named accused, except the accused appellant,
against whom the subsequent charge sheet has been filed. It is now settled
position of law that although Section 173(8) CrPC empowers the police to
‘further investigate’ a case, and submit a supplementary report, no power is
vested with the police for reinvestigation of a case. Rather, reinvestigation is
barred by law. Not to speak of police, directing re-investigation is also beyond
the jurisdictional competence of the subordinate courts. It is only the higher
Court which, in exercise of constitutional power, can order for reinvestigation
in exceptional and rare cases. The Apex Court in M itha Bhai Passa Bhai
Patel Vs. State of Gujrat (M anu SC 0858/ 2009 ) distinguishing between
further investigation and reinvestigation held as under:
                13. It is, however, beyond any cavil that `further investigation' and
                `re- investigation' stand on different footing. It may be that in a
                given situation a superior court in exercise of its constitutional
                power, namely under Articles 226 and 32 of the Constitution of India
                could direct a `State' to get an offence investigated and/or further
                investigated by a different agency. Direction of a re-investigation,
                however, being forbidden in law, no superior could/would ordinarily
                issue such a direction. Pasayat, J. in Ramachandran v. R.
                Udhayakumar, [(2008) 5 SCC 413], opined as under :-
                         "7. At this juncture it would be necessary to take note of
                         Section 173 of the Code. From a plain reading of the above
                         section it is evident that even after completion of
                         investigation under sub-section (2) of Section 173 of the
                         Code, the police has right to further investigate under sub-
                         section (8), but not fresh investigation or reinvestigation..."
25.     In Vinya Tyagi (supra) also the Apex Court held as under:
                “54. No investigating agency is empowered to conduct a
                ‘fresh’, ‘de novo’ or ‘re-investigation’ in relation to the offence
                for which it has already filed a report in terms of Section
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                      Page 14 of 21

                173(2) of the Code. It is only upon the orders of the higher
                courts empowered to pass such orders that aforesaid
                investigation can be conducted, in which event the higher
                courts will have to pass a specific order with regard to the fate
                of the investigation already conducted and the report so filed
                before the court of the learned magistrate.”
26.     It is therefore abundantly clear, that in view of the statutory power
provided by Section 173(8) CrPC, police is empowered to further investigate a
case and submit supplementary charge sheet, even after filing of report
under Section 173 (2), without being circumscribed by any embargo and for
that matter, the Magistrate or the subordinate Court can also direct for
further investigation both at pre and post cognizance stage, if such further
investigation is considered necessary for ends of justice. But reinvestigation
or fresh investigation is barred by law. Only the higher court in the exercise
of constitutional and inherent power, can order reinvestigation or fresh (de
novo) investigation in exceptional and rare cases, obviously to meet the ends
of justice. What therefore follows is that the term ‘further investigation’ and
reinvestigation    are   not    synonymous.    A   reinvestigation  or   de-novo
investigation has to be understood in contra distinction to a further
investigation.
27.     The Apex Court had the occasion to elaborate the distinction between
further investigation and reinvestigation in the case of K . Chandra Shekhar
Vs. State of K erela reported in (1998) 5 SCC 233 as under:
                “24. From a plain reading of the above Section it is evident
                that even after submission of police report under sub- section
                (2) on completion of investigation, the police has a right of
                'further' investigation under sub-section (8) but not "fresh
                investigation' or 're-investigation'. That the Government of
                Kerala was also conscious of this position is evident from the
                fact that though initially it stated in the Explanatory Note of
                their notification dated June 27, 1996 (quoted earlier) that the
                consent was being withdrawn in public interest to order a 're-
                investigation' of the case by a special team of State police
                officers, in the amendatory notification quoted earlier it made
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                               Page 15 of 21

                it clear that they wanted a 'further investigation of the case'
                instead of 're-investigation of the case'. The dictionary
                meaning of 'further' (when used as an adjective) is 'additional';
                more; supplemental. 'Further' investigation therefore is the
                continuation of the earlier investigation and not a fresh
                investigation or reinvestigation to be started ab-initio wiping
                out the earlier investigation altogether. In drawing this
                conclusion we have also drawn inspiration from the fact that
                sub-section (8) clearly envisages that on completion of further
                investigation the investigating agency has to forward to the
                Magistrate a 'further' report or reports - and not fresh report or
                reports- regarding the 'further' evidence obtained during such
                investigation. Once it is accepted - and it has got to be
                accepted in view of the judgment in Kazi Lhendup Dorji
                (supra) - that an Investigation undertaken by CBI pursuant to
                a consent granted under Section 6 of the Act is to be
                completed, notwithstanding withdrawal of the consent, and
                that 'further investigation' is a continuation of such
                investigation which culminates in a further police report under
                sub-section (8) of Section 173, it necessarily means that
                withdrawal of consent in the instant case would not entitle the
                State Police, to further investigate into the case. To put it
                differently, if any further investigation is to be made it is the
                C.B.I. alone which can do so, for it was entrusted to
                investigate into the case by the State Government. Resultantly,
                the notification issued withdrawing the consent to enable the
                State Police to further investigate into the case is patently
                invalid and unsustainable in law. In view of this finding of ours
                we need not go into the questions, whether Section 21 of the
                General Clauses Act and whether consent given for
                investigating into Crime No. 246/94 was redundant in view of
                the general consent earlier given by the State of Kerala.”
28.     A Division Bench of this Court in the case of R ana Sinha (supra)
while   discussing    the    distinction  between    further   investigation  and
reinvestigation, observed as under:
                “160. Further investigation is nothing, but continuation of an
                earlier investigation. In further investigation thus, the
                investigation, which might have been conducted in the past,
                would be resumed and conducted further.
                161. As against ‘further investigation’, a re-investigation is an
                investigation, which is a new and fresh investigation wiping
                out the earlier investigation and ‘re-investigation’ is conducted
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                Page 16 of 21

                by an agency, which is not only different from the earlier
                investigating agency, but also must be one, which falls under
                the control, supervision or jurisdiction of an authority not only
                different from, but also independent of, the authority, which
                had the control, supervision or jurisdiction over the earlier
                investigation agency. In this sense, an investigation conducted
                by an investigating agency, such, as Criminal Investigation
                Department of a State, is not different from the ordinary police
                machinery of the State concerned, because both of them are
                under the jurisdiction of the same State; whereas Central
                Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is an authority, which is different
                from the normal police investigation of the State or its Criminal
                Investigation Department. As has been pointed out in clear
                terms, in A.S. peter (supra), what Section 173(8) permits is a
                further investigation and not a re-investigation. What is,
                however, extremely important to bear in mind is that a
                reinvestigation being prohibited by law, it would not, ordinarily
                be ordered by a superior court. It, thus, becomes clear that a
                ‘reinvestigation’ would be ordered in the situations, which are
                extra-ordinary, rare and cannot be met by a further
                investigation.”
29.     Thus, a further investigation is nothing but continuance of the earlier
investigation which commenced by virtue of the power vested on police
under Section 173(8) of the CrPC and such further investigation culminates in
submission of a supplementary charge sheet or additional charge sheet,
whereas a reinvestigation is a fresh investigation conducted by a different
agency, which culminates in submission of a fresh report as envisaged under
Section 173(2) CrPC. Further investigation is an additional investigation,
which    adds    new   material   to  the   original   charge  sheet,   whereas,
reinvestigation is a fresh investigation, which may wipe out or completely
obliterate the previous investigation. Further investigation is statutory power
of the police and the Magistrate/court as provided in by Section 173(8) CrPC,
whereas reinvestigation is prohibited by the law. Only constitutional court can
order for reinvestigation in exercise of inherent or constitutional power, in
exceptional and rare cases.
30.     Coming to the case in hand, the subsequent charge sheet, Ext.5
submitted on completion of reinvestigation, shows that the Investigating
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                               Page 17 of 21

Officer has reinvestigated the case and submitted a fresh report whereby
wiping out the earlier investigation, inasmuch as, in the original report under
Section 173(2), the police submitted charge sheet against accused Mukitur
Rahman and prayed for exonerating the remaining 5 persons named in the
FIR for want of sufficient evidence against them. Whereas, by the subsequent
report, after the reinvestigation, the police submitted charge sheet (Ext.5)
against the present appellant Abdul Rokib and exonerated all other 5 persons
named in the FIR including the accused, who was charge sheeted in the first
charge sheet, meaning thereby, the subsequent reinvestigation has wiped out
the original investigation and charge sheet. The subsequent reinvestigation
and resultant charge sheet, Ext.5 wiping out completely the previous
investigation, was apparently illegal and beyond the jurisdictional competence
of police. What is more important is that after submission of the second
charge sheet (Ext.5) as culmination of the reinvestigation, the learned Trial
Court resumed the trial and framed charge against the accused appellant and
jointly tried both the accused persons, charge sheeted by first as well as
second charge sheet. When reinvestigation is prohibited by law and is beyond
the jurisdictional competence of the police as well as the subordinate courts,
the trial commenced on the basis of such reinvestigation is also illegal and a
nullity.
31.      Now the question, which arises is, whether the entire trial stands
vitiated because of the illegal reinvestigation. Evidently, initial charge sheet
was filed against the accused Mukitur Rahman and trial proceeded against
him and during the course of trial, after examination of four PWs, the learned
Trial Court ordered further investigation and stopped the trial till completion
of such further investigation. But the police, in its wisdom or ignorance
reinvestigated the case illegally and without jurisdiction and submitted a fresh
charge sheet against the appellant wiping out the original investigation.
However, the learned Trial Court without applying its mind proceeded with
joint trial of the appellant along with the accused who was charge sheeted in
the original report. Apparently, till the order made by the Trial Court for
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                Page 18 of 21

further investigation, there was no illegality in the trial, as it commenced and
continued as per law.
32.      A Division Bench of this Court in Hanum an Box Agarw al Vs. Girish
Ch. Gogoi reported in 1990 Cr.L.J. 2250 while dealing with the
consequence of investigation in a summon case continued beyond the period
of 6 months without the leave of the Court under Section 167 (5) CPC,
interalia formulated the following questions:
         (i)     Whether the entire proceeding becomes without jurisdiction
                 and nullity in case investigation in a summon case is not
                 completed and the charge sheet is not submitted within a
                 period of 6 months from the date of arrest of the accused
                 unless the Investigating Officer making the investigation
                 satisfies the Magistrate that for a special reason and in the
                 interest of justice the continuation of the investigation beyond
                 the period of 6 months is necessary?
         (ii)    ……………
         (iii)   Whether the proceeding is a nullity and Magistrate cannot take
                 cognizance, if the investigation continues beyond 6 months of
                 arrest of the accused although the part of investigation
                 completed before expiry of 6 months make out a case for trial
                 against the accused?
33.      Answering the above questions, this Court held as under:
                 “4. even though it would be permissible to take cognizance of
                 the offence on eh basis of the charge sheet submitted beyond
                 the period of 6 months visualized by Section 167 (5), it would
                 be open to the magistrate to look into those materials alone
                 which had been collected within the period of 6 months and to
                 ignore other materials put on record. Confinement to the
                 materials collected within 6 months would not require
                 examination of the question regarding prejudice to the
                 accused, which aspect has been mentioned in many cases.
                 ………………..
                 ………………..
                 iii) The proceeding would not become a nullity if the materials
                 collected before expiry of 6 months make out a case for trial
                 against the accused. This applies to those cases which are
                 connected with the accused persons not in jail at the relevant
                 time.”
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                 Page 19 of 21

34.      Though the above observation of the Division Bench of this Court
relates to an investigation in a summon case under Section 167(5) CPC, the
principle embodied in the ratio, can beneficially be applied in the present case
to the extent that although the joint trial of the appellant along with the co-
accused after submission of the charge sheet on the basis of reinvestigation
was illegal, commencement of continuation of trial on the basis of the original
charge sheet till the order directing further investigation, cannot be said to
have been affected or vitiated by reinvestigation of the case, inasmuch as the
reinvestigation or the report submitted on the basis of such reinvestigation
had nothing to do with the continuation of trial till the order of further
investigation was passed. Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that
notwithstanding the trial of the appellant along with the co-accused having
been rendered illegal and vitiated, because the reinvestigation was without
jurisdiction; there is no justification to hold that the trial was vitiated ab initio,
for, the trial of the accused Mukibur Rahman continued in accordance with
law, till the order of further investigation was passed.
35.      In above view of the matter, by applying the ratio of Hanum an Box
(supra) it can safely be held that the entire proceeding would not be illegal
and nullity. However, the proceeding to the extent, and so far as based on
the reinvestigation, is illegal and a nullity and liable to be set aside.
Accordingly, the conviction and sentence of the appellant is set aside. The
accused appellant Abdul Rokib be immediately released, if he is not required
in any other case. The LCR be send down along with copy of this judgment.
The learned Trial Court shall resume fresh trial in respect of accused Mukitur
Rahman from the stage, before the direction of further investigation. As the
learned Trial Court already held that accused Mukitur was suffering from
mental ailment, necessarily, learned Trial Court shall comply with the chapter
XXV of the CrPC.
Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                                   Page 20 of 21

    36.     Appreciating the assistance rendered by Mr. S.K. Agarwal, learned
    Amicus Curiae, I hereby provide that he will be entitled to Rs. 7500/-, as fees,
    which shall be paid by the Gauhati High Court Legal Services Committee upon
    production of a copy of this judgment.
                                                                            JUDGE
Mkk
    Crl. A. (J) 117/2015                                              Page 21 of 21


