                                             Page No.1
                       IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                          Crl.Appeal(J) 124 of 2016
        RAJ KUMAR PRASAD AHUDHYA
                                                             - Appellant
                                      Versus-
    1. THE STATE OF ASSAM
    2. SRI RUDRA KALITA, INSPECTOR,
        THE THEN O/C OF DHALIGAON P.S., P.S.-GOSSAIGAON, DIST.-KOKRAJHAR(BTAD),
        ASSAM.
                                                             - Respondent
                                            BEFORE
                     HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
        Advocate for the appellant Ms. P. Baruah Bordoloi
        Advocate for the respondent Mr. D Das,
                                      learned Additional Public Prosecutor, Assam
        Date of hearing               28th June, 2017
        Date of Judgment              20th July, 2017
                                JUDGMENT AND ORDER
                                            (CAV)
        Heard Ms. P. Baruah Bordoloi, the learned counsel Amicus Curiae appearing on behalf
of the appellant. Also heard Mr. D Das, learned Additional Public Prosecutor, Assam.
2.       The present appeal has been preferred by the appellant wherein he was convicted to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven years and to pay fine of Rs.10,000 only, in default,
further term of simple imprisonment of six months for his offence under Section 25(1-A) of
the Arms Act in Sessions case No.225(D) of 2015 under Section 25(1-A) of the Arms Act.
3.      The prosecution case, in brief, is that on the basis of prior information, the Inspector
and O/C of Dhaligaon PS, one Rudra Kalita being accompanied with TSI, Bhaben Das and
Crl.App(J) 124 of 2016

                                             Page No.2
one Section of CRPF of 156Bn of Kukurmari, Chapaguri started checking the four wheelers at
Chapaguri National Highway No. 31(C) on 11.05.2014, under the command of the Additional
SP (HQ) CHR from 10A.M. At about 4.30 pm, found one sky blue Wagon-R car bearing
registration No.AS-09-A/7377 coming from Guwahati towards Srirampur. The police party
stopped    the   vehicle   by    giving signal   and   found,  one   Sri   Raj Kumar   Prasad
Ahudhya(accused/appellant) driving the vehicle. On interrogation, the said driver admitted
that he brought some illegal arms and ammunitions in the vehicle to hand over the same to
some unknown organization. The said vehicle was seized by the police on the spot and
mechanic was called from Chirang MTO office, and on being shown by the said accused
driver, police recovered two numbers of sophisticated arms and four numbers of
ammunitions wrapped with black plastic after opening the bumper of the back side of the
vehicle. The recovered arms and ammunition were also seized by police on the spot in
presence of witnesses and police seized the material exhibits of the case record. The
relevant papers connecting the said vehicle including driving license etc. were also seized
from the driver. Thereafter the driver of the car along with the seized articles were brought
to the police station and on further interrogation he confessed that he carried the illegal
arms for delivery of the same to some unknown organization on receiving Rs.50,000/-.
Accordingly, the FIR was lodged.
4.      On the basis of the said FIR, the Dhaligaon PS Case No. 72/2014 under Section
25(1)(a)/35 of the Arms Act was registered against the accused person and on completion of
the investigation, police filed charge-sheet under Section 25(1)(a)/27 of the Arms Act against
the accused/appellant and another Belsri Narzary. The case was thereafter transferred to the
court of learned Additional CJM, Bongaigaon and after creation of Chirang District, the same
was transferred to the court of Judicial Magistrate, Chirang for disposal.
5.      The learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Chirang furnished the necessary copies as
required under section 207 of the Cr.P.C by that court and the other accused Belsri Narzary
Crl.App(J) 124 of 2016

                                            Page No.3
having not appeared in the court for long time, the case of the present accused/appellant
was splitted from the said accused and trial proceeded against the accused/appellant in the
court of Judicial Magistrate 1st Class, Chirang. In course of trial, a formal charge under
Section 25(1-B)/35 of the Arms Act was framed against the accused/appellant by that court
and thereafter, as the case attracts provision under Section 25(1-A) of Arms Act, the case
being exclusively triable by the court of Sessions, the learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class,
Chirang committed the case for trial to the court of Sessions after receiving the case record
and on production of the accused/appellant. The learned Sessions Judge, Chirang framed a
formal charge under Section 25(1-A) of the Arms Act which was read over and explained to
the accused/appellant which he pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. During trial, the
prosecution side examined altogether 11 prosecution witnesses while the defence side did
not adduce any evidence. The plea of the accused/appellant was total denial of the
prosecution case. Thereafter hearing the parties, the learned court of Sessions Judge,
Chirang convicted the accused/appellant as aforesaid and hence this appeal, from jail.
6.      Ms. Bordoloi, Amicus curiae submits that the alleged seizure of the Arms was not
carried out as required under the law. In fact, for such seizure, presence of Magistrate is
necessary who was absent at the relevant period of the said seizure of the Arms. Further,
none of the seizure witnesses who are civilians, had seen the act of seizure of the Arms from
the vehicles. Pointing to the evidence of the PW-2, Gopal Narzary, one of the seizure
witnesses, Ms. Bordoloi submits that the said witnesses specifically deposed in his cross-
examination that he never saw the arms being recovered from the Wagon-R. In fact, the
police called him to Chapaguri police control room and shown the arms and thereafter took
the signature in the seizure list. PW-3, Jainal Abedin, another seizure witnesses, deposed
that the police called him to the Chapaguri traffic police cell and over the table he saw the
arms and the vehicle. There were no other vehicles standing there. PW-4, Niranjan
Crl.App(J) 124 of 2016

                                             Page No.4
Mazumdar, another seizure witness, deposed that the traffic police called him towards the
police rest house and he saw the SP sitting there. He told him that the arms were recovered
from the said Wagon-R vehicle. Highlighting the said piece of evidence, Ms. Bordoloi submits
that all the seizure witnesses were called and mechanically asked to put their signatures in
order to complete the formality but without keeping in mind the importance of such civilian
witnesses in an action of the police of seizure of arms.
7.      It is also submitted that prosecution sanction was not obtained as required under the
Arms Act. In fact before submitting the charge-sheet by the police there was no formal
sanction letter authorizing the concerned O/C, Dhaligaon to initiate the prosecution against
the accused/appellant. Such being the position, the whole process of investigation and
prosecution of the accused/appellant under the Arms Act is invalid and as such the
conviction of the accused/appellant is uncalled under the law. Hence, the appeal is to be
allowed.
8.      Mr. Das, learned Additional Public Prosecutor submits that there is no none
compliance of the legal provisions in the process of seizure of the arms from the vehicle. As
apparent from the evidence of the PW-1, it is clear that on being admitted by the
accused/appellant of arms being carried by the said vehicle, the PW-7, Mr. Mahim Ch. Roy,
mechanic was called up and as per the instruction of the accused/appellant the back side
bumper of the vehicle was removed and on such removal the arms were detected and
seized. Further, on being shown by the said accused/appellant, the said PW-7 removing
various parts of the vehicle recovered arms which were seized therefrom and that too in
presence of witnesses. The accused/appellant, on his part, admitted that as against the
payment of Rs.50,000/- he transferred the arms from Dimapur to deliver the same to
unknown organization at Bongaigaon. The said piece of evidence coupled with the evidence
Crl.App(J) 124 of 2016

                                              Page No.5
of PW-2, 3 and 4 it is not at all disbelivable about the seizure of arms and that too on being
pointed out by the accused/appellant.
9.      With regard to the presence of the Magistrate during the process of seizure of the
arms from the vehicle, Mr. Das submits that there is no requirement of the presence of the
Magistrate, inasmuch as Section 23 of the Arms Act specifically stipulates that any police
officer or any other officer specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government can
carry out search in any vehicles or other means of conveyance. Regarding the granting of
sanction letter for prosecution of the accused/appellant, Mr. Das submits that exhibit-16 is
clear and definite that I.O, PW-11 Mr. Bhaben Das was issued the prosecution sanction vide
order dated 31.07.2014 to prosecute the accused/appellant under Section 25(1)(a) of the
Arms Act. Thus, Mr. Das submits that there is no such illegality leading to violation of any of
the provisions of the Arms Act while conducting the investigation, seizure of the arms and
prosecution of the said accused/appellant. Accordingly, he submits that the appeal is liable to
be dismissed.
10.     Considered the submission of the learned counsels. In deciding the case under the
Arms Act, 1959, the vital ingredients to be looked into by the court in the considered opinion
of this Court are as follows:
(a) The possession of fire arms under the Arms Act by the accused/appellant. Such
possession means the elements of consciousness or knowledge of that possession in the
person charged with such offence and where he has not the actual possession, he must have
nonetheless a power or control over that weapon so that his possession thereon continues.
(b) The identity of the arms seized and the arms produced before the court must be
established by the prosecution.
(c) Involvement of public witnesses at the time of search of the accused and recovery of
arms.
Crl.App(J) 124 of 2016

                                             Page No.6
11.      Keeping in view the said requirement, let us examine the evidence on record. From
the evidence of PW-11, Bhaben Das it is clear and apparent that at the time of checking the
vehicles, this particular vehicle was stopped and the accused/appellant was carrying arms.
Subsequently, the said accused/appellant informed the PW-11 that there are arms in the
rear bumper and on both the sides of the vehicle. On such indication, PW-7, Mr. Mohan Ch.
Roy, the mechanic of MTO was called and from his evidence it is far more clear that as per
the instruction of the accused/appellant, he removed the bumper and some parts on both
sides of the vehicle wherefrom the seized arms were recovered. Amongst the relevant
papers seized by the police the driving license of the accused/appellant was also seized and
it is also on record that on being paid a sum of Rs.50,000/- to him, he transported the arms
from Dimapur for delivery at Bongaigaon. Accordingly, the element of consciousness and/or
the dominion and the control of the said arms in possession of the accused/appellant is
proved beyond any reasonable doubt.
12.      Now in order to verify the second requirement it is necessary to consider the
deposition of PW-5, Raj Kumar Singha, the armourer of the 8th Assam Police Battalion,
Abhayapuri. From the evidence, it is clear that while taking delivery of the said arms the
same were delivered to him in a wooden box wrapped with cloth with seal. He opened the
box and found the arms which he marked and specified as exhibit No.1, mark(A) to exhibit
No.11, mark(k) and accordingly he has exhibited his report as exhibit-13. In his cross-
examination, he deposed that he received the box under a specific memo number. This piece
of evidence has not been challenged by the accused/appellant in order to bring on record
that there were discrepancy in the arms recovered and produced before the court.
Accordingly, this requirement is also established.
13.      Now coming to the third requirement, on perusal of exhibit-11 and 12, seizure lists, it
is seen that PW-2, Mr. Gopal Narzary is one of the public who observed the said seizure of
Crl.App(J) 124 of 2016

                                             Page No.7
arms by the police from the said vehicle. It is very much clear from his evidence that at
about 4.30 pm the police recovered arms from a Wagon-R vehicle. He identified the same on
being shown to him in the witness box. Similarly, there were other witnesses from public as
evident from the record itself. The accused/appellant failed to produce any paper as required
u/s 3 of the Arms Act, 1959. Further no dispute was raised with regard to the expert opinion
nor the arms being not prohibited by the defence.
14.     Considering the discussions made hereinabove, this Court finds that the basic
requirement in a trial under the Arms Act are proved by the prosecution beyond any
reasonable doubt and with regard to the sanction order it is a fact that requisite prosecution
sanction order was issued to the PW-11 i.e. the Investigating Officer through the SP, Chirang
by the District Magistrate as required under the Act. While sanctioning the said prosecution,
it was mentioned that the prosecution be carried out under Section 25(1)(a)/35 of the Arms
Act. However, the charge was framed under Section 25(1-A) and the learned Court below
correctly opined that said variation in quoting the provisions of the Act has no bearing in the
prosecution against the accused/appellant. Similar is the view of this Court also.
15.     This court appreciate the assistance rendered by the learned Amicus Curiae in
disposing of the appeal and accordingly an amount of Rs.7500/- (rupees seven thousand five
hundred) be paid to her as her professional fees from the Legal Services Authority.
16.     Accordingly this Court finds no merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed.
17.     Send back the LCR.
                                                                                    JUDGE
Rakhi
Crl.App(J) 124 of 2016


