                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
         (THE HIGH COURT: ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                      Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113 of 2014
                   Nabir Hussain alias Nabebur
                   S/o Noor Islam,
                   R/o Balabhita, Mouza Damka,
                   P.S. – Sorbhog, Dist. Barpeta
                   Assam.                                          ………… Appellant
                                         -Versus-
                    The State of Assam                            ………… Respondent
                                       -BEFORE-
             HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
                   Advocate for the appellant    :    Ms. Bijita Sarma,
                                                      Amicus Curiae
                   Advocate for the Respondent:       Mr. PS Lahkar,
                                                      Additional Public Prosecutor,
                                                      Assam
                   Date of hearing & Judgment :       28.06.2017
                         JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
         Heard Ms. Bijita Sarma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant. Also heard Mr. PS Lahkar, learned Additional Public Prosecutor,
appearing on behalf of the State of Assam.
2.       This appeal has been filed by the appellant from jail against the judgment
and order dated 04.08.2014 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge
(FTC), Barpeta in Sessions Case No. 293/2012 under which the appellant stood
                                                                            Page 1 of 8
Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113/2014

convicted for the offence under section 304 B of the IPC and sentenced to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and a fine of Rs. 10,000/-, in default, simple
imprisonment for another 6 months for the offence aforesaid.
3.       Appellant/ accused Nabir Hussain @ Nabebur stands trial under Sections
304B/302 IPC for commission of offence of causing death of his wife Ambia
Khatun, who was subjected to cruelty for demand of dowry prior to her death on
20.11.2010 at village Balavitha, under the jurisdiction of Sarbhog police station.
4.       The prosecution case in brief is that an FIR dated 20.11.2010 lodged by
one Md. Askar Ali, son of late Jainuddin of village Bhaluki Salmara of Barpeta
police station alleging that his daughter Ambia Khatun was married to the
appellant/ accused, namely, Nabir Hussain @ Nabebur about 6/7 years ago and
out of their wedlock two children were born to Ambia. But after the marriage she
was subjected to physical and mental torture by her husband for demand of
dowry. On 19.11.2010 the accused/ appellant severely beaten up his wife as a
result of which she sustained grievous injuries on her person. On 20.11.2010, the
informant could learn about the physical torture meted out against his daughter
by the accused person and he immediately shifted her to Barpeta Road Hospital
where his injured daughter succumbed to her injuries. Upon receipt of the
aforesaid FIR, the police registered a case being Barpeta Road P.S. 190/2010
under Section 304B of the IPC and investigated the case and after completion of
the investigation submitted the charge sheet under the said section of law
against the accused person for his trial.
5.       On receipt of the summons, the accused person appeared before the
court of learned CJM, Barpeta, and the learned court below after furnishing the
                                                                           Page 2 of 8
Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113/2014

copy, finding materials under section 304B IPC which is exclusively triable by the
court of Sessions committed the record on 13.12.2012. Accordingly, after hearing
the parties and perusing the case record, the learned CJM framed charge under
Sections 304B/302 of the IPC. The charge so framed was read over and
explained to which the accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
6.       After hearing the parties, the learned trial court convicted the accused
Nabir Hussain @ Nabebur and sentenced him to undergo for rigorous
imprisonment for 7 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 10,000/-, in default to undergo
simple imprisonment for another period of 6 months for his conviction under
Section 304B of the IPC against which the present appeal is preferred.
7.       Ms. Sarma submits that there are discrepancies regarding the cause of
death alleged to be informed by the deceased. The PW 1, Baharul Islam deposed
in his deposition that the deceased told him in the Barpeta Road Hospital that her
husband i.e. the accused/ appellant, assaulted her on the date of occurrence and
prior to the date of occurrence the accused husband used to assault her. On the
other hand, Askar Ali, PW 2 who is the complainant and the father of the
deceased Ambia, deposed that on the date of occurrence he went to Bhaluki
Salmara Bazar and his nephew Rashid informed him on the road that the accused
had brutally assaulted his daughter and he should go there immediately. He
informed the PW 1 and the PW 1 went to the house of the accused person on his
bike. The said PW 1 put the deceased Ambia tying her on the pillion seat and
took her from the house of the accused person and came to Damkata bazaar.
The PW 2, the father of the deceased with the help of 3/4 persons lifted the
deceased on the vehicle and took her to Barpeta Road Hospital. On the way, the
                                                                         Page 3 of 8
Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113/2014

deceased informed about the occurrence to the PW 2 and further informed that
the accused appellant had pressed her neck severely, hit her brutally on her
shoulder and punched her in the back of the abdomen. In the hospital, she was
admitted and after about half an hour i.e. at about 9.30 A.M., Ambia died and
thereafter the PW 1 informed the death to the police and lodged an ejahar.
However, the PW 2 deposed that the PW 1 did not accompany them while going
to the hospital. Rather, the PW 1 went to the hospital only after the death of
Ambia. So, Ms. Sarma submits that there was discrepancy so far the cause of
death and the assault alleged to be purported by the appellant. PW 2 contradicts
the deposition of the PW 1 to the effect that PW 1 was told by the deceased
Ambia at Barpeta Road Hospital that her husband, the accused / appellant, had
assaulted her on the date of occurrence. Ms. Sarma submits that in order to
come to the conclusion with respect to the assault as alleged to be perpetrated
on the deceased, a duty was cast upon the prosecution side at least to record
the evidence of the persons who accompanied the deceased to the hospital and
also the nurses who treated her at least prior to her death who were present at
the time of such disclosure to PW 2 to make it believable. There being no such
evidence on record the finding of the court below is not conclusive and a shade
of doubt remains in the conviction of the accused/ appellant.
8.        On the other hand, Mr. Lahkar, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor,
submits that the alleged discrepancy as pointed out by Ms. Sarma is not material
at all. In fact, it is not disputed by the appellant that she was lifted with the
injuries from the court yard of the house of the appellant. There is no leading
evidence as to how she suffered those injuries from the defence side. In such a
                                                                         Page 4 of 8
Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113/2014

situation, the statement of the deceased with regard to the torture and the
assault perpetrated on her by the husband appellant cannot be disbelieved at all.
9.       The learned trial court took into consideration the post mortem report
and accepted the opinion that the death was due to shock, haemorrhage and as
a result of injuries sustained on her person. The said post mortem report was
accordingly proved. The learned trial court also took into consideration the
deposition of the rest of the witnesses who are neighbours and inhabitants of the
village of the appellant. It is taken into consideration that an attempt was made
to establish that the death of the deceased was due to suicide by consuming
poison. However, such attempt on the part of the defence side was disbelieved
inasmuch as had the cause of death been suicide by consuming poison, the same
would have been detected in the post mortem report. The learned trial court
considered the offences under Section 304 B of the IPC and in order to bring the
guilt of the accused appellant within the ambit and scope of Section 304 B of the
IPC also recorded as follows:-
                   “Hon’ble Gauhati High Court in (2010) 3 GLR 13 Umesh Sarma and
              another – Appellant vs. State of Assam – Respondent in paragraph 9 has
              held that – “the peculiar circumstances in respect to an offence under
              section 304B IPC is that the court has a statutory compulsion merely on the
              establishment of two factual positions namely, (i) death of a wife should
              have occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances within 7 years of
              her marriage; (ii) soon before her death, she should have been subjected to
              cruelty or harassment by the accused in connection with any demand for
              dowry, to presume that the accused had committed dowry death. If any
              accused wants to escape from the said catch, the burden is on him to
              disprove and if he fails to rebut the presumption, the court is bound to act on
              it.”
                                                                                   Page 5 of 8
Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113/2014

10.      The learned trial court keeping in view of the said ingredients convicted
the appellant under Section 304B of the IPC and apparently the prosecution has
failed to prove that soon before the death of the deceased Ambia she was
subjected to cruelty or harassment by the accused appellant in connection with
any demand for dowry to presume that the accused appellant had committed
any dowry death which is one of the vital ingredients under Section 304 B of the
IPC.
11.      On perusal of the evidence of the various witnesses on record and from
the discussions made in the judgment by the learned trial court, it is apparent
that the prosecution has failed to show that immediately prior to the torture
meted to the deceased, there was a claim for dowry. The learned trial court has
failed to consider the said aspect of the matter and wrongly invoking Section 304
B of the IPC convicted the accused appellant. On a specific query to Mr. Lahkar,
the learned Additional Public Prosecutor, he submits that the said error is very
much apparent on the judgment. However, he submits that as the cause of
death as per the post mortem report and the information given to the PW 2 by
the deceased are synchronising, so it is proved that at least owing to the torture
carried out by the appellant husband on the deceased Ambia, she died. Mr.
Lahkar also submits that considering the totality of the circumstances, the
accused appellant ought to have been punished under Section 304 Part-II of the
IPC.
12.      Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels. From the
deposition of PW 2 coupled with the post mortem report it can be concluded that
the deceased was hit by the appellant husband brutally on her shoulder, punched
                                                                         Page 6 of 8
Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113/2014

in her back and abdomen and pressed her neck severely. The post mortem
report indicates as following:-
              “2. Wounds, Position, Character:
                            1.    One bruise noted over posterior aspect of left
                      lower chest (3” x 1”).
                            2.    Abrasion present over front of both legs. Rt. 1” x
                      ½” Lt. ½” x ½”.
                                          ***
              IV – ABDOMEN
              ***
              2. Peritonoum: Healthy contains clotted blood in large amount
              ***
              ***
              8. Spleen:          A linear tear noted over outer surface.
              ***
                   In my opinion death is due to shock and haemorrhage as a result
              of injuries sustained in her person.
                   Type of weapon – blunt
                   Time since death – about 48 hours.”
13.      From the said injuries it cannot be concluded that such injuries inflicted
on the deceased by the appellant without any intention to cause death. Rather,
the same gives an indication that the injuries inflicted on the body of the
deceased were done with the intention of causing death and thereby leading this
court to hold that the offence against the appellant is proved under Section 304
Part-I of the IPC.
14.      On the submission of Ms. Sarma this court holds that the discrepancies
are not vital in order to nullify the charge against the accused/ appellant. There
is specific evidence that the deceased was lying injured in the courtyard of the
house of the appellant/ accused. The husband appellant also absconded and he
never took the deceased to the hospital on his own. If there was/ were any
explanation with regard to the injury on the person of the deceased, the same
                                                                           Page 7 of 8
Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113/2014

ought to have brought on record by the defence side. As no such explanations
are forthcoming, the prosecution has no other alternative, but to accept the
prosecution case that the appellant/ accused had caused the injury to the person
of the deceased. So such discrepancies cannot be termed to be material in
dislodging the case of the prosecution.
15.      Considering the discussions made hereinabove, this court accordingly
holds the conviction for 7 years rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of Rs.
10,000/- in default, the appellant has to undergo simple imprisonment for
another period of 6 months for his conviction under Section 304 Part-I of the
IPC. With the aforesaid modification this appeal is accordingly disposed of. Send
back the LCRs.
16.      This court appreciates the valuable service rendered by Ms. B Sarma,
learned Amicus Curiae and as against her professional fees, a sum of Rs. 7,500/-
be paid to her from the legal services authority.
                                                                   JUDGE
 BiswaS
                                                                        Page 8 of 8
Criminal Appeal (J) No. 113/2014


