                                    1
                       IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
     (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                         ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                             PRINCIPAL SEAT
                     Crl. Appeal (J) No. 106/ 2015
      Sri Lakhi Murmur,
      Son of late Benga Murmur,
      Resident of Ikarajan Jugalati Goaon,
      P.S. Bokakhat,
      District- Golaghat,
      Assam
                                                     ………. Appellant
                     -Versus-
   The State of Assam.
                                                     ………. Opp. Party
Advocate for the petitioner:           Mr. K. Pathak
                                               ……. Amicus Curiae.
Advocate for the Opp. Party:           Mr. D. Das,
                                               ………..Addl. P.P. Assam.
                              -BEFOR E–
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
               Date of hearing                : 28.06.2017
               Date of judgment & order       : 20.07.2017
                       JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)

                                  2
             Heard Mr. K. Pathak, learned Amicus Curiae,
appearing for the appellant and Mr. D. Das, leaned Additional
Public Prosecutor, Assam, appearing for the Opposite Party.
2]           The present appeal has been preferred by the
appellant against the judgment and sentence dated 23.09.2015,
passed by the learned District & Sessions Judge, Golaghat in
Sessions Case (Spl. POSCO Case) No. 20/2015 (GR Case No.
235/2015) under Section 6 of the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offence Act. 2012 (in short the POSCO Act), in which he
was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for 10 (ten) years, pay
fine of Rs. 2,000.00 (Rupees two thousand) and in default to
undergo further imprisonment of 1 (one) month.
3]           The present appellant Sri Lakhi Murmur, son of late
Bengal Murmur, a resident of Jugalati Goan under Bokakhat
Police Station in the District of Golaghat, Assam was prosecuted
as accused in Bokakhat P.S. Case No. 31/2015 under Section
376 IPC read with Section 8 of the POSCO Act. It is the case of

                                 3
the prosecution that on 07.02.2015 at about 10.00 a.m. in the
morning he committed rape upon his niece Smti Anita Soren
(actual name is withheld) aged about 14 years old and also
attempted to kill her by pressing her neck.
4]          On receipt of the ejahar from the complainant Sri
Hari Nath Soren, son of Haria Soren on 09.02.2015, the Officer-
in-Charge of Bokakhat Police Station registered the above noted
case and endorsed S.I. Phani Madhab Saikia to investigate the
case. The said Investigating Officer investigated the case,
examined the victim by doctor, collected report and on
completion of investigation, he sent up the present accused-
appellant for trial under Section 376 IPC read with Section 8 of
the POSCO Act. The court of the learned Special Judge
(POSCO)/ the District & Sessions Judge, Golaghat framed
charges under Section 6 of the POSCO Act and on being read
over and explained the same to which the accused-appellant
pleaded not guilty of the offence.

                                 4
5]           The prosecution side has examined as many as 8
(eight) witnesses including the Medical Officer and the I.O. in
support of its case. After closure of the prosecution witnesses,
the accused- appellant was examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
in which he denied the total case and adduced no evidence in
defence. The learned court below, after considering all the
material evidence on record and after hearing the argument of
both the learned counsels of prosecution and defence side
finally, the appellant was convicted and sentenced as aforesaid.
Being aggrieved, the accused appellant has preferred this
appeal from jail.
6]           Mr. K. Pathak, learned Amicus Curiae, appearing on
behalf of the accused-appellant submits that the offence as
apparent from the materials on record and from the statement
of the victim is a case of aggravated sexual assault as provided
under Section 9 of the POSCO Act. Such being the position, the
accused-appellant ought to have convicted and sentenced
under Section 10 of the POSCO Act.          The punishment as

                                 5
prescribed, shall not be less than 5 years, which may extend to
7 years and shall also be liable to fine. In support of his
contention, Mr. Pathak submits that the case is well covered
under Section 9(n) and 9(p) of the Act. Accordingly, Mr. Pathak
submits that the conviction and sentence of the accused-
appellant is liable to be reduced to the maximum period as
prescribed by Section 10 of the said Act as against the one for
10 years.
7]          Mr. Das, learned Additional Public Prosecutor submit
that the submission of the learned Amicus Curiae cannot be
taken into consideration. If the Medical Report (Ext.2) is taken
into consideration, as apparent from the said report, the hymen
of the victim was found to be ruptured. Accordingly, if the said
medical piece of evidence is considered then the offence will fall
under “aggravated penetrative sexual assault” as defined under
Section 5 of the POCSO Act. In such a nature of offence and/ or
offences, Section 6 of the said Act stipulates the punishment
which shall not be less than 10 years but which may extend to

                                6
for imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine. Mr. Das
further submits that the accused-appellant is the uncle of the
victim girl and it is the case of the prosecution that as the
daughter of the accused-appellant eloped with someone as
such, the victim girl who was residing with PW 2 (the
complainant) was requested to stay in the house of the
accused-appellant in order to do domestic works which the PW
2 agreed. Thus, the present case falls within Section 5(n) and
5(p) of the Act inasmuch as, the accused-appellant was in a
position of trust or authority of the victim child. Accordingly,
there is no error committed by the learned court below and it
requires no interference in the judgment and sentence passed
against the appellant.
8]          Considered the submissions of both the learned
counsels and perused the evidence of the victim girl (PW 1).
From the evidence, it is apparent that the accused-appellant is
her own uncle and on the date of occurrence, she was staying
alone in the house of the said accused-appellant. The victim girl

                                7
specifically deposed that there was complete penetration on her
against her will. In this manner, the said accused appellant
raped on her and she felt abdominal pain. The said piece of
evidence from the mouth of the victim is clearly supported by
the medical report wherein it is reported that her hymen was
found to be ruptured on medical examination. This is sufficient
enough to prove the case of the prosecution wherefrom it can
very well be concluded beyond any reasonable doubt, that the
accused appellant is related to the victim girl and there was
deep penetration which covers the offence as prescribed under
Section 5(n) and 5 (p) of the POSCO Act, 2012. The age of the
victim as per the medical report is above 14 (fourteen) years
but below 16 (sixteen) years. She is a child as per definition
prescribed in the Act.
9]           The accused-appellant in his statement given under
Section 313 Cr.P.C. tried to project his defence that he had
beaten up the victim girl for not attending the domestic works

                                  8
and he never raped her. It is also tried to project by the
defence that there was no cordial relation between the
complainant (PW 2) and the said accused-appellant. The said
accused- appellant failed to adduce any evidence in support of
his defence while making the statement under Section 313
Cr.P.C. nor thereafter.
10]          Situated thus, this court do not find any illegality in
passing the impugned judgment of conviction and sentence
against the accused-appellant. More so, there is no dispute with
regard to age of the victim girl and as such, this court finds no
merit in this appeal and accordingly, the same is dismissed.
11]          This court appreciate the assistance rendered by the
learned Amicus Curiae in disposing the appeal and accordingly
an amount of Rs. 7,500.00 (Rupees seven thousand five
hundred) only be paid to the learned Amicus Curiae as the
professional fees from the legal service authority.

                        9
12]  Send back the LCR.
                          JUDGE
Eam…


