                     THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
      (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                          ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                          Criminal Appeal 185/2009
                               Madan Saikia
                                     Vs
                              State of Assam
                                       BEFORE
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE HITESH KUMAR SARMA
        Advocate for the Appellant          : Mr. K Sarma & Mr. D Das.
        Advocate for the Respondent         :  Mr. N J Dutta .... Additional PP.
        Date of hearing & Judgment          : 13.07.2017.
                        JUDGMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
        The prosecution case is that, on 13.10.2003, the government had initiated
an eviction drive of some shops, at Kalabari Center, and during the course of
such eviction drive, the shop of one Babul Bhuyan was damaged to some extent.
One Jiten Bhuyan and Ramesh Saikia guarded the shop of said Babul Bhuyan in
view of the fact that several articles were there in the shop. At about 1:00 am, in
the intervening night of 13.10.2003 and 14.10.2003, one Bhaba Saikia, along
with 10/15 persons, armed with ‘dao’, ‘khukuri’, ‘lathi’ etc., attacked the shop of
said Babul Bhuyan and assaulted Jiten Bhuyan and Ramesh Saikia by sharp
                                                                           Page 1 of 5
Crl.A.185/2009

weapon. The informant was informed about this by the neighbouring shop-
keepers over telephone. He rushed to the place of occurrence and saw aforesaid
Jiten Bhuyan and Ramesh Saikia were lying in a pool of blood. The attackers
chased them also and then assaulted. Injured Jiten Bhuyan, Ramesh Saikia and
Babul Bhuyan aforesaid were shifted to Guwahati for better medical treatment.
Informant Rosheswar Bhuyan lodged the FIR, on the aforesaid facts, with the
Hawajan Police Outpost.
2.      The police, on receipt of the FIR of the above facts, registered the case,
investigated into it, collected evidence, and finally, submitted charge-sheet
against the accused person under Sections 148/149/326/325/307 IPC.
3.      The learned Magistrate committed the case to the learned Sessions Judge
for trial as the alleged offences included Sessions Triable offences.        After
exhausting the procedure, the learned trial court framed a formal charge against
the    accused/appellant  under    Sections  148/325/326/307/149     IPC.     The
accused/appellant and his co-accused pleaded innocence necessitating the trial of
the case. After completion of the trial, the Additional Sessions Judge, vide his,
judgment dated, passed in Sessions Case No. 237/2005, convicted the
accused/appellant under Section 324 IPC, and sentenced him to rigorous
imprisonment for 1 (one) year and a fine of Rs. 5,000/- (rupees five thousand)
with a default clause.
4.      I have heard learned counsel for the accused/appellant, Mr. K Sarma and
also heard learned Additional PP for the state Mr. N J Dutta.
                                                                        Page 2 of 5
Crl.A.185/2009

5.      I have also scanned the evidence on record.
6.      In view of the evidence on record, this court, is required to decide as to
whether the accused/appellant caused injuries to injured Jiten Bhuyan, Ramesh
Saikia, Babul Bhuyan and Roseswar Bhuyan.
7.      On perusal of the judgment of the learned trial court, it appears that the
learned trial court completely relies upon the evidence of PW8 for holding the
accused/appellant is guilty of the commission of offence under Section 324 IPC.
On perusal of the evidence, it is found that at the time of occurrence the
accused/appellant Madan Saikia assaulted him on his head by means of a
weapon. There is evidence led by him to suggest that injured Jiten Bhuyan was
earlier assaulted by some persons, without naming who assaulted him.            The
other witnesses do not appear to have stated as to who caused the injuries on
the person of the aforesaid Roseswar Saikia. Only the evidence on record to
show that the accused/appellant assaulted the injured Roseswar Saikia is his own
evidence as PW8.       This fact has also been asserted by the PW8 in his cross-
examination.
8.      The learned counsel for the accused/appellant has also argued that there
was a cross-case between the parties, and in the cross case also, vide judgment in
GR Case No. 495/2003, the learned Additional Sessions Judge, convicted some
of the persons, including Babul Bhuyan, son of the informant, was also convicted
and was sentenced 1(one) year rigorous imprisonment with a fine of Rs. 5,000/-
(rupees five thousand) with a default clause under Section 324 of the IPC.
                                                                          Page 3 of 5
Crl.A.185/2009

9.      It appears from the evidence on record that at the time of occurrence,
there was a mutual fight between both the parties, i.e., the accused/appellant
and other co-accused who were already acquitted by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge, and the accused persons including the informant in the instant
case in the GR Case, referred to above. There is an observation in paragraph-39
of the impugned judgment made by the learned Additional Sessions Judge that
this was a case of group fighting and there was a mutual provocation and blows
to each other. It was also observed that there was not a unilateral provocation
and in such cases, one side could not be blamed. Both the parties are more or
less to be blamed.
10.     On perusal of the trial court record including, the evidence of the
witnesses, it does not appear that the learned trial court looked into the aspect as
to who was the aggressor at the relevant point of time of the occurrence,
whether it is the present accused/appellant or the informant side in spite of the
fact that it was held to be a mutual fight between both the parties. Record also
reveals that persons from both the parties got injuries.
11.     The evidence of PW8 in the instant case was not corroborated by any of
the other witnesses which was necessary, particularly, in view of the fact that the
accused/appellant also got injuries at the time of occurrence. Ascertaining as to
who was the aggressor is essential in the facts of the instant case as admittedly
both the parties engaged in the fight resulting injuries to members of both the
parties.
                                                                          Page 4 of 5
Crl.A.185/2009

12.     The position being as above, in the considered view of this court, the
judgment impugned in this appeal, is found to be not based on the factual matrix
of the case, and therefore, requires to be interfered with.
13.     In the absence of any specific corroborative evidence to the effect that the
accused/appellant was aggressor in the case and, particularly when he himself
sustained injuries in the mutual fight between the parties, it cannot be safely
held, beyond reasonable doubt, that he was the aggressor and assailant in respect
of the injury sustained by the informant Roseswar Saikia.
14.     That being so, the accused deserves to be acquitted on benefit of doubt.
Accordingly, this court acquits him on benefit of doubt. The judgment of the
learned trial court in Sessions Case No. 237/2005 is set aside.
15.     The appeal is allowed.
16.     Send down the LCR with the copy of this judgment.
                                                                           JUDGE
Basumatary
                                                                          Page 5 of 5
Crl.A.185/2009


