                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     Criminal Appeal No. 143 of 2008
                            Sri Tapan Kumar Das
                            Proprietor, M/S Ferro Structures,
                            Basistha Chariali,
                            P.S. Basistha Chariali, Guwahati-29.
                                                              ----- Complainant/Appellant
                                        – VERSUS –
                            1. The State of Assam
                            2. Mr. Munin Basumatary,
                            Partner, Bright Construction Corporation,
                            Vivekananda Lane,
                            Ulubari, GS Road, Guwahati-7.
                            And/or
                            Mr. Munin Basumatary,
                            Resident of Bye Lane No. 2,
                            Mathura Nagar, P.O. Dispur Sachivalaya,
                            Ulubari, GS Road, Guwahati-6.
                                                              ----- Respondent/Accused.
                                              BEFORE
                 Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                  Advocate for the appellant        : Mr. Z Alam, Advocate.
                  Advocate for Respondent            : Ms. S Jahan, Addl. P.P.
                   Date of hearing and Judgment & Order::               20th of July, 2017.
                                JUDGMENT & ORDER (oral)
                  This appeal, under Section 378(4) of the Code of Criminal
       Procedure, is directed against the judgment and order, dated 08-08-2007,
       passed by the learned Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Kamrup,
       Guwahati, in CR Case No. 1123C/2003, acquitting the accused/respondent
       from the offence, under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument Act,
       read with Section 422 of the IPC.
       Crl. A. No. 143 of 2008                                                         Page 1 of 5

2.         I have heard Mr. Z Alam, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
complainant-appellant, and Ms. S Jahan, learned Additional Public
Prosecutor, Assam.
3.         I have perused the evidence, recorded by the learned trial Court in
the case and has also perused the impugned judgment.
4.         The evidence on record makes it clear, which also the learned trial
Court recorded in its judgment that the respondent issued the cheque
involved in the complaint case against the discharge of his liability of Rs.
2,02,500/-.
5.         The only issue in the instant appeal, as found from the appeal
memo as well as from the impugned judgment, is that whether the
decision of the learned trial Court, on point No. 11(vii), is correct or not
on the basis of the evidence on record.
6.         There is no denial of the fact that, on the basis of the evidence on
record, the cheque, in question, was issued by the respondent to the
appellant. The cheque was presented in the bank thrice, once on 20-11-
2002, then on 18-12-2002, and finally, on 14-02-2003. There is no
dispute that the cheque was presented in the bank thrice, within the
period of limitation, for encashment of the cheque. The cheque presented
in the bank was dishonoured on 20-11-2002 and 18-12-2002, on the
ground that the signature of the drawer did not match. While the cheque
was presented for the third time, within the period of limitation of
encashment of the cheque, it was dishonoured for non-availability of fund
in the account of the drawer as well as for non-rectification of the defects
in respect of signature of the drawer. The learned trial Court, on the basis
of the above facts, held that that bank authority ought to have returned
the cheque to the drawer, as his signature did not match or differed. It
Crl. A. No. 143 of 2008                                              Page 2 of 5

appears from the judgment that the learned trial Court found fault with
the bank and not with the present appellant/complainant.
7.         The learned counsel for the appellant has referred to the decision
of this Court in Sushil Kr. Mandal –vs- Probodh Kumar Dihingia, reported
in 2016 (2) GLT 572, in which decision, the judgment of Hon’ble
Supreme Court in M/S Laxmi Dyechem vs State Of Gujarat & Ors,
reported in (2013) 1 Crimes (SC) 101, on a situation, similar to one in the
instant case decided that the dishonour of cheque in the manner as in the
instant case would also amount to dishonour constituting an offence
under Section 138 of the NI Act.
8.         That being so, on this ground alone, the judgment of the learned
trial Court suffers from perversity resulting in an erroneous decision.
9.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in M/S Laxmi Dyechem (supra), has
observed as follows:
           “15. The above line of decisions leaves no room for holding that
           the two contingencies envisaged under Section 138 of the Act
           must be interpreted strictly or literally. We find ourselves in
           respectful agreement with the decision in NEPC Micon Ltd. (supra)
           that the expression “amount of money …………. is insufficient”
           appearing in Section 138 of the Act is a genus and dishonour for
           reasons such “as account closed”, “payment stopped”, “referred to
           the drawer” are only species of that genus. Just as dishonour of a
           cheque on the ground that the account has been closed is a
           dishonour falling in the first contingency referred to inSection 138,
           so also dishonour on the ground that the “signatures do not
           match” or that the “image is not found”, which too implies that
           the specimen signatures do not match the signatures on the cheque
           would constitute a dishonour within the meaning of Section
           138 of the Act. This Court has in the decisions referred to above
           taken note of situations and contingencies arising out of deliberate
           acts of omission or commission on the part of the drawers of the
           cheques which would inevitably result in the dishonour of the
           cheque issued by them. For instance this Court has held that if after
           issue of the cheque the drawer closes the account it must be
           presumed that the amount in the account was nil hence insufficient
Crl. A. No. 143 of 2008                                              Page 3 of 5

           to meet the demand of the cheque. A similar result can be brought
           about by the drawer changing his specimen signature given to the
           bank or in the case of a company by the company changing the
           mandate of those authorised to sign the cheques on its behalf. Such
           changes or alteration in the mandate may be dishonest or
           fraudulent and that would inevitably result in dishonour of all
           cheques signed by the previously authorised signatories. There is in
           our view no qualitative difference between a situation where the
           dishonour takes place on account of the substitution by a new set
           of authorised signatories resulting in the dishonour of the cheques
           already issued and another situation in which the drawer of the
           cheque changes his own signatures or closes the account or issues
           instructions to the bank not to make the payment. So long as the
           change is brought about with a view to preventing the cheque
           being honoured the dishonour would become an offence
           under Section 138 subject to other conditions prescribed being
           satisfied. There may indeed be situations where a mismatch
           between the signatories on the cheque drawn by the drawer and
           the specimen available with the bank may result in dishonour of
           the cheque even when the drawer never intended to invite such a
           dishonour. We are also conscious of the fact that an authorised
           signatory may in the ordinary course of business be replaced by a
           new signatory ending the earlier mandate to the bank. Dishonour
           on account of such changes that may occur in the course of
           ordinary business of a company, partnership or an individual may
           not constitute an offence by itself because such a dishonour in
           order to qualify for prosecution under Section 138 shall have to
           be preceded by a statutory notice where the drawer is called upon
           and has the opportunity to arrange the payment of the amount
           covered by the cheque. It is only when the drawer despite receipt
           of such a notice and despite the opportunity to make the payment
           within the time stipulated under the statute does not pay the
           amount that the dishonour would be considered a dishonour
           constituting an offence, hence punishable. Even in such cases, the
           question whether or not there was a lawfully recoverable debt or
           liability for discharge whereof the cheque was issued would be a
           matter that the trial Court will examine having regard to the
           evidence adduced before it and keeping in view the statutory
           presumption that unless rebutted the cheque is presumed to have
           been issued for a valid consideration.
10.        In view of the above ratio laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the above judgment, cheque issued by the respondent to the
appellant in discharge of his liability was dishonoured.
Crl. A. No. 143 of 2008                                             Page 4 of 5

11.        In view of the above, the judgment passed by the learned Trial
Court impugned in this appeal is set aside. The case is remanded back to
the learned trial Court with a direction to proceed with the case from the
stage of argument and to decide accordingly.
12.        Send down the LCR along with a copy of this judgment and order.
13.        Both the parties are directed to appear before the learned Trial
court on 27th of July, 2017.
                                                                   JUDGE
Paul
Crl. A. No. 143 of 2008                                         Page 5 of 5


