                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                         Criminal Appeal NO. 175/2015
              RANTU MEDHI,
              SON OF LATE MITHU MEDHI,
              PERMANENT RESIDENT OF VILLAGE NO.1,
              JAMBARI UNDERBOKO POLICE STATION
              IN THE DISTRICT OF KAMRUP(R), ASSAM
                                                           .........Accused/Appellant.
                                                                   (In jail)
                                          - Versus –
              1. THE STATE OF ASSAM.
              2. SMTI. SARADA DAS,
              WIFE OF SHRI BANESWAR DAS,
              RESIDENT OF VILLAGE NO.1 JAMBOI,
              UNDER BOKO POLICE STATION, IN THE
              DISTRICT OF KAMRUP(R), ASSAM
                                                                     …….. Respondents.
                                     -BEFORE-
           THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE Hitesh kumar sarma
       For the Appellant                    :      Mr. D Talukdar.
       For the Respondent No. 1             :      Mr. BJ Dutta, Addl. PP.
       For the Respondent No. 2             :      Mr. H Bhuyan.
       Date of Hearing & Judgment           :      22.06.2017.
                          JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
              This is an appeal against the judgment and order, dated 11.12.2013,
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge No. IV, Kamrup at Guwahati convicting
the accused-appellant under Section 376(2)(f)/511 IPC and sentencing him to undergo
                                            1

Rigorous Imprisonment for 5 (five) years and also to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default
to undergo further Rigorous Imprisonment for 1 (one) month in Sessions Case No.
341(K)/2011.
[2]            Heard Mr. D Talukdar, learned counsel for the appellant. Also heard Mr.
BJ Dutta, learned         Additional Public Prosecutor, appearing for the State of
Assam/respondent No. 1 as well as Mr. H Bhuyan, learned counsel appearing for the
respondent No. 2.
[3]            The prosecution case is that, on 25.11.2011, at about 1 p.m., the
accused/appellant was playing ludo with the victim, while her mother, PW2, was
sleeping at that time. The accused-appellant attempted to commit rape on the victim,
who was a 9 year old girl at that time, and to implement his such criminal intention, he
made the victim lie on the floor. The victim raised alarm following which her mother
came out and the accused-appellant fled away from the place of occurrence. On the
basis of such facts, the FIR (Exhibit-4) was lodged by the mother of the victim/PW2.
[4]            On receipt of the FIR, Boko Police Station registered a case being Boko
PS Case No. 297/2011. The case was investigated, evidence was collected and after
exhausting all the procedural formalities, finally, charge-sheet was filed against the
accused-appellant under Sections 448/376/511 IPC.
[5]            The charge against the accused-appellant was framed under Section
376/511 IPC, to which, the accused-appellant pleaded innocence. Therefore the trial
proceeded. After completion of the trial, he accused-appellant was convicted as
indicated above.
[6]            The issue before this Court are for deciding as to whether the accused-
appellant attempted to commit rape on the victim and whether the accused-appellant
trespassed into the house of the informant with a view to commit an offence there.
[7]            In respect of the 2nd part, i.e., commission of house trespass, the
accused-appellant appears to have committed no offence in view of the admitted
position in the FIR itself that the victim and the accused-appellant were playing ludo at
                                              2

the relevant point of time in the house of the victim. One of the elements of the offence
under Section 448 IPC is to trespass into the house with the intention of committing the
offence. It has not come out from the evidence on record that he trespassed into the
house of the informant with a view to commit an offence rather he was there playing
ludo with the minor girl with the knowledge and approval of the informant and he used
to come to the house of the informant earlier also for playing ludo.
[8]            Now let us scan the evidence to arrive at a decision as to the alleged
offence committed by the accused-appellant under Sections 376/511 IPC.
[9]            The victim, examined as PW1, implicated the accused-appellant, who
took her to another room of their house, grabbed her, and thereafter, penetrated his
penis repeatedly in her vagina. At this point of time, her mother appeared and the
accused-appelalnt fled from the scene of occurrence. In her statement recorded under
Section 164 Cr.PC also, she appears to be consistent with the evidence she has led in
her examination-in-chief as PW1.
[10]           The informant/mother of the victim, examined as PW2 is found to have
deposed in her evidence that the accused/appellant visited her house for playing ludo
with the victim on the date of occurrence and he was playing ludo with her
daughter/victim. At the relevant time of the occurrence, this witness was sleeping and
after hearing the alarm raised by her daughter/victim, she came out only to witness that
the victim was laid down on the floor with the gamocha wearing at that time by the
accused-appellant removed and then attempting to have penetrating sexual inter-course
with the victim. He failed to have penetrating sexual intercourse, in view of the tender
the age of the victim. This evidence of the PW2 appears to have not been dislodged by
the defense during the cross-examination, and rather, in her cross-examination, she is
found to have assertive of her statement she made in the examination-in-chief.
[11]           PW3 is the doctor, who examined the victim, on requisition from the
Investigating Police Officer. She has exhibited the report of medical examination, vide
Ext.2. In her such examination, she did not see any mark of violence, laceration or any
symptoms of rape on the victim/PW1.
                                             3

[12]             PW4 is the elder brother of the victim and son of the informant, who is
found to have stated in his evidence that from the place he was erecting fencing, he
heard hue and cry at his house and he rushed to his house and found the victim lying on
the floor and the accused/appellant leaving the place of occurrence quickly.
[13]             PW5 is the Investigating Police Officer, who is found to have stated about
the routine stages of the investigation of the case, including recording of statement of
the witnesses and also causing of recording of statement of the victim under Section
164 Cr.PC by the learned Magistrate.
[14]             The defense subjected the PW2 and PW4 to cross-examination, to elicit
the contradiction with their previous statements. Although in vain, as defense could not
bring out such contradiction, which would have cracked the prosecution case.
[15]             Now let us scan the evidence of the 2 defense witnesses to substantiate
the plea taken in their cross-examination that the accusation against the accused-
appellant is nothing but a lie and that the accused-appellant has been falsely implicated.
[16]             The evidence of DW1 appears to have staged a case for the accused-
appellant by leading evidence to the effect that it is because of the quarrel between the
accused-appellant’s side with the father of the victim, following the rebuke by the father
of the victim under the influence of liquor. He also threatened the accused-appellant
that he would be subjected to harassment by filing false case against him and even he
demanded an amount of Rs. 20,000/- from him in the evening so as to prevent him from
filing a false case against him (accused-appellant).
[17]             The DW2 appears to have led evidence in corroborating the evidence of
the DW1, meaning thereby, that she subscribed to the evidence led by the DW1.
[18]             But, the fact remains that the victim was aged about 9 years. Unless she
fails to inspire confidence of this Court on her evidence, there can be no reason to
disbelieve her. The statement of the victim, as PW1, in the Court as well as her
                                              4

statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.PC are so consistent that she leaves no scope
for this Court to disbelieve her and her such evidence is corroborated by the
informant/PW2, except the minor discrepancies as regard the sequence as to how she
could arrive at the place of occurrence, there is no other discrepancies. The discrepancy
is that while the victim said that the informant/PW1 appeared in the place of occurrence
and saw the occurrence. The informant deposed in her evidence that she appeared in
the scene of occurrence after hearing the alarm raised by the victim, which remains
undisputed
[19]            Let us see whether such discrepancy is such that it touches the root of
the case. In the considered view of this Court, such discrepancy does not touch the root
of the case, as in respect of material particulars, the evidence is consistent and
corroborative. That apart, minor discrepancies of such nature rather guarantee the
truth.
[20]            Whatever it may be, the prosecution, in view of the above evidence on
record, has been able to bring home the guilt of the accused-appellant for commission
of an offence under Sections 376/511 IPC by attempting to commit rape on the person
of the victim and the defense fails to discard the case of the prosecution inspite of
adducing evidence of two witnesses.
[21]            Having found the prosecution version true, the finding of the guilt
accused/appellant by the learned Trial Court, does not require interference by this Court.
So far, the substantive sentence is concerned, this Court is of the view that the accused-
appellant has already undergone sentence for a period of 3 years and 9 months and the
remaining 1 year and 3 months of the substantive sentence is yet to be undergone. So
far the fine, as a part of the sentence is concerned, and default clause thereof, this
Court is of the opinion that no interference is required.
[22]            However, in view of the above discussions, considering the facts and
circumstances of the case, and the age of the accused-appellant, i.e., 27 years, the RI
for 3 years and 9 months, already undergone appears to be appropriate. Therefore, the
accused-appellant is convicted and sentenced to the period already undergone, subject
                                              5

to payment of fine as imposed by the learned Trial Court with the default clause retained
as it is.
[23]          Send a copy of this order to the Central Jail, Guwahati for release of the
accused-appellant immediately with a final release order.
[24]          Send down the LCR with a copy of the judgment.
                                                                               JUDGE
Nilakhi
                                            6


