                                    1
                       IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
      (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                         ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                             PRINCIPAL SEAT
                      Crl. Appeal (J) No. 81/ 2015
Sri Ajoy Bora @ Das
                                       ……….Appellant
                    -Versus-
State of Assam & Another
                                       ……….Opposite Parties
Advocate for the appellant:            Ms. B. Sarma,
                                                   Amicus Curiae
Advocate for the Opposite Parties:     Mr. P.S. Lahkar,
                                       Addl. Public Prosecutor, Assam.
                                 -BEFOR E–
   HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
               Date of hearing                : 28.06.2017
               Date of judgment & order       : 24/07/2017
                       JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)

                                      2
            Heard Ms. B. Sarma, learned Amicus Curiae, appearing on
behalf of the appellant and Mr. P.S. Lahkar, learned Additional Public
Prosecutor, appearing for the State of Assam.
2]            This appeal has been preferred from the jail by the accused-
appellant Shri Ajoy Bora @ Das, who was convicted and sentenced to
undergo R.I for a period of 7 (seven) years and sentenced to pay fine of
Rs. 2000/- (two thousand) only, in default R.I for 2 (two) months alongwith
another accused Smti Rumi Bora in Sessions Case No. 343(N)/2010 under
Sections 366/34 of the Indian Penal Code (in short, the IPC).
3]            The case of the prosecution is that on 14.3.2010, one Sri
Sankar Roy lodged an ejahar in the Nagaon Police Station against three
persons namely, Smti Rumi Bora, Sri Ajoy Bora @ Das (present appellant)
and Puja. It was alleged that the said three persons inducing his wife, Smti
Rita Devi that they would provide her employment in a Company at
Guwahati took her. After 1 or 1 and ½ months he went to the house of
Smti Rumi Bora and asked as to when his wife would come back. But the
said Smti Rumi Bora asked him not to worry as she would come. In this
manner, he met Smti Rumi Bora 4/5 times. On 13.3.2010, his wife informed

                                       3
him over phone from Mumbai that the accused persons sold her at Thane,
Mumbai and also informed that she was confined in a room.
4]            Initially, Nagaon P.S. Case No. 355/2010 was registered under
Sections 366/ 34 IPC and the same was entrusted to one Sri Pradip Kumar
Baruah, S.I. to carryout investigation. The victim Smti Rita Devi on her own
came back to Nagaon and appeared before the Investigating Officer (I.O.)
whereafter, the I.O. examined her medically through doctor, recorded her
statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and also recorded the statement of
other witnesses and charge sheet was filed against the said Smti Rumi Bora
and Sri Ajoy Bora @ Das under Section 366/ 34 IPC.
5]            Formal charge was framed under Section 366/34 IPC against
the said two accused persons. The prosecution’s side examined, in all, four
witnesses including the I.O. The learned Sessions Judge, Nagaon vide
impugned judgment and order convicted the said two accused persons and
sentenced them as aforesaid.
6]            Being aggrieved, one of the accused persons, Sri Ajoy Bora @
Das has preferred this appeal from the jail.

                                      4
7]            Ms. B. Sarma, learned amicus curiae submits that the
prosecution has failed to prove the required ingredients to convict a person
under Section 366 of the IPC. It is submitted that the prosecution failed to
prove beyond all reasonable doubt the purpose of abduction of the said
victim as required under Section 366 IPC and in the absence of such proof,
Ms. Sarma submits that the accused person is entitled for setting aside the
conviction.
8]            Mr. Lahkar, learned Additional Public Prosecutor supports the
case of the prosecution and submits that the prosecution has been able to
prove successfully the ingredients required under Section 366 IPC including
the purpose for which the said victim was abducted. As such, submits Mr.
Lahkar that no interference is required in the judgment and order of
conviction and sentence.
9]            Considered the submissions and examined the deposition of
the various witnesses in order to examine the findings of the learned court
below. PW 1, Smti Rita Devi deposed in her chief that Puja introduced her
to Smti Rumi Bora, who proposed to take her to Delhi for giving
employment in a Company. She did not agree to the said proposal. As Smti
Purnima Das and Smti Aloka Das agreed, she also agreed to the proposal of

                                       5
Smti Rumi Bora. But the present appellant Sri Ajoy Bora @ Das took them
to Mumbai from Guwahati Railway Station. At Mumbai, Sri Ajoy Bora @ Das
took her alongwith the other two women namely, Smti Purnima Das and
Smti Aloka Das to a house wherein a person was staying with his wife. The
said accused, Smti Rumi Bora and the present appellant talked to each
other and Smti Rumi Bora asked the appellant to deposit the amount in the
Bank account and the said conversation was made through mobile phone.
All of them were sent to a house at a different place by one Sri Robi and in
that place various unlawful activities were going on as observed by her.
10]           PW 1 took part in the said activities and stayed with a man for
a night. She stayed there for 6 months. On being informed by the husband
to Haiborgaon Police Station, the In-charge of the Police Station contacted
her over phone and visited Mumbai but could not locate her as Sri Robi hide
her somewhere. Smti Rumi Bora contacted the said person Sri Robi and
asked him to send her back alongwith other two ladies, but he refused only
because money was not refunded. Thereafter, Sri Robi arranged railway
tickets and put them in Guwahati bound train and after two days she
reached Guwahati and therefrom Nagaon and she presented herself before
the Police Station. She has deposed in her chief that she gave missed call to
her husband and thereafter on the return call by her husband she informed

                                      6
the address where she was kept. Thereafter her husband informed the
police stating about her whereabouts.
11]            In her cross-examination, PW 1 deposed that Smti Rumi Bora
assured her to provide job in a Steel Factory. She informed about the
discussion with Smti Rumi Bora to her husband. Her husband resisted her
proposal to go in search of employment but when pressing hard she
consented to the proposal of Smti Rumi Bora.
12]            In her cross-examination she failed to name the girl from
whom she took the mobile for calling her husband. She also deposed that
her husband never came to see her off. There were 10/15 numbers of girls
in the place where she resided at Mumbai. She never objected when she
came to know that they were going to Mumbai instead of Delhi.
13]            Sri Sankar Roy, PW 2 (husband of PW 1) in his chief deposed
that Smti Rumi Bora used to visit their rented house and insisted his wife
that she should accompany her for employment in a Steel Factory at
Guwahati for 1 or 1 and ½ months and return back. He did not agree, but
later on at the initiation of his wife he agreed on the condition that she
would earn money and come back. But he never went to see her off. His

                                      7
wife gave a call to him and informed that Smti Rumi Bora and Sri Ajoy Bora
@ Das sold her at Mumbai for a sum of Rs. 50,000.00 (Rupees fifty
thousand) only. On receipt of the phone call, he lodged a complaint against
Smti Rumi Bora and Sri Ajoy Bora @ Das by filing an FIR. Thereafter, police
visited Mumbai and rescued his wife and brought back her to Haibargaon
Police Station.
14]           In the cross-examination, he deposed that Smti Rumi Bora
and Puja used to visit his house and only on such visit he knew about them.
Puja visited his house to meet his wife prior to Rumi Bora’s visit. He does
not know about Puja and what her husband used to do. It was from PW 1
that he could come to know that Smti Rumi Bora asked her to go to
Guwahati for working in a factory and 3/ 4 days thereafter his wife went
away. During absence, for 6 (six) months of his wife, he did not lodge any
written ejahar before the police. He could not say who was with PW 1 at
the time when she called him from Mumbai. He asserted in his cross-
examination that police rescued his wife and took her back from Mumbai.
He also deposed that Sri Ajoy Bora @ Das is well known to him.
15]           PW 3 Rasima Begum, the landlord deposed in her chief that
she saw Smti Rumi Bora and Sri Ajoy Bora @ Das visited the house of PW

                                      8
2. PW 1 told her that she was leaving with Smti Rumi Bora for work in a
Embroidery Company. PW 1 left her daughter with her. PW 2 informed her
after about 6 (six) months that Smti Rumi Bora had sold PW 1 at Mumbai.
She saw PW 1 coming to her house alone.
16]           In her cross-examination, she deposed that she does not
know Puja. She met Smti Rumi Bora in the house of PW 2 and prior to that
she did not meet Smti Rumi Bora. PW 1 never told her that she would go to
work in a Company. After 2 (two) months, she could learn that PW 1 was
staying at Mumbai. She cannot say as to how PW 1 was recovered.
17]           PW 4 (I.O.) in his chief deposed that on 14.3.2010, FIR was
lodged and in his cross-examination, he deposed that the date of
occurrence was 31.12.2009 and FIR was received on 14.3.2010. He
examined PW 2 at the Police Station and at that time, he was not
accompanied with his wife, PW 1. On 12.4.2010, he went to Mumbai to
rescue PW 1. On 19.3.2010, the IGP, Assam accorded permission to
proceed to Mumbai. He recorded the statement of PW 1 at Haiborgaon
Police Station. PW 1 stated that she was accompanied by Smti Aloka Das
and Smti Purnima Das. He did not visit the house of PW 1 and examined
the neighbours of the house of PW 1.

                                    9
18]          From the records, the statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. of
PW 1 shows that the said Smti Rumi Bora met Smti Purnima Das and Smti
Aloka Das in the house of PW 1 and they also agreed to go with Smti Rumi
Bora.
19]          The prosecution heavily relied on PW 1 i.e. the victim. She,
however contradicted in her statement. In her cross-examination she stated
that before going to Mumbai she never met Smti Aloka Das and Smti
Purnima Das, but in her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. she stated
that Purnima Das and Aloka Das were present at her house and in their
presence she consented to go with Smti Rumi Bora as Smti Aloka Das and
Smti Purnima Das also consented to go to Mumbai. PW 2, the husband of
PW 1 deposed in his chief that Smti Rumi Bora asked PW 1 to go to
Guwahati for employment in a factory. PW 2        deposed that the police
rescued PW 1, but the PW 4, the I.O. deposed that on 21.3.2010, he went
to Mumbai to rescue PW 1 but could not locate her and came back and on
12.4.2010 he found PW 1 at the Police Station.
20]          PW 1 could not say the name of the lady from whom she took
the mobile phone for calling her husband. There was no verification with

                                      10
respect to the said phone call to the husband, PW 2 by PW 1 from Mumbai
in order to ascertain the proof of phone call from the mobile set of the lady,
PW 1 called PW 2. No Railway tickets were verified in order to verify if PW
1, had come to Guwahati from Mumbai in order to prove her story. Neither
the prosecution verified the bank transaction between the two accused
persons as deposed by PW 1. The return Railway tickets were also not
verified in order to prove that she was actually sent to Mumbai. There was
no any endeavour on the part of the prosecution side or investigating
authority to record the statement of Smti Aloka Das and Smti Purnima Das.
Further, the statement of Puja is also relevant, which the prosecution has
also failed to record.
21]            From the materials on record, it cannot be concluded that PW
1 went on the basis of the inducement of Smti Rumi Bora as she deposed in
her 164 Cr.P.C. statement that she consented as Smti Purnima Das and
Smti Aloka Das also agreed to go as per the proposal of Smti Rumi Bora.
She was not recovered from any brothel or any such place to show that she
was subjected to illicit intercourse after the abduction. The learned court
below merely on the statement of PW 1 had believed the prosecution story
when there is no verification and proof as to her transportation to Mumbai

                                     11
by accused persons. The Police visited Mumbai but failed to recover PW 1
from Mumbai. Accordingly, the required ingredients under Section 366 IPC
are missing.
22]            In Chote Lal and Anr. vs. State of Haryana, reported in 1979
CrlLJ 1126 (SC), it was held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that by merely
finding that the accused abducted a woman, charge under Section 366 IPC
could not be held to have proved. It is further necessary to find out that
they abducted the woman for any of the purpose mentioned in Section 366
of the IPC and in the absence of such a finding, charge must fail.
23]            Here in the present case in hand, even if it is presumed that
the accused persons abducted the PW 1, but the prosecution failed to prove
that the said abduction of the PW 1 was for any of the purposes mentioned
in Section 366 of the IPC. Considering the same, this court finds that the
accused-appellant is entitled for benefit of doubt and the conviction and
sentence recorded under Section 366 of the IPC against the accused
appellant in the judgment and order referred herein above, by the learned
Sessions Judge, in Sessions Case No. 343(N)/2010 under Sections 366/34
of the IPC is set aside.

                                      12
24]           In the present case, it is observed that two accused persons
were convicted by the court below. However, the appeal has been preferred
by only one accused appellant, Sri Ajay Bora @ Das. The other convict, Ms.
Rumi Bora has not preferred any appeal. It is found from the record and
evidence that the said accused, Ms, Rumi Bora stands on the same footing
as that of the present appellant before this court. Accordingly, whether the
benefit of the outcome of this appeal can be extended to the other acused,
Smti Rumi Bora.
25]           In Madhu Vs. State of Kerala, reported in (2012) 2 SCC 399 in
a similar situation, the Hon’ble Apex Court referring to Gurucharan Kumar
Vs. State of Rajastha, reported in (2003) 2 SCC 698 and Pawan Kumar Vs.
State of Haryana (2003) 11 SCC 241 came to the following findings:
       “77.   In view of the ratio laid down in the two cases referred to
       above, we are satisfied, that to do complete justice, it would be just
       and appropriate to extend the same benefit as has been extended to
       the appellant-accused Madhu, also to Sibi Accused 2. Therefore, for
       exactly the same reason as have weighed with us in the instant
       appeal, to determine the acquittal of the appellant-accused Madhu,
       we hereby order the acquittal of Sibi Accused No. 2 as well, even

                                      13
       though he has not preferred an appeal so as to assail the impugned
       judgment whereby he stands convicted”.
26]           Similarly, in Mahibul Haque Vs. State of Assam, reported in
2007 (1) GLT, 413, a Division Bench of this court in a similar situation faced
by this court held as follows:
       “16.   In the present case, we find although the two accused
       persons were convicted by the Court below the appeal has been
       preferred by only one accused appellant Mahibul Haque. The other
       convict Makibur Rahman is not before us. However, from the
       evidence and materials on record we find that both the accused
       persons stand on the same footing and the evidence against them is
       identical. The question thus arises is whether the benefit accrued on
       to the appellant Mahibul Hoque can be extended to an accused
       person, who is not before us. The question was considered by the
       Apex Court in the case of Pawan Kumar Vs. State of Haryana (2003)
       11 SCC 241 wherein one of the non-appellants Balwinder Singh was
       extended to the benefit which was granted in favour of the
       appellant. Admittedly, the illegality for the conviction of the accused
       appellant U/s 364 (A) IPC and in order to set the matter right

                                        14
       interference is called for in favour of non-appellant also otherwise
       the illegality will be allowed to be perpetuated”.
27]            Keeping in view the ratio laid down as aforesaid, this court set
aside the conviction and sentence by the court below passed against other
accused, Smti Rumi Bora for exactly the same reasons, this court has
arrived in the instant appeal to determine the acquittal of the accused –
appellant, Sri Ajay Bora @ Das.
28]            This court appreciate the assistance rendered by the learned
Amicus Curiae in disposing the appeal and accordingly an amount of Rs.
7,500.00 (Rupees seven thousand five hundred) only be paid to the learned
Amicus Curiae as the professional fees from the legal service authority.
 29]           Accordingly, this appeal is disposed of. Send back the LCR.
                                                             JUDGE
 Eam…


