                                                                                                          1
                                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
                       (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM, AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                                                 CR IM INAL APPEAL (J) No.116 of 2013
                                    Sri Rupen Kurmi,
                                    Son of Sri Durga Kurmi,
                                    Resident of Vill- Ulukunchi,
                                    P.S.- Jagiroad,
                                    District- Morigaon,
                                    Assam.
                                                                                              … ..Appellant
                                      -versus-
                                    The State of Assam.
                                                                                           ....R espondent
                                                           BEFORE
                                        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE UJJAL BHUYAN
                                  HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PARAN KUMAR PHUKAN
                                    For the Appellant              : Ms. S. Kanungoe, Amicus Curiae
                                    For the Respondent             : Ms. B. Bhuyan, Addl.PP, Assam
                                    Date of hearing                : 25-07-2017
                                    Date of judgment               : 25-07-2017
                                             JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
                     (P.K. Phukan,J)
                             This an appeal from jail preferred by the appellant Rupen Kurmi.
                     2.      The appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 10.06.2003,
                     passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Morigaon in Sessions Case No.11/2001,
                     convicting the accused appellants Rupen Kurmi, Suben Maradi, Aghona Konwar
                     under Section 302 of the IPC and sentencing them to undergo Rigorous
Crl.A(J) No.116 of 2013

                                                                                                       2
                     Imprisonment for life and to pay fine of Rs.1000/- each with a default clause and
                     also convicted all the accused appellants under Section 201 of the IPC and
                     sentencing them to Rigorous Imprisonment for 3 years with fine of Rs.1000/- with a
                     default clause.
                     3.      We have heard Ms. S. Kanungoe, learned Amicus Curiae appearing for the
                     appellant and Ms. B. Bhuyan, learned Additional Public Prosecutor, Assam.
                     4.      On 31.07.1997 Sub Inspector of Police Amulya Deka of Jagiroad Police
                    Station lodged a written FIR with the O/C of the said police station stating therein
                    that while conducting investigation in connection with GD Entry No.659 dated
                    29.07.1997, he found involvement of the accused appellants Chandra Pator, Rupen
                    Kurmi, Suben Maradi and Aghona Konwar in the murder of one Rajen Baraik of the
                    same Basti and after the murder they buried the dead body in the campus of the
                    appellant Chandra Pator. The accused appellants dug out the dead body in his
                    presence and it was sent to Morigaon Civil Hospital for post mortem examination.
                    5.       The further allegation was that the brother of the deceased, namely, Raju
                    Baraik took Rs.3,600/- from the accused appellants to suppress commission of the
                    crime by the accused appellants. On the basis of the FIR, a case was registered and
                    on completion of investigation charge-sheet was submitted against the accused
                    appellants under Sections 302/201/34 of the IPC.
                    6.       In order to prove the charges, prosecution examined 7 witnesses including
                    the Medical Officer and the Investigation Officer. The appellants in their defence
Crl.A(J) No.116 of 2013

                                                                                                         3
                     statements recorded under Section 313 of the CrPC pleaded innocence but they
                     have not adduced any evidence.
                     7.      Ms. Kanungoe, learned amicus curiae painstakingly led us through the
                    evidence of the prosecution witnesses to contend that none of the witnesses
                    examined by prosecution supports the case and even the medical evidence is also
                     silent regarding cause of death of the deceased. She further contends that the
                     learned Trial Court committed manifest illegality by relying on the testimony of Pw-1
                     who has been declared hostile by the prosecution.
                     8.      Ms. B. Bhuyan, learned Additional Public Prosecutor on the other hand
                     contends that there is no legal impediment for consideration of that part of the
                     evidence of a hostile witness which supports the prosecution and the evidence of
                     Pw-1 coupled with the evidence of Pw-6 Sri Saurendra Mohan Goswami who
                    conducted inquest on the dead body of the deceased, before whom the accused
                    appellants admitted their guilt established the complicity of the appellants in the
                    murder.
                    9.       In the backdrop of the aforesaid contentions we have gone through the
                    evidence on record. In his statement before police Pw-1 Fekal Paharia claims to have
                    seen the accused appellants assaulting the deceased with firewood. According to
                    him while he was sleeping in the house of his father-in-law Chandra Pator he saw his
                    father-in-law and other 3 accused appellants, namely, Suren, Rupen and Aghona
                     assaulting a person with firewood as a result of which there was bleeding from his
                     mouth and became unconscious and died soon thereafter. Out of fear he left the
Crl.A(J) No.116 of 2013

                                                                                                          4
                     place and saw the appellants dragging the dead body and burying the same near
                     the house of Chandra Pator in a deep pit which was dug earlier to construct a well.
                     They threatened him not to disclose the incident to anybody. After a few days he
                     came to know that the appellants paid Rs.3,600/- to the elder brother of the
                     deceased not to divulge any information to police. He also claimed that on 29-07-
                     1997 when police came and he disclosed the truth and on the next day he showed
                    the place of burial of the dead body of the deceased. The accused appellants then
                    dug out the dead body from the pit. His evidence also reveals that he was hesitant
                    initially to adduce evidence as the accused appellants were his neighbours. Though
                    he had given the above statement before police, while adducing evidence in Court
                    he deviated from his earlier stand and denied having stated that the accused
                    appellants caused the death of the deceased and buried the dead body. He has been
                    declared hostile by the prosecution. He also denied having seen the appellants
                    digging out the dead body and according to him he came to know about it after
                    about a week. On a careful scrutiny of his evidence, we do not find him reliable and
                    trustworthy at all and his evidence only goes to show that the dead body of the
                    deceased was buried over a hillock and it was recovered by police.
                    10.       Pw-2 Rabindra Das, Pw-3 Thanuram Goala, Pw-4 Biswajeet Dutta also could
                    not through any light on the incident and they support the prosecution to the extent
                    that the dead body of the deceased was recovered from a pit and they even could
                    not recognize the dead body.
                    11.       Prosecution made a feeble attempt through the evidence of Pw-5 A. Deka,
                    Sub-Inspector of police of Jagiroad Police Station at the relevant time who is also the
Crl.A(J) No.116 of 2013

                                                                                                        5
                     first informant of the case to establish that the accused appellants were the
                     perpetrators of the crime. On careful examination of his evidence we find that the
                     Circle Inspector of the concerned circle sent a message to the effect that the
                     accused appellants Aghona Konwar, Chandra Pator (since deceased) and Bhikel
                    Konwar killed Rajen Baraik and buried the dead body in the compound of Chandra
                    Konwar. The message was communicated to the Nelie out post and accordingly
                    Nelie out post GD Entry No.659 dated 29-07-1997 was registered. Pw-5 was
                     entrusted to investigate the case. His evidence reveals that during investigation he
                     apprehended the accused appellants and interrogated them and they admitted
                     having committed the crime and also admitted that they buried the dead body in the
                     compound of Chandra Pator. Acting on the information provided by the appellants
                     and accompanied by Executive Magistrate, he proceeded to the spot where the dead
                     body was buried which was identified by Raju Baraik, elder brother of the deceased.
                     According to him the place of burial was pointed out by the co-accused Suben
                     Maradi. The purported confessional statement of the accused made before Pw-5
                     who is the Sub-Inspector of the police associated with the investigation is
                     inadmissible in evidence due to bar imposed by Section 25 of the Evidence Act.
                     There is also nothing in his evidence to indicate that he recorded disclosure
                     statement of the accused appellants before recovery of the dead body or the dead
                     body was recovered on being led by the accused appellants. There was total non-
                     compliance of Section 27 of the Evidence Act and from his evidence it cannot be said
                     with certainty that the dead body was recovered at their instance and on being led
                     by them. Pw-6 Sri Saurendra Mohan Goswami was posted as Executive Magistrate at
                     Morigaon at the relevant time and after receiving requisition and on being deputed
Crl.A(J) No.116 of 2013

                                                                                                       6
                     by the Deputy Commissioner, he proceeded to Nelie outpost initially and
                     accompanied by police he proceeded to Ulukunchi Basti. According to him all the 4
                     accused were taken by police with them and in their presence the dead body was
                     recovered from a pit. It was decomposed and even muscles were also decomposed
                     and flesh was attached with the bone having no hair on the head. The dead body
                     was identified by Raju Bariak. He prepared the inquest report Exhibit-2. No injury
                     was noticed by him and due to decomposition of the dead body it might not have
                     been possible on his part to notice any injury. On examination of the dead body
                    since the Doctor also could not ascertain the presence of any injury, he sent
                    specimen for Forensic examination. The Forensic report also gave negative test for
                    any poison and on consideration of the totality of the evidence we have noticed that
                    the cause of death of the deceased could not be ascertained. There is also no
                    evidence that the appellant Rupen Kurmi confessed his guilt before him.
                    12.     The cumulative effect of the entire evidence is that the deceased was killed
                    and the dead body was buried in a pit which was dug over a hillock near the house
                    of one Chandra Pator and it was recovered by police. After carefully weaving all the
                    pieces of evidence we are of the unhesitant view that the circumstances established
                    against the appellant Rupen Kurmi are not consistent with the guilt of the appellant
                    and it cannot be held conclusively that he caused the death of the deceased and
                    buried the dead body.
                    13.     Consequently, the judgment of the learned Trial Court convicting the accused
                    Rupen Kurmi under Section 302/201/34 of the IPC is set aside.
Crl.A(J) No.116 of 2013

                                                                                                          7
                     14.    The appeal is allowed so far appellant Rupen Kurmi is concerned. The
                     accused appellant is acquitted and set at liberty forthwith. Bail bond, if any, stands
                     discharged.
                     15.    Send down the LCR forthwith.
                    16.     While appreciating the assistance rendered by Ms. S. Kanungoe, learned
                    Amicus Curiae, we direct the State Legal Services Authority to pay an amount of
                    Rs.7,500/- (Rupees Seven Thousand Five Hundred) as professional fees to her.
                                                               JUDGE                              JUDGE
                     Rupam
Crl.A(J) No.116 of 2013


