                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                  Criminal Appeal (J) No. 123 of 2016
                               Bideshi Mandal.
                                                               ----- Accused/Appellant
                                          – VERSUS –
                               State of Assam.
                                                               ----- Respondent.
                                               BEFORE
                  Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                    Advocate for the appellant       : Mr. Rishi Raj Kaushik, Amicus Curiae.
                    Advocate for Respondent          : Mr. NK Kalita, Addl. P.P, Assam.
                    Date of hearing               ::    29th of June, 2017.
                    Date of Judgment & Order ::          10th of July, 2017.
                                       JUDGMENT & ORDER
                    This is an appeal from jail, preferred by accused/appellant,
        Bideshi Mandal, who has been convicted, by judgment and order, dated
        30-09-2016, passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Bajali,
        Pathsala, in Sessions Case No. 170/2015, under Sections 302/324 of the
        IPC, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and to pay a fine of Rs.
        1,000/-, in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for further period of
        2 months, for the offence punishable under Section 304 Part-II IPC, and
        also to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 1 year and to pay a fine of
        Rs. 500/-, in default, to suffer further rigorous imprisonment for 1
        month, for the offence punishable under Section 324 IPC.
        Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                                     Page 1 of 11

2.          I have heard Mr. Rishi Raj Kaushik, learned Amicus Curiae,
appearing on behalf of accused-appellant, and Mr. NK Kalita, learned
Additional Public Prosecutor, Assam.
3.          The prosecution story, as unfolded during the trial, is that there is
land dispute amongst the informant, Sri Jatin Mandal, and his brother
accused Bideshi Mandal, and another brother (deceased) Milan Mandal,
in respect of their ancestral property. For settlement of such dispute
amongst them, there took place a meeting, convened by the informant,
on 29-08-2013, at village Dhalangbari. In the midst of the meeting, the
accused-appellant and his son, Bidyadhar Mandal inflicted injuries on
Milan Mandal, the deceased as well as upon the informant, and his son,
Tapash Mandal. All the said three injured persons were taken to
hospital, although injured Milan Mandal died.
4.          On receipt of the FIR, being Exhibit 1, about the above
occurrence, Patacharkuchi Police Station registered a case, being Case
No. 354/2013, under Sections 326/302/34 of the IPC, investigated into
it, collected evidence, and finally, submitted charge-sheet against the
accused-appellant, Bideshi Mandal, under Sections 326/302/324/34 IPC.
5.          The learned Additional Sessions Judge framed formal charge
against the accused-appellant, under Sections 302/324 IPC, to which, he
pleaded innocence. At the end of the trial, the accused-appellant was
convicted and sentenced, as indicated above.
6.          On the basis of the accusations and the evidence on record, this
Court is required to decide the following points:
            a. Whether the accused-appellant, on 29-08-2013, voluntarily
            caused hurt to informant, Sri Jatin Manda and his son Tapash
            Mandal, by means of dangerous weapon to attract the charge,
            under Section 324 of the IPC;
            b. Whether the accused-appellant committed murder of
            deceased, Milan Mandal intentionally or knowing that the injury
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                            Page 2 of 11

            caused by him upon Milan Mandal was likely to cause death of
            Milan Mandal, making him liable for punishment under Section
            302 IPC.
7.          For the decisions of the above points, this Court has meticulously
scanned the evidence of 13 witnesses, produced by prosecution, and
three witnesses, produced by defence.
8.          It deserves a mention here that statements of PW3, Sadananda
Ramchiary; PW5, Abhiram Sarkar; PW8, Asiruddin and PW9, Akbar Ali,
were recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C., during investigation.
9.          The      doctor, examined    as  PW10,   exhibited    the   medical
examination reports of the injured, Tapash Mandal and Jatin Mandal, as
Exhibits 9 and 10, respectively. He examined the said injured persons
with reference to the police case referred to above. While examining
injured, Tapash Mandal, he found simple injury caused by sharp
weapon. This injured appeared before him with the history of assault
with dagger (sharp weapon). At the time of examination, fresh
penetrating wound with bleeding in the interior aspect of axilla of
about 1½” deep x 2” wide were found.
10.         On examination of Jatin Mandal, he found fresh bleeding
present, stab wound in the right forum about 2” wide to 1½” deep. He
opined that injuries were simple, caused by sharp weapon.
11.         There is no dispute at the Bar regarding the injuries found on the
persons of aforesaid Tapash Mandal and Jatin Mandal. Tapash Mandal
and Jatin Mandal were examined, in this case, as PW1 and PW2
respectively.
12.         Now, the question is whether the injuries upon the said victims
were caused by the accused-appellant?
13.         In this case, it appears that PW6 and PW7, Sri Sambhu Mandal
and Sri Jatin Das, respectively, are not the eye witnesses of the
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                           Page 3 of 11

occurrence and they were only reported about the occurrence. In
absence of corroboration of their evidence by the persons, who
reported to them about the incident, their evidence remains hearsay,
having no evidentiary value.
14.         In their evidence, PW4, PW8 and PW9, Sri Tajuddin Ali, Md.
Asuriddin and Md. Akbar Ali, respectively, did not state specifically as to
who inflicted the injuries on the injured persons, although their
evidence is clear to the extent that while Milan Mandal (since deceased)
was making statement in the meeting held for settlement of the land
dispute, the informant, deceased Milan Mandal and his son Tapash
Mandal assaulted the accused-appellant, Bideshi Mandal.
15.         PW1, Sri Jatin Mandal (informant), PW2, his son, PW3
Sadananda Ramciary and PW5 Sri Abhiram Sarkar are eye witnesses to
the occurrence and the evidence of PW4, PW8 and PW9 are found to
have lent support to the eye witness account of the incident, which, as is
evident, is the result of the consequence of mutual assaults between the
parties before the infliction of the injuries by sharp cutting weapon, i.e.,
the knife.
16.         The evidence of PW1, the informant, makes it clear that the
accused-appellant, the deceased, Milan Mandal and Tapash Mandal
(PW2) along with others were present in the meeting in the village that
was held for the purpose of settlement of the land dispute between the
deceased and the accused-appellant. When the meeting was in session,
the accused-appellant inflicted injuries on the chest of the deceased,
Milan Mandal, and when Tapash Mandal came forward to save the said
deceased, he was also assaulted by the accused-appellant with a knife,
and then, he fled away from the place of occurrence. PW2, Tapash
Mandal, aforesaid, is also found to have stated in his evidence that
while the accused-appellant was making false statement in the meeting,
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                       Page 4 of 11

the deceased objected to that, following which, he inflicted injuries on
Milan Mandal with a knife, and while he came to save the deceased, he
was also assaulted with a knife causing injuries on his person. When his
father, PW1, came forward, he was also injured by the accused-
appellant with the knife, and then, the accused-appellant fled away.
17.          The evidence of PW3 makes it appear that, in the meeting,
aforesaid, suddenly, PW1, Jatin Mandal, deceased, Milan Mandal,
accused-appellant, Bideshi Mandal, PW2 Tapash Mandal, attacked each
other. During that time, the accused-appellant took out a knife from his
pocket and injured Tapash Mandal, Jatin Mandal and the deceased,
Milan Mandal.
18.         The evidence of PW4, Tazuddin, also clearly shows that in the
tussle, PW2, Tapash, PW1, Jatin Mandal sustained injuries along with
the deceased, Milan Mandal.
19.         The defence failed to dislodge such evidence of the aforesaid
witnesses in respect of causing injuries to the persons of PW1 and PW2,
i.e. Jatin Mandal and Tapash Mandal, by the accused-appellant with a
knife. The defence evidence, on this score, is that the deceased, Milan
Mandal, wanted to cause injury to his person with a sharp weapon and
when he moved his body aside, the same fell on the informant, Jatin
Mandal causing injury to his person. Such evidence of the defence
indicates that the accused-appellant held the deceased, Milan Mandal
responsible for the injuries sustained by PW1 and PW2. He also claimed
that he also sustained injuries in the scuffle, which ensued amongst
them. But the medical evidence makes it clearly appear that, on
examination of DW1, i.e. accused-appellant, the doctor (PW3) found
only old injury on his person, although PW5 is found to have stated in
his evidence that he had seen some wound near one of the eyes of the
accused-appellant. So the consistent evidence of the aforesaid witnesses
PW1, PW2, PW3 received corroboration from PW4 and PW5 that, it
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                     Page 5 of 11

was the accused-appellant, who used a sharp cutting weapon to inflict
injuries on the person of PW1 and PW2. Therefore, the oral evidence of
the aforesaid witnesses, coupled with the medical evidence, vide
Exhibits 9 and 10, leaves no doubt that it was the accused-appellant,
who inflicted injuries on PW1 and PW2. Therefore, the charge against
him under Section 324 IPC is proved beyond all reasonable doubt.
20.         In the instant case, the deceased is Milan Mandal. As per
evidence of PW1, PW2, PW3, the accused-appellant pierced the knife
somewhere around the chest of the deceased. PW12, the doctor, who
conducted autopsy of the deceased, exhibited the post mortem report,
as Exhibit 11. In the post mortem report under the head ‘External
appearance’ in column-2, the following injuries are found:
            One stitched wound present over the right chest wall, size 3cm
long and has three number of stitches, one about 6cm from right
shoulder and 13cms from midline at the level of second interposal space
obliquely.
            The doctor also opined that the death was due to haemorrhage
and shock resulting from injury sustained on chest and that all injuries
are anti mortem and caused by sharp cutting pointed weapon, which is
homicidal in nature. The post mortem of the dead body of the deceased
was conducted within 12 to 24 hours. So it appears from the evidence
of the doctor, who conducted post mortem of the deceased that the
cause of death was due to the injuries caused by sharp weapon.
21.         PW1, PW2, PW3 and PW4 are found to have deposed in their
evidence that while the accused-appellant was making a statement in
the meeting held for settlement of the land dispute amongst the
brothers, i.e. PW1 Jatin Mandal, deceased Milan Mandal and the
accused-appellant, PW2 Tapash Mandal chased him and assaulted him
followed by Jatin Mandal and deceased Milan Mandal. From the
evidence, it is absolutely clear that before the occurrence of causing
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                       Page 6 of 11

injury by sharp weapon upon the deceased, Milan Mandal, PW1, PW2
and the deceased assaulted the accused-appellant, forming a group by
themselves, and this happened in the meeting itself. The evidence of
PW3 and PW5, who are independent witnesses in the sense that PW1
and PW2 are, respectively, the brother and nephew of the deceased,
have categorically stated in their evidence that PW1, PW2 and deceased
Milan Mandal were the aggressors. They also saw the accused-appellant
causing the injuries to deceased, Milan Mandal with a knife. Such
evidence, coupled with the evidence of PW12, the doctor who
conducted the post mortem examination leaves us with no doubt that
the deceased was injured with a knife by the accused-appellant, resulting
in his death.
22.         Now the question remains to be answered is whether the death
of the deceased was caused intentionally.
23.         The evidence on record, the relevant part of which has been
discussed above, makes it succinctly clear that immediately before the
occurrence of causing injury to the deceased, Milan Mandal, the
accused-appellant was assaulted by PW2 first, then PW1, his elder
brother, and they were joined by the deceased, Milan Mandal. The
causing of injuries to the person of the deceased, Milan Mandal was
during the continuance of assault on his person. Therefore, prima facie it
appears that the accused-appellant, at the spur of the moment, injured
the deceased, which resulted in his death. Therefore, from the totality of
the evidence, it does not appear that the accused-appellant intended to
cause death of the deceased, Milan Mandal.
24.         There appears no premeditation in committing the offence and
the accused-appellant caused the injuries to the deceased in the sudden
fight and in the heat of passion. Rather, the accused-appellant caused
the injuries, on being provoked, after he was assaulted first.
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                     Page 7 of 11

25.         Therefore, it appears that the facts in the case resulting in the
death of the deceased fall under exception 4 of Section 300 of the IPC.
Exception 4 of Section 300 of the IPC reads as follows:
            “Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without
            premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a
            sudden quarrel and without the offender’s having taken undue
            advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner.”
26.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Pappu –vs- State of M.P. reported
in (2006) 7 SCC 391, in paragraphs 12 and 13, held as follows:
            “12. For bringing in its operation it has to be established that the
            act was committed without premeditation, in a sudden fight in
            the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel without the offender
            having taken undue advantage and not having acted in a cruel or
            unusual manner.
            13. The Fourth Exception of Section 300 IPC covers acts done in
            a sudden fight. The said exception deals with a case of
            prosecution not covered by the first exception, after which its
            place would have been more appropriate. The exception is
            founded upon the same principle, for in both there is absence of
            premeditation. But, while in the case of Exception 1 there is total
            deprivation of self-control, in case of Exception 4, there is only
            that heat of passion which clouds men's sober reason and urges
            them to deeds which they would not otherwise do. There is
            provocation in Exception 4 as in Exception 1; but the injury done
            is not the direct consequence of that provocation. In fact
            Exception 4 deals with cases in which notwithstanding that a
            blow may have been struck, or some provocation given in the
            origin of the dispute or in whatever way the quarrel may have
            originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties puts them
            in respect of guilt upon equal footing. A 'sudden fight' implies
            mutual provocation and blows on each side. The homicide
            committed is then clearly not traceable to unilateral provocation,
            nor in such cases could the whole blame be placed on one side.
            For if it were so, the Exception more appropriately applicable
            would be Exception 1. There is no previous deliberation or
            determination to fight. A fight suddenly takes place, for which
            both parties are more or less to be blamed. It may be that one of
            them starts it, but if the other had not aggravated it by his own
            conduct it would not have taken the serious turn it did. There is
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                            Page 8 of 11

            then mutual provocation and aggravation, and it is difficult to
            apportion the share of blame which attaches to each fighter. The
            help of Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused (a) without
            premeditation, (b) in a sudden fight; (c) without the offender's
            having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
            manner; and (d) the fight must have been with the person killed.
            To bring a case within Exception 4 all the ingredients mentioned
            in it must be found. It is to be noted that the 'fight' occurring in
            Exception 4 to Section 300IPC is not defined in the IPC. It takes
            two to make a fight. Heat of passion requires that there must be
            no time for the passions to cool down and in this case, the
            parties have worked themselves into a fury on account of the
            verbal altercation in the beginning. A fight is a combat between
            two and more persons whether with or without weapons. It is
            not possible to enunciate any general rule as to what shall be
            deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is a question of fact and
            whether a quarrel is sudden or not must necessarily depend upon
            the proved facts of each case. For the application of Exception 4,
            it is not sufficient to show that there was a sudden quarrel and
            there was no premeditation. It must further be shown that the
            offender has not taken undue advantage or acted in cruel or
            unusual manner. The expression 'undue advantage' as used in the
            provision means 'unfair advantage'.”
27.         Therefore, it appears that there was a sudden fight, in which the
accused-appellant was assaulted at the relevant time of the occurrence
after being chased by at least three persons, provoking the accused-
appellant to react. The facts and circumstances of this case makes it
appear that a mental rift amongst the deceased, accused-appellant, PW1
and PW2 existed prior to the date of occurrence, in view of dispute
relating to ancestral property. The meeting, where the occurrence took
place, was also convened for settlement of dispute amongst them.
Evidently, the accused-appellant was making a statement in the meeting
and during the statement he was first assaulted by PW2, joined by PW1
and the deceased, Milan Mandal only to provoke the accused-appellant.
Such position can also be inferred from the fact that in the meeting, the
accused-appellant was making a statement in respect of the dispute and
he was also supposed to make the statement in view of the fact that the
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                           Page 9 of 11

same was convened for the purpose of settlement of the dispute. There
is no instance, in the evidence on record, even to suggest remotely, that
PW2, PW1 and the deceased were provoked by the accused-appellant.
Therefore, as stated above, in the considered view of this Court, the
accused-appellant           caused   injuries   to   the    deceased    without
premeditation, in a sudden fight, and in the heat of passion. He did not
take undue advantage in the sense that what he did was only reaction
to the assault on his person by a group of persons.
28.         So in view of above factual background, in the considered view
of this Court, the offence committed by the accused-appellant falls
under Section 304 Part-II of the IPC.
29.         The learned trial Court sentenced the accused-appellant to
rigorous imprisonment for seven years and to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000/-,
in default, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for further period of two
months, for the offence punishable under Section 304 Part-II of the IPC
and rigorous imprisonment for one year, and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/-,
in default, to suffer further rigorous imprisonment for one month.
30.         It is the view of this Court that in the facts and circumstances of
the case, the punishment, under Section 304 Part-II, is on in the higher
side. Therefore, on an assessment of the facts and circumstances, this
Court is of the view that rigorous imprisonment for five years, if
imposed, upon the accused-appellant, will meet the ends of justice.
Accordingly, the substantive sentence of 7 years, under Section 304,
Part-II IPC is reduced to rigorous imprisonment for 5 years. In respect of
punishment under Section 324 of the IPC, there is no reason to interfere
with. Both the substantive sentences will run concurrently. In respect of
the fine, imposed as a punishment, on both the counts above, no
interference is called for.
31.         In view of the above, the appeal is partly allowed.
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                           Page 10 of 11

32.         Send down the LCR with a copy of the judgment.
33.         Send a copy of this judgment to the Superintendent of Jail,
Barpeta, who will furnish a copy of the same to the accused-appellant.
31.         This Court records its appreciation for the assistance rendered by
learned Amicus Curiae, Mr. Rishi Raj Kaushik. Learned Amicus Curiae be
paid an amount of Rs. 7,000/-, as remuneration.
                                                                      JUDGE
Paul
Crl. A. (J) No. 123 of 2016                                           Page 11 of 11


