                            IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                   Criminal Appeal No. 173 OF 2009
                             1. Shri Lakhi Saikia,
                                 Son of Sri Nagen Saikia,
                                 Resident of village Chengamora,
                                 P.O.-Kalabari,
                                 P.S.-Gohpur,
                                 Dist.-Sonitpur, Assam.
                             2. Sri Pranjal Sabukdhara,
                                 Son of Nirmal Sabukdhara,
                                 Resident of village Chupahibari,
                                 P.O.-Kalabari,
                                 P.S.-Gohpur,
                                 Dist.-Sonitpur, Assam.
                             3. Shri Bipul Phukan,
                                Son of Late Moheswar Phukan,
                                Resident of village Kalitagaon,
                                P.O.-Kalabari,
                                 P.S.-Gohpur,
                                 Dist.-Sonitpur, Assam.
                             4. Sri Binanda Bhuyan,
                                Son of Late Ratiya Bhuyan,
                                Resident of village Chupahibari,
                                P.O.-Kalabari,
                                 P.S.-Gohpur,
                                 Dist.-Sonitpur, Assam.
                                                           ----- Appellants
                                          – VERSUS –
                                 State of Assam
                                                           ----- Respondent
        Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                               Page 1 of 9

               Criminal Appeal No. 175 OF 2009
                        Sri Babul Bhuyan,
                        Son of Roseswar Bhuyan,
                        Resident of village Kalabari,
                        Kalitagaon, P.S.-Gohpur,
                        District- Sonitpur, Assam.
                                                      ----- Appellant
                                      – VERSUS –
                        State of Assam
                                                      ----- Respondent
                                          BEFORE
             Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
    Advocates for the appellants (Crl. A. 173/2009) : Mr. D Saikia & Mr. PJ Saikia.
    Advocates for the appellant (Crl. A. 175/2009)          : Mr. P Pathak, Ms. P Barman,
                                                              Ms. S Changkakati,
                                                              Mr. JN Gogoi & Ms. N Gogoi
    Advocate for Respondent                                : Mr. BJ Dutta, Addl. PP.
    Date of hearing & Judgment                            : 3rd of August, 2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              These Criminal Appeal No. 173/2009 and Criminal Appeal No.
175/2009 has arisen out of the judgment, dated 19.09.2009, passed by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Biswanath Chariali in GR Case No.
495/2003, convicting and sentencing the accused appellants. Criminal
Appeal No. 173/2009 is preferred by Shri Lakhi Saikia, Shri Pranjal
Sabukdhhara, Shri Bipul Phukan and Shri Binanda Bhuyan, appellants and
    Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                                     Page 2 of 9

Criminal Appeal No. 175/2009 in preferred by Shri Babul Bhuyan,
appellant.
2.            Both these Criminal Appeals are disposed of by this common
judgment.
3.            The accused appellant Babul Bhuyan of Criminal Appeal No.
175/2009 was convicted and sentenced to Rigorous Imprisonment for
1(one) year and to pay a fine of Rs. 500/-, in default, Simple Imprisonment
for 60 (sixty) days under Section 324 of the IPC. The accused appellants in
Criminal Appeal No. 173/2009, named above, are sentenced to Rigorous
Imprisonment for 3 (three) months each, under Sections 427/34 of the IPC.
4.            Heard Mr. D Saikia, learned counsel for the appellants in
Criminal Appeal No. 173/2009 and Ms. P Barman, learned counsel for the
appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 175/2009. Also heard Mr. BJ Dutta,
learned Additional Public Prosecutor, appearing for the State of Assam in
both the appeals.
5.            Briefly stated, the case for the prosecution is that, on 13.10.2003,
the Government initiated an eviction drive and evicted the shops
constructed on Government land at Kalabari centre, Gohpur. The accused
appellant Babul Bhuyan, accompanied by some others, and armed with
deadly weapons destroyed the newly constructed shop house of the
informant and one hotel belonging to one Bhaba Saikia suspecting both of
them to be the persons behind the eviction drive undertaken by the
Government. After hearing the news of destruction of shop houses, the
informant and others came to the place of occurrence in the night itself and
then the accused appellant Babul Bhuyan and his two brothers attacked
them resulting in injuries to the persons of Madan Saikia and Dukan Saikia.
    Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                             Page 3 of 9

The injured were taken to the Doctor immediately after the occurrence, at
about 2:30 am.
6.            On the above facts, the informant, Nityananda Saikia, filed a
complaint before the learned Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Gohpur
which was subsequently registered as an FIR. The police investigated into
the case, and after completion of investigation, submitted Charge-Sheet
against the accused appellant and few others (who were already acquitted
by the learned Trial Court) under Sections 148/147/149/323/325/427/34
IPC.
7.            The father of the present accused appellant Babul Bhuyan also
filed an FIR which was also investigated by the Police in respect of the same
occurrence, and finally, submitted Charge-Sheet which resulted in the
proceedings in Sessions Case No. 237/2005, tried by the same Court of
learned Additional Sessions Judge. Both the cases were taken up by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge being cross-case to each other.
8.            As stated above, both these appeals have arisen out of GR Case
No. 495/2003.
9.            In this case, the prosecution examined as many as 8 (eight)
witnesses, who were subjected to cross-examination by the defence,
whereas the defence examined none.
10.           The plea of the defence during the trial as well as in the
statements of the accused appellants recorded under Section 313 of the
Cr.PC is of total denial.
11.           The accused appellants were charged by the learned Trial Court
under Sections 148/323/326/427/149 of the IPC.
    Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                        Page 4 of 9

12.            Therefore, it has to be seen whether the evidence led by the
prosecution is sufficient to substantiate the charges.
13.            PW1, Sri Nityananda Saikia, is the informant. He is heard saying
in his evidence that in the night of 13.10.2003, in the eviction drive carried
out by the Government, the shop of accused appellant Sri Babul Bhuyan
was also evicted, and thereafter, the said accused appellant Sri Babul
Bhuyan caused mischief to the newly constructed house of the informant,
i.e., PW1 which was situated behind his demolished shop house. When the
informant came to the place of occurrence, after hearing about the
destruction of his newly constructed shop house situated behind the shop
of the accused appellant, Sri Babul Bhuyan along with his brothers Dukan
Saikia and Bhaba Saikia came there and the accused appellant Sri Babul
Bhuyan gave a dao blow on the head of his brother Madan Saikia and
when he prevented the dao blow to fall on him with his hand, he received
cut injuries on his hand. Another blow on his head was also inflicted by the
accused appellant Sri Babul Bhuyan with the dao which made the injured
fall on the ground. The accused Ramesh Saikia and Jitesh Bhuyan assaulted
Madan Saikia, the brother of the accused appellant (who were acquitted
from the charge vide the judgment appealed against). The local doctor
referred them to Tezpur Civil Hospital for treatment. During his cross-
examination, this PW1 has been found to have stated that they thought that
the accused appellants attacked them on under the impression that they
were behind the eviction drive.
14.            PW2, Sri Rupeswar Saikia, only heard halla raised by Bhaba Saikia
and next day morning only he came to know that the accused appellants
caused injuries to Madan Saikia on his head and hand. The evidence of this
witness appears to be hearsay in nature, in view of the fact that he has not
linked the source of his information with any of the witnesses examined by
     Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                          Page 5 of 9

the prosecution. Even there is no evidence in his statement to show as to
from whom he heard about the occurrence. That being so, his evidence is
not having any evidentiary value.
15.            The evidence of PW3, Madan Saikia, appears to be important in
this case. He being the alleged injured and was allegedly assaulted by the
accused appellant Babul Bhuyan by means of a dao on his hand. He named
three persons, i.e., Babul, Jiten and Ramen as the persons who assaulted
him. He was not aware as to whether the accused appellants also got
injuries in their persons at the relevant time of the occurrence.
16.            PW5, Nityananda Bhuyan, identified the accused appellants Lakhi
Saikia, Binod Saikia, Bipul Phukan and Pranjal Chabukdhara committing the
mischief by destructing the house of the informant/PW1. He did not notice
any injuries in the person of the informant/PW1.
17.            The evidence of PW6 is that he also saw the aforesaid Lakhi
Saikia, Binod Saikia, Bipul Phukan and Pranjal Chabukdhara to have
committed the offence of destruction of the house of the informant/PW1.
18.            PW4 and PW7 are the doctors who examined the injured Madan
Saikia. PW7, Dr. Gobinda Mahanta, examined the injuries of Madan Saikia
first and found cut injury on scalp, cut injury on left forearm and cut injury
on left thumb, whereas PW4, Dr. GM Das examined and found only
lacerated cut injury over right parietal region of scalp and cut injury with
tenderness and swelling over left elbow and cut injury over left thumb with
tenderness.
19.            The       evidence       of the Investigating Police Officer,     PW8,
Nandeswar Das, is of routine nature. He has narrated the different stages of
investigation of the case.
     Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                             Page 6 of 9

20.           It appears from the evidence, as discussed above, that PW5 and
PW6 claims to have witnessed the occurrence of causing injuries on the
person of Madan Saikia by the accused appellant Babul Bhuyan and also
witnessed destruction of the house of the informant by Lakhi Saikia, Binod
Saikia, Bipul Phukan and Pranjal Chabukdhara.
21.           It is an admitted position that there is a cross case in respect of
same offence in which also the injured in the instant case was convicted and
sentenced by the same learned Trial Court, in respect of the same
occurrence, vide judgment and order, dated 19.09.2009, in Sessions Case
No. 237/2005.
22.           That apart, the record of the learned Trial Court reveals that in
the complaint petition, filed before the learned Trial Court by the
informant of this case, which was later on registered as an FIR by the Police,
the informant named Ramesh Saikia, Rosheswar Bhuyan, Muninda Bhuyan
and Subhas Bhuyan and Jiten Bhuyan also as accused claiming them also to
have committed the offence involved in this case. But, during the trial, the
learned Sessions Judge acquitted all these five persons from the accusation,
which is indicative of the fact that there is some improvement in the
prosecution case at the very initial stage, which the informant could not
pursue to the logical conclusion for holding them guilty of the commission
of the offences alleged. In his evidence, the PW1/informant very
categorically stated that it was Babul Bhuyan who inflicted the injury on
Madan Saikia but in his cross-examination and as well as in his statement in
the FIR he has made number of persons as accused who were found not
guilty of commission of the alleged offences by the learned Trial court, as is
apparent from the judgment appealed against.
    Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                            Page 7 of 9

23.           There is an admitted position in this case that both the parties
were engaged in a mutual fight at the time of occurrence and persons from
both sides were injured. For the injuries sustained by Madan Saikia another
case was filed and for injuries sustained by Babul Bhuyan and others,
another case was filed. The injured Madan Saikia of the instant case is an
accused in the other case. There is no dispute on this fact as appears from
the evidence on record, that accused appellant Babul Bhuyan also sustained
injuries in the same occurrence.
24.           The evidence on record although reveals that both the parties
engaged in assaulting each other and also caused injuries to person from
each side, yet there is no evidence to show as to who was the aggressor. In
the absence of any evidence as to who was the aggressor and in view of the
fact that members from both the sides sustained injuries, it is unsafe, to hold
any of the accused appellants guilty of commission of the offences.
25.           It appears from the evidence on record that it was a case of
group fighting and there was a mutual provocation from both sides. When
there is a group fight and there is no evidence of unilateral provocation,
one side cannot be blamed. Both the parties are more or less to be blamed.
26.           On perusal of the impugned judgment and the evidence
recorded by the learned Trial Court, it does not appear that while
recording conviction of the accused appellants, the learned Trial Court
looked into the aforesaid aspect of the case. Had such aspect been looked
into, the judgment would have been otherwise than the one recorded by
the learned Trial Court.
27.           As discussed above, there is some concoction and improvement
in the prosecution case as it is apparent from the fact that apart from the
present accused appellants the other five persons named as accused in the
    Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                         Page 8 of 9

original complaint were not found guilty by the Court although, the
informant/PW1 roped them in the complaint.
28.           In view of the above discussions, the evidence appears to be not
sufficient to unhesitatingly hold that the accused appellants in both the
appeals were guilty of the offences which they were held to have been
committed by the learned Trial Court.
29.           The judgment of the learned Trial Court, convicting and
sentencing the accused appellants, needs to be interfered with in view of
the findings recorded in the foregoing discussions.
30.           Accordingly, both the appeals, namely, Criminal Appeal No.
173/2009 and Criminal Appeal No. 175/2009 stand allowed.
31.            Send down the LCR along with the copy of this judgment.
                                                                     JUDGE
     Nilakhi
    Crl. A. No. 173 of 2009 & 175 of 2009                         Page 9 of 9


