                              IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                    Criminal Appeal (J) No. 90 of 2015
                               Sri Jawngblam Narzary.
                                                               ----- Accused/Appellant
                                          – VERSUS –
                               State of Assam.
                                                               ----- Respondent.
                                               BEFORE
                  Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                    Advocate for the appellant        : Ms. B Sarma, Amicus Curiae.
                    Advocate for Respondent           : Mrs. SH Baruah, Addl. P.P.
                    Date of hearing               ::     28th of June, 2017.
                    Date of Judgment & Order :: 10th of July, 2017.
                                      JUDGMENT & ORDER
                    This is an appeal from jail, preferred by accused/appellant, Sri
        Jwngblao Narzary, who has been convicted by judgment and order
        dated 05-08-2015, passed by the learned Special Judge, Kokrajhar, in
        Special Case No. 3/2014, arising out of GR Case No. 217/2014, under
        Section 4 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
        (hereinafter           referred    to  as    ‘POCSO        Act’),  to   suffer   rigorous
        imprisonment for ten years and pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default, to
        suffer rigorous imprisonment for further period of six months.
        2.          I have heard Ms. B Sarma, learned Amicus Curiae, appearing on
        behalf of accused-appellant, and Mrs. SH Baruah, learned Additional
        Public Prosecutor, Assam.
        3.          The fact of the case is that, on 05-06-2014, the victim, aged
        about 12 years, a student of Class-V, came to a shop at Narenguri from
        Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                                     Page 1 of 9

her house, riding a bicycle, to purchase some articles. She purchased the
articles and was returning home at about 6.10 p.m. The accused
Jawngblam Narzary restrained her on her way, gagged her and took her
to the nearby jungle and committed rape on her. She came back home
and narrated the incident to her mother.
4.          On the above facts, the informant, father for the victim, lodged
an FIR, which was registered as Kachugaon Police Station Case No. 20
of 2014, under Section 376 IPC.
5.          Police investigated into the case, collected evidence, and finally,
submitted charge sheet against the accused/appellant, under Section 376
IPC.
6.          On appearance of the accused, charge was framed against the
accused-appellant, under Section 4 of the POCSO Act, 2012, to which
the accused-appellant pleaded innocence.
7.          During the trial, prosecution examined 7 witnesses and the
defence examined none. The defence plea is of denial.
8.          The statement of accused-appellant was recorded as required
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. The accused-appellant denied the accusations
levelled against him in his said statement.
9.          PW1, is the victim. In her evidence, she deposed that on the day
of occurrence, at about 5.00/5.30 p.m., she went to Narenguri riding a
bicycle, to the market to purchase agarbatti. While returning, near a
culvert, the accused pushed her following which she fell down.
Although she deposed that she did not know the accused by name, yet
she knew him to be an inhabitant of the nearby village and that he
belonged to Bodo community. She stated that she cried after falling
down from the bicycle. Then the accused gagged her with a cloth and
pressed her neck, and then took her to the nearby jungle. The accused-
Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                          Page 2 of 9

appellant put off her panty there and penetrated his penis into her
vagina. Thereafter, he left the place of occurrence leaving the victim,
PW1 there. She came back home and informed about the occurrence to
her parents. Her statement was also recorded, under Section 164
Cr.P.C., by Magistrate, during investigation, which she has exhibited as
Ext.1. She identified the accused in the Court. In her cross-examination,
she is found to have stated that the occurrence took place in the
evening, and just before it became dark. There was none in and around
the place of occurrence. She did not know the accused from before, but
had come to know him since the date of occurrence. She denied that
she had made false accusations against the accused-appellant.
10.         PW2, informant, Sri Gohai Murmu, is the father of the victim. He
deposed that the victim went to the market, at about 5.30 p.m., to
purchase agarbatti. At about 6.00 p.m., she came home back weeping.
While enquired about the reason of her weeping, she informed PW2
that while coming back from the market, near a culvert, a boy caused
her fall from the bicycle, gagged her and took her to a nearby jungle
and committed rape on her. Immediately, he rushed to the President of
the local Unit of Bodo Student Union and informed him about the
occurrence. Both of them, thereafter, went to the place of occurrence
and there one boy gave the name of the accused-appellant to them.
Then, both of them went to the house of the accused-appellant and
asked about the incident. After initial refusal, the accused-appellant
admitted commission of the offence. Next day, there was a meeting in
respect of the incident where the accused-appellant admitted his guilt.
Thereafter, PW2 lodged the FIR, with the police, vide Ext.2.
11.         PW3, Dr Sushma Brahma, who examined the victim, is the
Medical and Health Officer-1 in the Civil Hospital. Ext. 3 is the medical
examination report of the victim exhibited by this witness. In the
medical examination report, the age of the victim, on the basis of
Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                        Page 3 of 9

radiological examination is found to be either 14 years or above, but
below 18 years. Further opinion is that the victim might have been
exposed to sexual intercourse. On examination of valva and vagina,
PW3 found as follows:
            “Developed/well developed.
            Vaginal CANAL – Admit one finger easily.
            Presence of injuries – Not found.
            Hymen – Ruptured.”
            This witness was not subjected to cross-examination by the
defence.
12.         PW4, Sri Manabendra Narzary, is found to have deposed that
they were told about the accused-appellant by one boy and an old
lady. In his cross-examination, he is found to have asserted his evidence
in the examination-in-chief and denied that the accused-appellant did
not commit rape on the victim as well as the fact that he did not state
that one boy and one old lady identified the accused-appellant to her.
13.         The evidence of PW5, Sri Stipen Mardi, is that after hearing
about the occurrence of commission of rape by one boy, he went to the
house of the accused-appellant with some other youths. The accused-
appellant confessed his guilt before them. There took place a meeting
on the next day.
14.         PW6, Sri Thomas Narzary, stated that the victim identified the
accused-appellant in the meeting, and thereafter, the accused-appellant
was handed over to Kachugaon Police Station.
15.         PW7, Sri Latak Das, is the Investigating Officer. His evidence is in
respect of the investigation carried out by him. He also got the victim
examined by a doctor. He also got the statement of the victim recorded
under Section 164 Cr.P.C., filed the charge-sheet against the accused-
appellant.
16.         Although charge-sheet, against the accused-appellant, was filed
under Section 376 IPC, the learned Special Judge (Sessions Judge)
Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                           Page 4 of 9

framed charge against the accused-appellant under Section 4 of the
POCSO Act, as stated above. Section 4 of the POCSO Act, reads as
follows:
            “4. Punishment for penetrative sexual assault.-        Whoever
            commits penetrative sexual assault shall be punished with
            imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be
            less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for
            life, and shall also be liable to fine.”
17.         It appears from the evidence on record that there was no eye
witness to the occurrence. The place of occurrence was isolated, as
found from the sketch map. Topography of the place of occurrence, as
found from the sketch map available in the record, is that on one side
there was jungle, on another side, there was paddy field, yet another
side there was a beel (natural water body), and on the other side was
an irrigation canal and wooden bridge on the road. There were two
houses at some distance, away from the place of occurrence and both
these houses were located, opposite to each other, in extreme south and
extreme north of the place of occurrence. Therefore, naturally, there
was none in the immediate vicinity of the place of occurrence. As such,
there is no question of anybody witnessing the occurrence. That apart, it
has come out unequivocally from the evidence of the victim that she
was forced to the jungle where rape on her was committed. The
evidence of PW2 is important for the reason that he is not only the
informant of the case but also father of the victim. Immediately, after
arrival at home, the victim informed the occurrence to her parents, on
father asking her as to why she was weeping. The victim, then,
explained to him the reason stating clearly that one boy committed rape
on her. Therefore, it appears that immediately after the occurrence, the
victim being a minor girl, was weeping and informed her parents about
the occurrence, which is quite natural.
Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                        Page 5 of 9

18.         PW7 is a formal witness being the Investigating Officer. His
evidence is important because according to him, he got the statement of
the victim recorded, under Section 164 Cr.P.C. by a Magistrate and in
her evidence, PW1 victim, has also deposed that her statement was
recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and examination of the evidence of
PW1, recorded by the Court during the course of trial and her statement
recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C., it is seen that no such discrepancy is
noticed, which makes her evidence doubtful in any manner what so
ever. The statement of the victim under Section 164 Cr.P.C. was
recorded on 07-05-2014 and her evidence was recorded by the learned
Court on 06-02-2015, after about more than six months, but her
statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. and that before the trial Court as
witness, remained intact on material point.
19.         The other witnesses in this case, particularly, PW4, PW5 and
PW6 are all witnesses, who were reported about the occurrence and
according to them, the accused-appellant admitted his guilt before them.
20.         The evidence of PW1 makes it clearly appear that she was raped
by an unknown boy, whom she identified later on, while PW4, PW5
and PW6 and her father, PW2 met the accused-appellant. There is
absolutely no reason noticed during the evaluation of the evidence on
record that there is anything to disbelieve the evidence of victim, PW1,
rather her evidence appears to be inspiring confidence. The fact that she
did not see the accused before the occurrence and she identified him
only in the meeting aforesaid also speaks of her honesty. Had the
accused been falsely implicated by her, she would have named her
before she could identify him. She has very categorically stated that she
did not know the accused from before and only on the date of
occurrence, she had seen the accused. Such version in the evidence of
victim rather gives credence to the story narrated by her about the
commission of rape on her person. On the other hand, her evidence on
Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                       Page 6 of 9

commission of rape on her person by accused is further substantiated by
the evidence of the doctor, who examined her and found rupture in her
vagina and opined that she might have been exposed to sexual
intercourse. There is absolutely nothing in the record to disagree with
the evidence of the victim, her father and the doctor examined as PW1,
PW2 and PW3, respectively.
21.         As regards the age of the victim, she herself stated that she is a
student of Class-V and is 12 years of age, which is supported by PW2,
her father, but the medical evidence shows that she is either 14 years or
above 14 years, but below 18 years of age. In any case, there is no
dispute that she is below 18 years of age.
22.         In the POCSO Act, a child has been defined in Section 2(d) as
person below the age of 18 years. Therefore, the offence in the instant
case is covered by POCSO Act, the victim being below 18 years of age.
23.         The evidence of PW1, the victim, makes it clearly appear that the
accused-appellant penetrated his penis into her vagina. The doctor,
PW3, found rupture in the vagina of the victim, leaving no doubt that
the accused committed penetrating sexual assault on the person of the
victim, PW1.
24.         As stated above, the evidence of the victim in this case is
convincing and inspiring without the aid of other witnesses.
25.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Himachal
Pradesh –vs- Sanjay Kumar alias Sunny, reported in (2017) 2 SCC 51, in
paragraph 31 observed as follows:
            “31. After thorough analysis of all relevant and attendant factors,
            we are of the opinion that none of the grounds, on which the
            High Court has cleared the respondents, has any merit. By now it
            is well settled that the testimony of a victim in cases of sexual
            offences is vital and unless there are compelling reasons, which
            necessitate looking for corroboration of a statement, the courts
            should find no difficulty to act on the testimony of the victim of
Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                          Page 7 of 9

            a sexual assault alone to convict the accused. No doubt, her
            testimony has to inspire confidence. Seeking corroboration to a
            statement before relying upon the same as a rule, in such cases,
            would literally amount to adding insult to injury. The deposition
            of the prosecutrix has, thus, to be taken as a whole. Needless to
            reiterate that the victim of rape is not an accomplice and her
            evidence can be acted upon without corroboration. She stands at
            a higher pedestal than an injured witness does. If the court finds
            it difficult to accept her version, it may seek corroboration from
            some evidence which lends assurance to her version. To insist on
            corroboration, except in the rarest of rare cases, is to equate one
            who is a victim of the lust of another with an accomplice to a
            crime and thereby insult womanhood. It would be adding insult
            to injury to tell a woman that her claim of rape will not be
            believed unless it is corroborated in material particulars, as in the
            case of an accomplice to a crime. Why should the evidence of the
            girl or the woman who complains of rape or sexual molestation
            be viewed with the aid of spectacles fitted with lenses tinged
            with doubt, disbelief or suspicion? The plea about lack of
            corroboration has no substance (See Bhupinder Sharma v. State
            of H.P). Notwithstanding this legal position, in the instance case,
            we even find enough corroborative material as well, which is
            discussed hereinabove.”
26.         Therefore, on the basis of the evidence on record, the conviction
recorded by the learned Special Judge, needs no interference.
27.         The accused-appellant has been imposed with the punishment of
rigorous imprisonment for 10 years, and fine of Rs. 5,000/-, and in
default of payment of fine, further rigorous imprisonment for 6 months.
In respect of substantive punishment of rigorous imprisonment for 10
years, I have considered the same from the perspective that as per the
application, preferring this jail appeal, the accused-appellant has only his
old mother and there is none to look after her. Also the fact that from
the very beginning, the accused-appellant was cooperating with the
investigation of the case, even while he was detected to be the accused
by the public and before the police initiated the investigation of the
case. The record of Special Case No. 3/2014, does not show that the
statements of the accused-appellant was recorded while he was heard
Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                            Page 8 of 9

on the point of sentence, although, vide order, dated 05-08-2015, he is
shown to have been heard on sentence. The accused is also found to be
of 30 years of age. Considering all these aspects, this Court is of the
considered view that the substantive sentence of rigorous imprisonment
for 10 years imposed on the accused-appellant appears to be on the
higher side. Therefore, in the considered view of this Court, 7 years of
rigorous imprisonment, as substantive imprisonment, would be
appropriate. Accordingly, the substantive punishment of imprisonment
of 10 years is reduced to 7 years in exercise of the power of this Court
under Section 386 (c)(iii) of the Cr.P.C. The remaining part of sentence,
in respect of fine, no interference is called for.
28.         In view of above, the appeal is partly allowed.
29.         Send down the LCR to the Court below with a copy of this
judgment and order immediately.
30.         Also send a copy of this judgment to the Superintendent of
District Jail, Kokrajhar, for furnishing the same to the accused-appellant.
31.         This Court records its appreciation for the assistance rendered by
learned Amicus Curiae, Ms. B Sarma. Learned Amicus Curiae be paid an
amount of Rs. 7,000/-, as remuneration.
                                                                      JUDGE
Paul
Crl. A. (J) No. 90 of 2015                                           Page 9 of 9


