                                    1
                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL
                          PRADESH)
               Criminal Petition No.933/16 and 941/16
                Criminal Petition No.933/16
                Mehboob Mukter
                Son of Late Giasuddin Mukter
                Resident of Village-Moirabari,
                PO & PS-Moirabari,
                District-Morigaon(Assam)
                Pin-782126
                                             ............Petitioner
               1. State of Assam
               2. Md. Abul Hussain
                    Son of late Abdul Khalek
                    Village –Tatikata Pather
                    PO & PS- Moirabari,
                    Pin-782126
                                           ………… Respondents
             Criminal Petition No.941/16
             1. Nitya Borah, Editor,
                Asomiya Pratidin
                MRD Road, Chandmari,Guwahati,
                District- Kamrup (M)Assam,
                Pin-781003
                Resident of House No.25, Bye Lane No.5,
                Gandhibasti, PO-Silpukhuri,Guwahati,
                District- Kamrup (M)Assam,
                Pin-781003
             2. Jatin Choudhuary, Publisher
                Asomiya Pratidin
                MRD Road, Chandmari,Guwahati,
                District- Kamrup (M)Assam,
                Pin-781003
                Resident of House No.2,
                Dakhin Gaon Tiniali,

                                           2
                        PO-Kahilipara, Guwahati, District-
                        Kamrup (M), Assam, Pin-781019.
                                                   .....Petitioners
                       1. State of Assam
                       2. Md. Abul Hussain
                           Son of late Abdul Khalek
                           Village –Tatikata Pather
                           PO & PS- Moirabari,
                           Pin-782126
                                                      ………… Respondents
                                          BEFORE
                 HON’BLE MRS. JUSTICE RUMI KUMARI PHUKAN
                   For the Petitioner(s)          : Mr. M K Hussain,Advocate
                   in both the petitions
                   For the respondent No.1         : Ms. S.Jahan,Addl.P.P.Assam,
                   For respondent no.2              : Mr. A.I.Uddin, Advocate
                   Date of hearing                 :    25.5.2017
                   Date of judgment                 :    12.06.2017
                                     JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)
       All above petitioners have challenged the same criminal proceeding pertaining
to CR Case No. 561/16 U/S 501/502/120 IPC pending before the learned JMFC,
Morigaon by way of filing the present petitions U/S 482 CrPC and prayed for quashing
the aforesaid proceedings. As such both the petitions are taken up together for
disposal by way of this common order.
2.     The petitioner namely Mehboob Mukter is the local correspondent of the
Assamese vernacular newspaper namely, Asomiya Protidin and other petitioners Nitya
Bora and Jajtin Choudhury are Editor and publisher of the said newspaper. The
respondent Md. Abul Hussain lodged a complaint on 21.7.2016 before the learned CJM,

                                             3
Morigaon bringing allegation of defamation against the petitioners for publication of
the news item in the said newspaper, Asomia Pratidin dated 6.7.2016. It was alleged in
the complaint petition that his settlement has been stopped due to publication of news
item in the newspaper which is not based on records.
3.       According to the petitioners, on the basis of a WT Message dated 5.7.2016
communicated by the Chief Executive Officer,(CEO), Morigaon Zila Parishad the
opposite party / complainant was not allowed to take over the possession of the
Moirabari bi-weekly market. On the basis of materials available on record and the WT
message dated 5.7.2016 the local correspondent/petitioner Mehboob Mukter prepared
a news item in the evening of 5.7.16 and forwarded the same for publication and
accordingly the news item was published on 6.7.2016. Thereafter the opposite party
lodged the complaint with the allegation that due to publication of the news item his
settlement has been stopped by the authority. The petitioners state that the CEO,
Morigaon Zila Parishad vide order dated 2.7.2016 offered the settlement of Moirabari
bi-weekly market to opposite party and accordingly he was asked to complete the
formalities for taking over the possession of the market. Lateron Circle Officer,
Laharighat Revenue Circle communicated a Whatsapp message on 4.7.16 to the CEO,
Morigaon Zila Parishad intimating that the land valuation certificate has been issued
wrongly by the Laharighat revenue circle in favour of the person who stood as
guarantor of Babul Hussain. Thereafter the CEO, Morigaon Zila Parishad communicated
a WT Meesage on 5.7.16 intimating all concerned that the settlement process of
Moirabari bi-weekly market has been kept in abeyance. The petitioners further submit
that the complaint lodged by the opposite party that his settlement has been stopped
due to the publication of the news items is not based on records as because settlement
was stopped on 5.6.16 and the news item was published on 6.7.16. Therefore, the
publication of the news could not influence the authority in the settlement process as
alleged in the complaint petition. It is the contention of the petitioner that the news
item was published basing on materials on record and on the basis of WT Message
dated 5.7.16 and therefore no criminal liability can be attributed to the accused
petitioners and the above criminal proceeding is liable to be quashed.
4.      Thus it is the case of the petitioners that they have published the news item on
the basis of the WT Message dated 5.7.16 vide Annexure-(D & I in the respective)
petitions and the documents on records. The petitioner Mehboob Mukter in his petition

                                                  4
has annexed certain documents like NIT issued by office of the Moirabari Anchalik
Panchayat for settlement of market/ghats and fishery under Moirabari Anchalik
Panchayat for the financial year 2016-17 (vide Annexure-D),. Though the opposite
party required to submit land document for the current year 2016 but the opposite
party has submitted documents pertaining to the year 2015 like land revenue clearance
certificate (vide annexure-E), NOC of the land (Annexure-F),and land valuation
certificate (Annexure-G). It is stated that the surety of the opposite party namely, Md.
Faizur Rahman has shown himself to be owner of 19 Bighas of land whereas he is
owner of 11 Bighas 11 Lechas of land vide Annexure-H Jamabandi copy.
5.       For proper appreciation of the matter, let us first examine the WT Message
dated 5.7.16 which was sent by CEO Zilla Parishad Morigaon addressed to BDO-cum-
Moirbari AP and the relevant portion is reproduced below:
                        “............Ref this office letter no.............dated 2.7.16 regarding
                        settlement of Moirabari bi-weekly bazaar for the year 2016-17
                        with effect from 1.7.2016 in favur of Abul Hussain,..... the Circle
                        Officer, Lahorighat has informed over Whatsapp message that
                        the land valuation certificate has been               wrongly issued by
                        Laharighat Revenue Circle in favour of the persons who stood as
                        a guarantor of Abul Hussain and a formal report in this regard
                        being submitted by him to the matter and pending such report
                        by him regarding the said land valuation certificate, he has
                        requested to treat the matter of settlement of Moirabari bi-
                        weekly bazaar in abeyance. In view of above, the offer of
                        settlement in favour of Abul Hussain for Moirabari bi-weekly
                        market vide letter under reference is hereby suspended until
                        further instruction. As such you are hereby instructed to run the
                        said market departmentally until further instruction. .................”
6.       The aforesaid news publication was made on 6.7.2016 referring to the said WT
message and thereafter a complaint was lodged by the opposite party with the
allegation that the petitioners herein have published the false and fabricated news that
the land documents of the guarantor submitted by the complainant are false and after
publication of said false, fabricated news, Zila Parishad kept abeyance of his settlement
order and created doubt regarding land document of guarantor submitted by the

                                               5
complainant along with the tender papers. Moreover, after publication of the said news
the general public as well as other people known to him treated him as a cheater and
his dignity has been lowered in the public esteem.
5.      Now let us reproduced the news item that was published on 6.7.16, which read
as follows:
                  “MARKET SETTLED WITH TENDERER WHO SUBMITTED FALSE
                 DOCUMENTS:REACTION AT MOIRABARI
                 Pratidin Special Correspondent, Moirabari, 5th Juy: Dominance of Dr.
                 NazrulIslam, MLA, Laharighat LAC is continuing in Morigaon Zilla
                 Parishad. Due to dominance of Dr. Nazrul Islam, Moirabari Bi-Weekly
                 Market has been settled with tenderer who submitted false documents
                 which creates huge reaction. As per allegation, Moirabari Bi-Weekly
                 Market has been settled by the Zilla Parishad with tenderer namely Abul
                 Hussain with monthly bid value submission of false documents with the
                 tender papers. The tenderer is required to submit encumbrance free
                 certificate of the current year but he submitted the same of previous
                 year. Excluding this, the Circle Office issued land valuation certificate in
                 favour of Faizur for 11 Bigha land under Hugoltoli kisam covering Dag
                 No.36 and Patta No.58 amounting to Rs.16,46,666/-. After submission
                 of complaint in this regard, the authority assured that the tender of Abul
                 Hussain will be cancelled but the tenderer is a relative of Dr. Nazrul
                 Islam and as such, how the Chairman of Zila Parishad namely Shyam
                 Das settled the market with tenderer who submitted false documents,
                 the conscious people are demanding a judicial enquiry:
6.      It is evident that the same news was prepared by the special correspondent
i.e.by Mehboob Mukter. After careful examination of WT Message as well as the news
report it reflects that in the aforesaid message the CEO never indicated about falsity of
document furnished by the opposite party as a tenderer and all that have been
conveyed that the land valuation certificate has been wrongly issued by the Laharighat
Revenue Circle and in that case it is the authority liable who issued wrong certificate.
By the said WT Message the CEO has however directed for kept abeyance of the
settlement issued in favour of respondent no.2.

                                             6
7.      Of course, one part of allegation of the respondent no.2 that his settlement has
been kept abeyance only after publication of notice is of no consequence as it was
already directed to be stayed in the Message itself. But however, as regards the other
publication of the news that because of filing of false document by the respondent
no.2 his tender has been rejected, is not a proper reporting of the matter, rather it
has been made by the correspondent by his own creation and the same has been
published by the other respondents, being the editor and publisher of the paper.
Further it is to be noted that the said WT Message was issued on 5.7.2016 and on the
very next date it was published in the newspaper and how the local correspondent
collected all those documents which was neither referred in the message nor provided
to him. Situated thus, such a detailed statement prepared by the local correspondent is
not at all proper while the matter is pending for enquiry before the appropriate
authority. Unless and until proper finding come up from the appropriate authority, such
publication on the part of accused petitiones certainly have great impact in the society
which is enough to affect the status of the respondent no.2.
8.      The learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that the aforesaid WT
Message was challenged by way of filing W.P(C) No.4270/16 and the Hon’ble Court by
order dated 2.3.17 has set aside the aforesaid WT Message dated 5.7.16. The relevant
copy of the order has been submitted before this Court, which is perused.
9.      I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for both the parties
and considered the matter on record. The petitioner Mehboob Mukter herein has
admitted about the preparation of the news item by himself and he was very much
well aware about the content of WT Message where falsity of document has not been
mentioned. However, he has prepared the statement which is not in conformity with
the message whereas he has knowledge and reason to believe that such imputation
will harm the reputation of the complainant/respondent no.2. The complainant in his
complaint petition has made specific allegation as against the petitioner Mehboob
Mukter who is the local resident and on the basis of such statement prepared by
him, the news was published by the other accused petitioners being editor and
publishers. All of them are responsible for the publication of the aforesaid news
which has the element of imputation towards the complainant/respondent no.2.

                                             7
10.     In Shobana Bhartia and ors –vs- NC Delhi and another, reported in (2001) JCC
327 it has been held that in view of the provisions of Press and Registration Act, 1867
particularly Section 7, unless contrary is proved the person declared as Printer,
Publisher and Editor of the Newspaper are presumed to be responsible for the content
of the newspaper. As regards the question as to whether any person other than the
Printer, Publisher and Editor can be prosecuted for a defamatory article it has been
held that besides persons declared as Editor, Printer and Publisher of a newspaper,
only such person could be prosecuted for an action of defamation against whom
specific and clear allegation has been made in the complaint that either he was
responsible for selection of the defamatory matter or has personal knowledge about
the content of defamatory matter. In addition, it must be averred in the complaint that
such person had the intention to harm or knowledge or reason to believe that the
imputation will harm the reputation of the complaint.
11.     The same principle has been endorsed in recent case of Indrajit Lankesh-vs-
K.T.Bhanu Kumar, reported in (2015) 4 SCC 598. In the present case as has been
discussed above, despite having specific information as per the WT Message the
petitioners have published such a statement in a twisting manner and as per discussion
above all petitioners are responsible. Situated thus, their challenge to the cognizance
taken by the Court is not maintainable. Resultantly invoking of provision 482 CrPC by
this Court is unwarranted. The power under Section 482 should not be exercised to
deter a legitimate prosecution.
        The Hon’ble Apex Court in Dhanalakshmi v-Ra. Prasanna Kumar, reported in
1990 sup SCC 686 it has been held as below:
                “3. Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure empowers the High
                Court to exercise its inherent powers to prevent abuse of the process of
                court. In proceedings instituted on complaint exercise of the inherent
                power to quash the proceedings is called for only in cases where the
                complaint does not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or
                oppressive. If the allegations set out in the complaint do not constitute
                the offence of which cognizance is taken by the Magistrate, it is open to
                the High Court to quash the same in exercise of the inherent powers
                under Section 481. It is not, however, necessary that there should be a
                meticulous analysis of the case, before the trial to find out whether the

                                               8
                case would end in conviction or not. The complaint has to be read as a
                whole. If it appears on a consideration of the allegations, in the light of
                the statement on oath of the complainant that ingredients of the
                offence/offences are disclosed, and there is no material to show that the
                complaint is mala fide, frivoulous or vexatious, in that event there would
                be no justification for interference by the High Court”.
12.      In 2014 10 SCC 616 N.Sundaram –vs- P K Paunraj & another it has been held
that power under Section 482 CrPC has to be exercised sparingly and cautiously to
prevent the abuse of the process of the Court and to secure the ends of justice. The
High Court should refrain from giving a prima facie decision unless there is compelling
circumstances to do so. It is only, if taking the allegation and compliant as they are,
without adding or subtracting anything, if no offence is made out, only then the High
Court would be justified in quashing the proceedings.
13.      On overall perusal of materials placed before this Court, makes out a prima
facie case as against the accused petitioners which is required to be decided in course
of trial. Both the petitions are found devoid of merit and accordingly dismissed.
                                                                      JUDGE
Nandi


