                                                                                      1
                            Crl.Pet. 788/2016
                                        BEFORE
        HON’BLE mr. JUSTICE HITESH KUMAR SARMA
                                     :: O R D E R ::
31.07.2017
        Heard Mr. D. Sarma, learned Counsel for the petitioner and also Mr. A.M.
Bora, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent on 26.7.2017.
2)      By this order, this court proposes to dispose of the petition at this admission
stage itself.
3)      The fate of this petition under Section 482 CrPC is largely dependent on the
consequences which follow from the averments made in paragraph 2 of the
complaint petition in CR 42/11. For the sake of convenience the contents of
paragraph 2 are reproduced as follows;
                2. That the accused Shri ParthaBorthakur is the Director of NEFFS
                (India) Private Limited, a private limited company carrying on the
                business of contruction, having its head office at ABC, Bhangagarh
                and carries on business throughout the Assam. On 20.9.2010 he
                placed an order to the complainant company for supply of 3200 bags
                of PPC Cements at NEFFS (India) Private Limited, BPCL Project,
                Lepetkata, Dibrugarh, Assam for its own use.
4)      It, thus, needs to be seen whether the complaint in the present form and
manner would be maintainable.
5)      In this regard Section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, provides
as follows;
                Section 141. Offences by com panies.—(1) If the person
                committing an offence under Section 138 is a company, every person
                who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and
                was responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the
                company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
                offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
                accordingly:
                Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any
                person liable to punishment if he proves that the offence was
                committed without his knowledge, or that he had exercised all due
                diligence to prevent the commission of such offence:

                                                                                   2
               Provided further that where a person is nominated as a Director of a
               company by virtue of his holding any office or employment in the
               Central Government or State Government or a financial corporation
               owned or controlled by the Central Government or the State
               Government, as the case may be, he shall not be liable for
               prosecution under this chapter.
               (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any
               offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is
               proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
               connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any
               director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
               director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
               be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
               and punished accordingly.
               Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
               (a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
               association of individuals; and
               (b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
6)     Learned Counsel for the petitioner has referred to the cases of Pooja
R avinderDevidasani vs State of M aharashtra and another, (2014) 16 SCC
1,Sharad K um ar Sanghi vs SangitaR ane, (2015) 12 SCC 781 and National
Sm all Industries Corporation Ltd vs Harm eet Singh Paintal, (2010) 3 SCC
330 in order to buttress his case.
7)     Learned Senior Counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, relied on the
case of M alw a Cotton and Spinning M ills Ltd. Vs Virsa Singh Sidhu, (2008)
17 SCC 147.
8)     Mr. Sarma, learned Counsel for the petitioner while referring to the case of
National Sm all Industries Corpn. Ltd. v. Harm eet Singh Paintal, (2010) 3
SCC 330 argued that what is required under Section 141 is that the persons who
are sought to be made vicariously liable for a criminal offence under Section 141
should be, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company. Every
person connected with the company shall not fall within the ambit of the provision.
Only those persons who were in charge of and responsible for the conduct of the
business of the company at the time of commission of an offence will be liable for

                                                                                       3
criminal action. It follows from the fact that if a Director of a company who was not
in charge of and was not responsible for the conduct of the business of the company
at the relevant time, will not be liable for a criminal offence under the provisions.
The liability arises from being in charge of and responsible for the conduct of the
business of the company at the relevant time when the offence was committed and
not on the basis of merely holding a designation or office in a company.It was also
held in Harm eet Singh Paintal, (supra), that Section 141 is a penal provision
creating vicarious liability, and which, as per settled law, must be strictly construed.
It is therefore, not sufficient to make a bald cursory statement in a complaint that
the Director (arrayed as an accused) is in charge of and responsible to the company
for the conduct of the business of the company without anything more as to the role
of the Director. The Supreme Court in Harm eet Singh Paintal,(supra) went on to
observe that a company may have a number of Directors and to make any or all the
Directors as accused in a complaint merely on the basis of a statement that they are
in charge of and responsible for the conduct of the business of the company without
anything more is not a sufficient or adequate fulfilment of the requirements under
Section 141.
9)      A similar view was re-iterated in the case of Pooja R avinderDevidasani vs
State of M aharashtra and another, (2014) 16 SCC 1.
10)     Controverting the arguments of petitioner, Mr. Bora, the learned Senior
Counsel for the respondent while referring to the case of Malwa Cotton and Spinning
Mills Ltd. Vs Virsa Singh Sidhu, (2008) 17 SCC 147 argued that when disputed
questions of fact have been raised in the complaint petition it may not be a proper
course for an exercise of jurisdiction under Section 482 of CrPC and the adjudication
of the disputed facts should be left for trial in regular course.

                                                                                    4
11)     In the light of arguments made, when I turn to the complaint petition I find
that it is an admitted fact that the Cheque in question was issued by Mrs. Rekha
Khandelia, one of the Directors of the NEFFS (India) Private Limited, yet the
complainant has chosen to implead the petitioner as accused in the case as all the
transactions were carried out by the petitioner. In Para 2 of the complaint petition,
the respondent states that the order for the cements were placed by the accused. In
para 3 of the complaint petition, the respondent states that the petitioner took the
delivery of goods and then issued the Cheque. Thus, according to respondent the
only person who was involved in the entire business transaction was the respondent.
Hence, irrespective of the fact that another Director, Mrs. Rekha Khandelia issued
the Cheque, the respondent is equally responsible for the dishonor of the Cheque.
Perusal of the Cheque reveals that Cheque was issued for NEFFS (India) Private
Limited.
12)     The mandate of Section 141, as interpreted in Harm eet Singh Paintal,
(supra), is that only those persons who were in charge of and responsible for the
conduct of the business of the company at the time of commission of an offence will
be liable for criminal action. The liability arises from being in charge of and
responsible for the conduct of the business of the company at the relevant time
when the offence was committed and not on the basis of merely holding a
designation or office in a company.
13)     As would be noticed from the averments made in the complaint petition the
respondent has attributed a definite role played by the petitioner in the business
transaction and hence it would not be safe to hold that the complaint contains a bald
statement not sufficient enough to define the role played by the petitioner who is,
admittedly, a Director in the company. A determination of the fact as to whether the
role of the petitioner as Director of the NEFFS (India) Private Limited vis-a-vis the

                                                                                       5
business transaction, as alleged, would be entering into the merits of the case and
that would be highly prejudicial to the respondent’s case.
14)     Hence, in view of the facts of the present case, the reliance placed by Mr.
Bora, learned Counsel for the respondent, on the case of M alw a Cotton and
Spinning M ills Ltd (supra) is found to be applicable and it would not be proper to
quash the complaint on the ground of lack of averments against the petitioner.
15)     Now, let us deal with the argument proffered by Mr. Sarma, the learned
Counsel for the petitioner, that since the company, NEFFS (India) Private Limited,
has not been made an accused in this case the case is not maintainable.
16)     Whether, without impleading the company, a complaint under Section 138
can be maintained against a Director of the Company, has been a subject matter of
discussion in AneetaHada v. Godfather Travels And Tours (P) Ltd., (2012) 5
SCC 661. Since there was a difference of opinion among the Hon’ble Judges sitting
in a Division Bench, the issue came to be settled in AneetaHada (supra). The point
of contention was whether an authorised signatory of a company would be liable for
prosecution under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 without the
company being arraigned as an accused?
17)     While settling the issue, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in AneetaHada (supra),
held that commission of offence by the company is an express condition precedent
to attract the vicarious liability of others. Thus, the words “as well as the company”
appearing in section 141 make it absolutely unmistakably clear that when the
company can be prosecuted, then only the persons mentioned in the other
categories could be vicariously liable for the offence subject to the averments in the
petition and proof thereof.
 18)    The relevant paragraph of AneetaHada (supra) is reproduced as follows;
               58. Applying the doctrine of strict construction, we are of the
               considered opinion that commission of offence by the company is an
               express condition precedent to attract the vicarious liability of others.

                                                                                      6
                Thus, the words “as well as the company” appearing in the section
                make it absolutely unmistakably clear that when the company can be
                prosecuted, then only the persons mentioned in the other categories
                could be vicariously liable for the offence subject to the averments in
                the petition and proof thereof
19)    Apparently, the company NEFFS (India) Private Limited has neither been
impleaded as accused in the complaint case nor any cognizance has been taken by
the Court against the company. In view of the fact that the entire transaction by the
respondent was carried out in the name of NEFFS (India) Private Limited, a
company, a prosecution for dishonor of Cheque would not be maintainable without
impleading the said company as accused in view of the ratio laid down in the case of
Aneeta Hada (supra).
20)    As a result of the foregoing discussions, the learned trial Court could not have
taken cognizance against the petitioner and as such the order of taking cognizance
and consequent order of issuance of process is liable to quashed and set aside.
21)    The instant petition, under Section 482 CrPC, thus, deserves to be allowed.
22)    Accordingly, the complaint case CR 42/2011 pending in the Court of Judicial
Magistrate 1st class Kamrup (Metro) is hereby quashed.
                                                                            JUDGE
Paul


