                                                                                             1
                                     IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
                  (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM, AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                                          CRIMINAL PETITION No. 847 of 2016
                             Surajit Bhowmick,
                             Son of Shri Dhirendra Nath Bhowmick,
                             Barsapara, P.O.- Binova Nagar,
                             Guwahati, Pin- 781018,
                             Assam.
                                                                                 …..Petitioner
                                  --Versus--
                             1. The State of Assam
                             2. Sri Sarat Chandra Kalita,
                             Santipur Hill Side,
                             Mathura Nagar,
                             Guwahati-781009.
                             3. Bhupen Chandra Kalita,
                             S/o late Mukunda Ram Kalita,
                             Jonakpur, Birubari,
                             Guwahati-781016.
                             4. Hironmoy Kumar Das,
                             Kalitakuchi, 2 No. Birkuchi II,
                             No. 847, Milanpur,
                             Guwahati-781071.
                             5. Deba Kumar Hazarika,
                             Citizen Apartment, 1st Floor,
                             D-Type, Six Mile,
                             Guwahati-781022.
                             6. Atul Chandra Baishya,
                             Rudreswar, North Guwahati,
                             Guwahati-78103.
                             7. Khagen Bhuyan,
                             S/o- Late Hemeswar Bhuyan,
                             C/o Late Bhumidhar Bhuyan,
                             Bye Lane 4, House No.14,
                             P.O.- Silpukhuri,
                             Guwahati-781003.
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                2
                                8. Pankaj Dutta, Sarma,
                                Dr. Bhabendra Nath Thakuria Path,
                                Santipur Hill Side, (East),
                                Guwahati-781009.
                                                                                  … ..Respondents
                                                        BEFORE
                             HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PARAN KUMAR PHUKAN
                                For the Petitioner                : Mr. A. Das, Adv
                                For the Respondent No. 1          : None appeared
                                For the Respondent No. 2          : Mr. A.K. Srivastava, adv.
                                Date of hearing                   : 06-04-2017
                                Date of judgment                  : 08-06-2017
                                       JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
                        By filing this petition u/s 482 of the CrPC, 1973, the petitioner seeks
               quashing of the FIR No.13/2016 registered on 10.08.2016 by the Bureau of
               Investigation and Economic Offence (in short BIEO), Assam being registered as GR
               Case No.9016/2016 u/s 419/420/406 of the IPC.
               2.       The respondents herein who are the shareholders of Assam Chemical &
               Pharmaceutical Pvt. Ltd. filed an FIR on 03.08.2016 with the BIEO against the
               petitioner alleging therein that the petitioner who is functioning as a Chartered
               Accountant/Auditor of the aforesaid company misappropriated the company’s fund in
               collusion with the then Director Deep Narayan Singh (since deceased) of the said
               company. It has been alleged in the FIR that 10 numbers of computers, each,
               valued at Rs.30,000/- were shown to have been purchased by the company, but
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                     3
               none of the computers were found available in the office of the company. Further
               allegation is that the then Managing Director D.N. Singh (since deceased) had
               opened an account in the Industrial Co-operative Bank without approval of the
               Board of Directors and the petitioner was the introducer without having any
               authority to do so. The petitioner though not a shareholder of the company, was
               hankering after the shares and he even tried to steal the shares of the then
               Managing Director D. N. Singh (since deceased) by mesmerizing him, but somehow,
               the situation was saved by his son. The petitioner without having authority
               impersonated himself as company Secretary of the aforesaid company for personal
               interest. He used to put signatures in the salary voucher instead of putting the same
               in the salary slip with a view to siphon off company’s fund. The petitioner further
               misappropriated the company’s fund by approving a false fill from its raw material
               suppliers, Kolkata amounting to Rs.2,95,000/- without any supply being made by the
               suppliers. The petitioner also failed to submit the certified copy of the balance sheet
               to the Board of Directors of the company within the specified period which is highly
               detrimental to the interest of the company. It was also alleged that the petitioner
               used to commit theft of diesel from the company for using the same in his vehicle.
               3.       The pleaded case of the petitioner is that he is a qualified Chartered
               Accountant, Cost Accountant and Company Secretary, and he is one of the partners
               of the C.A., firm namely, U.A. Mazumdar and Company, which was engaged by the
               company as auditor. He is rendering his professional services to the company
               accordingly, being so, engaged by the company. According to the petitioner a tug of
               war has been going on between the management of the company and the
               shareholders with the present respondents and he has become a scapegoat. The
               respondent Deba Kr. Hazarika who was a shareholder and an employee of the said
               company was terminated from service by the then Director D N Singh (since
               deceased) which resulted in disgruntlement amongst Mr. Hazarika and few of his
               accomplishes and they have repeatedly filed cases one after another against the
               erstwhile Managing Director D N Singh (since deceased) for his removal. But having
               failed to achieve their objective they have again filed the FIR against the petitioner
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                     4
               although he has no personal interest in the affairs of the company except rendering
               professional services.
               4.       The pleaded case of the petitioner further is that Chartered Accountant Act,
               1949 and the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 have given powers to the members of
               the aforesaid institutions to render professional services in the field of finance,
               company matters etc., the Registrar of Companies is vested with the powers to
               scrutinize the financial impropriety of the company. The audit balance are statutorily
               required to be filed with the ROC every year and if there is any financial impropriety,
               the ROC is vested with powers to deal with the same in accordance with the law.
               The BIEO, Assam has no jurisdiction to investigate into the internal affairs of a
               private company which is exclusive domain of the ROC. Petitioner also pleaded that
               Section 419/420/406 of the IPC are not attracted at all in this case and the filing of
               the present FIR after about 7 years is nothing but abuse of process of law.
               5.       The contention of the petitioner is that earlier also the respondents filed
               several cases before the BIEO against the then Director D N Singh (since deceased)
               with the same sort of allegations and the cases are under investigation in that view
               of the matter also the present FIR is not maintainable.
               6.       Heard Mr. A. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. A. K. Srivastava,
               learned counsel for the respondent Nos. 2 to 8.
               7.       Mr. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner made strenuous submissions to
               convince me that the respondents filed the present FIR by suppression of material
               fact that the informant Deba Kr. Hazarika who is a terminated employee of Assam
               Chemical and Pharmaceutical Private ltd., earlier lodged various cases before the
               Civil Court as well as Company Law Board, Kolkata, challenging his termination
               order. Having failed to get any favorable order, he lodged the instant FIR before the
               BIEO, Assam who is not authorized to conduct investigation in such cases. The
               petitioner being an Auditor and Chartered Accountant engaged by the company was
               discharging his professional duties which is not subject to scrutiny by the BIEO,
               Assam and the appropriate authority is the Registrar of Companies. No offence u/s
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                  5
               419/420/406 of the IPC has been made out against the petitioner and nothing was
               entrusted to him by the company. Regarding purchasing of the computers by the
               management, the petitioner cannot be held liable and accusation in this regard was
               also earlier made in the FIR which was lodged before the BIEO against the erstwhile
               Director D N Singh (since deceased). Introducing the Managing Director of the
               company to the bank for opening the bank account, cannot, by any stretch of
               imagination, be an offence under any provisions of the law. He knew the Managing
               Director and introduced him for which he cannot be held liable. Mr. Das. Contends
               that the auditors are appointed by the shareholders of the company in the Annual
               General Meeting and they retire after the end of the financial year and if the
               shareholders were not satisfied with the services rendered by the petitioner he
               would not have been reappointed as Auditor. As Auditor of the company his duty
               was to the extent of checking the correctness of the entries made in the Book of
               Accounts by checking the corresponding vouchers and the auditors do not possess
               any mechanism to judge the genuineness of the documents.
               8.       Advancing further Mr. Das, learned counsel argues that the allegations made
               in the FIR, even if they are taken at their face value do not make out any case and
               the FIR has been filed for victimizing the petitioner. The allegations in the FIR
               pertains to the year 2008 and when the earlier FIR was filed against the then
               Managing Director D N Singh (since deceased) no allegation was made against the
               petitioner.
               9.       Mr. Das, has taken me through Annexure XII of the petition to contend that
               as provided in the charter of duty of the BIEO which was created in the year 1976,
               the accusations do not come under the domain of the BIEO.
               10.      Controverting the submissions, learned counsel for the respondent Nos. 2 to
               8 argues that accusations of fraud, misrepresentation and misappropriation of
               company’s fund have been brought against the petitioner and the criminal
               proceeding cannot be quashed at the threshold in exercise of the power u/s 482 of
               the CrPC. Petitioner’s duty was to audit the accounts, he exceeded his jurisdiction
               and by false representation misappropriated company’s fund. He also contends that
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                       6
               since the case is under investigation by the BIEO, the same cannot be quashed
               although the charter of duties of the BIEO does not cover the accusations made
               against the petitioner.
               11.      Before entering into the merit of this criminal petition it is necessary at this
               stage to point out the law with regard to quashing of criminal complaint or FIR. The
               law is no longer res integra. The Apex court in a catena of decision laid down the
               principles of law to be followed for quashing of FIR or complaint. Right from the
               case of R .P. K apoor vs State of Punjab reported in AIR 1960 SC 866 the
               Supreme Court held that revisional or inherent powers for quashing the proceeding
               at the initial stage can be exercised only when the allegations made in the complaint
               or the FIR even if taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not
               prima facie disclose the commission of an offence or where the uncontroverted
               allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence relied in support of the
               same do not disclose the commission of any offence against the accused. The above
               view has been reiterated by the Apex Court in the later decision including the case of
               State of Haryana vs Bhajan Lal reported in AIR 1992 SC 604, State of
               K arnataka vs Partor P. R aju, reported in AIR 2006 2825.
               12.      In the case of Bhajanlal (supra) the Apex Court gave a note of caution on the
               powers of quashing of criminal proceeding in the following words:-
                                “103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of
                                quashing a criminal proceeding should be exercised very sparingly
                                and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases; that
                                the court will not be justified inn embarking upon an enquiry as to the
                                reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the
                                FIR or the complaint and that the extra ordinary or inherent powers
                                do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act according to
                                its whim or caprice.”
               13.      From a close reading of the principles laid down in the case of R.P. Kapoor
               (supra) and Bhajanlal (supra) it emerges that broadly speaking, quashing of an FIR
               or a complaint is possible (a) when the allegations made in the First Information
               Report or the complaint, even if taken at their face value and accepted in their
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                    7
               entirety as true, do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case
               against the accused; (b) when the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or
               complaint and evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the
               commission of any offence and/or make out a case against the accused; and (c)
               when the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
               improbable that on the basis of such absurd and inherently improbable allegations,
               no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for
               proceeding against the accused.
               14.      In view of the laid down principles of law involved for quashing a complaint
               or FIR what needs to be decided now is whether the accusations made against the
               petitioner in the FIR made out any case. There is no denial that the petitioner is the
               Auditor/Chartered Accountant of the company and he is still holding the office being
               appointed and reappointed by the shareholders. There is also no denial that his duty
               is to render professional service to the company. The accusations against him are
               that 10 numbers of computers were shown to have been purchased but infact those
               were not supplied. Earlier also the respondents filed FIR against the then Director D
               N Singh (since deceased) with the same accusations but in the FIR no accusation
               was brought against the petitioner. He being the auditor had no role to play in
               purchasing the computers and it is for the management to take appropriate decision
               and it is also not his duty to ascertain whether the computers are supplied or not.
               Even if it is presumed that the computers were not supplied then also there is no
               logic behind holding the petitioner liable on this count. On the basis of the earlier
               FIR filed, a case was registered by BIEO against the then Director D N Singh (since
               deceased), the said case is under investigation and if at all the petitioner was
               involved BIEO would have found his complicity in the commission of the crime
               during investigation. Non registration of any separate case against the petitioner
               cannot be a ground to file fresh FIR with the same allegations which is nothing but
               gross abuse of the process of law.
               15.      So far accusations of introducing the Managing Director at the time of
               opening the bank account is concerned as I have already discussed, no criminal
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                     8
               liability can be attributed to the accused for introducing the Managing Director to the
               bank. The accusations that the accused petitioner wanted to grab the shares of the
               company and also the shares of the then Director D N Singh (since deceased) by
               mesmerizing him is also baseless not at all believable. Moreover, there is no
               accusation by the then Director D N Singh (since deceased) that the accused wanted
               to steal his shares. So far the accusation that petitioner put his signature in the
               voucher at the time of drawing his salary instead of putting signature in the salary
               slip is concerned it was just an irregularity and that could have been pointed out to
               him at that time, he cannot be held criminally liable for drawing his salary by signing
               the vouchers. It has been alleged against him that he misappropriated the
               companies fund by approving a bill of Rs.2,95,000/-. It is not the duty of the
               petitioner to purchase goods, decision in this regard is obviously taken by the
               management of the company and his duty was to audit the accounts and not to
               approve bills. If the billed amount was paid to the suppliers without receiving the
               goods the management of the company is liable and the auditor cannot be held to
               be liable. Another accusation is that he failed to timely submit the audit reports, on
               this ground also no criminal liability could be attributed to him. Though accusation of
               theft of diesel has been brought but no foundation has been laid for such an
               accusation. He allegedly put some diesel belonging to the company in his vehicle. If
               he was caught red handed by the chowkidar at that time itself action should have
               been initiated by the management but that was not done and no specific information
               has been provided in the written FIR regarding theft of diesel. Such accusation made
               after 7/8 years of the alleged occurrence is not likely to stand the test of law.
               Moreover, no case of theft has been registered against him.
               16.       The case has been registered against the petitioner u/s 419/420/406 of the
               IPC. In the case of cheating intention of the accused is dishonest from the very
               commencement of the transaction. There is really no consent by the person, who is
               intentionally induced by deception to deliver the property or allow any person to
               retain the property or is intentionally induced, as a result of deception, to do or omit
               to do anything, which he would not do or omit to do if he were not so deceived, and
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                    9
               which act or omission caused or is likely to cause damager or harm to that person in
               body, mind, reputation or property.
               17.      In’ criminal breach of trust” an accused comes into possession of a property
               or acquires dominion over a property honestly and bona fide, but he develops
               dishonest intention subsequent to the taking possession of, or subsequent to having
               acquired the dominion over, the property and, having developed such dishonest
               intention, he dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use the property or
               dishonestly uses or disposes of the property in violation of any direction of law
               prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal
               contract, express or implied, which he has made touching the discharge of such
               trust, or willfully suffers any other person so to do.
               18.      In the present case, from the accusations, neither the ingredients of Section
               415 nor Section 406 of the IPC has been made out against the accused petitioner.
               He was retained by the company as an Auditor and he was rendering his
               professional services to the company as a qualified Chartered Accountant and
               company secretary and was under the control of the management. There is no
               accusation that as auditor or Chartered Accountant he committed cheating or
               criminal breach of trust. From the materials placed before this court it is abundantly
               clear that there is a tug of war between the management and the respondents for
               the last several years and similar accusation was also brought in the earlier FIR
               against the erstwhile Director D N Singh (since deceased). The plea of the petitioner
               that the respondents are trying to take control of the company cannot be ruled out.
               19.      Moreover BIEO is an independent investigation agency created in the year
               1976 having their own charter of duties. Obviously, the accusations in the FIR do not
               fall under the domain of BIEO and they have no authority to conduct the
               investigation. The investigation so far conducted on the basis of the FIR cannot
               stand and is liable to be quashed.
               20.      Having regard to the submission, advanced by the learned counsel and
               having considered the facts and circumstances of the case and the materials placed
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016

                                                                                                  10
               before this court and all my discussions, above, I am of the considered view that the
               initiation of impugned criminal proceeding, filing of FIR, registration of a case
               against the petitioner would amount to abuse of process of law exposing the
               petitioner to unnecessary harassment. It would be legally impermissible to allow the
               petitioner to suffer agony of a criminal proceeding.
               21.      In the result, the petition is allowed. The impugned FIR No.13/2016
               registered on 10.08.2016 being registered as GR Case No.9016/2016 u/s
               419/420/406 of the IPC, pending for investigation before the BIEO is hereby stand
               quashed and set aside.
                                                                                          JUDGE
               Rupam
Crl.Pet. No.847 of 2016


