                                                                                       1
                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                        CRL. REV. P NO.529 OF 2005
             1. SRI SORU KALITA
                 VILLAGE – DHARAPUR.
                 P.S – AZARA
                 DISTRICT – KAMRUP
             2. SMTI SARASWATI KALITA
                 WIFE OF SRI SORU KALITA
                 VILLAGE – DHARAPUR.
                 P.S – AZARA
                 DISTRICT – KAMRUP
                                       -Versus-
                                                                     ……..petitioners
                  STATE OF ASSAM
                                                                    ….. respondent
                                  B E F O R E
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
         For the appellant                           : Ms. S Roy (Amicus Curiae)
         For respondents                             : Ms. S Jahan (Addl. PP, Assam)
         Date of hearing                             : 01-08-2017
         Date of Judgment & Order                    : 01-08-2017
                              JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
                    Heard Ms. S Roy, learned Amicus Curiae and Ms. S Jahan, learned Addl.
         PP, Assam.
Crl. Rev. P No.529/2005

                                                                                           2
         [2]        This revision under Section 482 Cr.P.C is directed against the judgment
         and order dated 05-12-2001 passed by learned Sessions Judge upholding the
         judgment and order dated 05-12-2001 in GR Case No.714/1995 passed by
         learned CJM, Kamrup, whereby the revision petitioner was convicted under
         Section 326 IPC and sentenced to imprisonment for 2 (two) years and fine of
         Rs.1,000/- with default stipulation.
         [3]        The prosecution case as unfolded during trial is that on 21-02-1995 at
         about 4.30 pm, when Lalit Kalita, Pw-1, was proceeding through Dharapur road,
         the accused arrived there by driving his vehicle.        The accused stopped the
         vehicle and dealt a blow to Pw-1, the victim, with a khukuri. When Pw-1 tried to
         ward off the blow by raising his hand, the blow fell on his hand and his thumb
         was cut. Immediately he was shifted to the hospital. The FIR was lodged on 23-
         02-1995 by Pw-2, the elder brother of Pw-1, on the basis of which, police
         registered a case and on completion of investigation laid charge-sheet against
         the revision petitioner under Section 326 IPC.
         [4]       In course of trial, the prosecution examined 6 (six) witnesses including
         the doctor and the I.O and on appreciation of evidence, learned Trial Court
         convicted the revision petitioner under Section 326 IPC and awarded sentenced
         as indicated above.
          [5]        Aggrieved by the judgment of conviction and sentence rendered by the
         learned CJM, the revision petitioner preferred an appeal before the learned
         Sessions Judge and learned Sessions Judge by the impugned judgment and
         order upheld the conviction and sentence of the accused/revision petitioner
         concurring with the findings of the Trial Court. It is against the said judgment of
         the learned Sessions Judge, the revision petitioner has filed the instant petition
         under Section 482 Cr.PC, praying for setting aside the conviction and sentence
         and or quash the proceeding.
         [6]        Out of the 6 witnesses examined by the prosecution, Pw-5 was the
         Doctor and Pw-6 was the I.O. Except the victim Pw-1, there was no other ocular
         witness of the occurrence.     According to Pw-3, on hearing hue and cry he came
Crl. Rev. P No.529/2005

                                                                                           3
         to the place of occurrence and found PW-1, the victim with injury on his hand
         and on being asked by him, Pw-1 told that the accused inflicted the injury.
         According to PW-4, he came to know about the occurrence later on and Pw-2
         also came to know about the occurrence from PW-1.
          [7]        It is now settled position of law that there is no impediment in basing
         conviction on the testimony of the lone eye witness, provided such witnesses is
         fully reliable inasmuch as, it is the quality of the evidence not quantity which
         matters.    Pw-1, being the injured and the lone eye witness has categorically
         stated in his evidence that the accused assaulted him with sharp weapon causing
         grievous injury and the testimony of Pw-1 to the extent of sustaining injury has
         been supported by the doctor, Pw-5. Although Pw-1 was subjected to cross-
         examination, nothing material could be elicited to create any dent in the
         testimony of Pw-1.         There is also no material on record suggesting false
         implication.     I have also gone through the previous statement of Pw-1 recorded
         by police under Section 161 Cr.P.C.          Having taken note of such previous
         statement of the Pw-1, I find that this witness has been consistent in all stages
         of the proceeding. Since the lone eye witness being the injured himself is found
         to be fully reliable and worthy of placing reliance and his testimony also finds
         support from the medical evidence, there is no difficulty in basing conviction on
         the sole testimony of Pw-1. In the above facts and circumstances, the learned
         Trial Court as well as the learned appellate court are found to have rightly,
         based the conviction on the testimony of Pw-1 and therefore, I do not find
         any perversity in the conclusion arrived at by the learned Trial Court as well
         as the appellate Court in convicting and sentencing the accused/revision
         petitioner.
         [8]         It is trite, that the scope of scrutiny by these revisional Court is
         circumscribed, inasmuch as, this Court cannot re-appreciate the evidence or
         replace the view of the Trial Court or the first appellate Court by its own view
         on the findings of facts or the appreciation of evidence. Since the evidence
         of Pw-1 is found to be worthy of credence and reliable which is supported by
Crl. Rev. P No.529/2005

                                                                                       4
         the medical evidence, I do not find any cogent reason to interfere with the
         judgment and order of conviction of the accused/revision petitioner in the
         instant case.
         [9]         The occurrence took place in the year 1995 and since then 22 years
         have passed. Having considered the long period of protracted trial and the
         facts and circumstances of the case, the substantive sentenced awarded by
         the learned Trial Court is reduced to 1 (one) year for ends of justice.
         However, the sentence of fine and imprisonment in default awarded by the
         Trial Court is maintained. With this modification in the sentence, the revision
         petition is disposed of.
         [10]        It appears from the record that the revision petitioner is on bail.
         He is directed to surrender before the learned Trial Court within 2 (two)
         months to serve out the sentence.
         [11]        Appreciating the evidence rendered by Ms. Sanchita Roy, learned
         Amicus Curiae, I hereby provide that she will be entitled to fees, as Legal Aid
         Counsel as per the norms fixed by the Legal Services Authority Regulation.
         Upon production of a copy of this judgment, Guwahati High Court Legal
         Services Committee, shall pay the fee to Ms. Roy.
          [12]       Send back the LCR.
                                                                              JUDGE
         Smita
Crl. Rev. P No.529/2005


