                                                                                      1
                 IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                       CRL. REV. P NO.90 OF 2005
            SHRI BHOLA KALITA
            SON OF LT. KANDURA KALITA
            R/O JANJI CHUMANI CHAPARI GAON
            P.O & P.S – TEOK,
            DISTRICT – JORHAT.
                                       -Versus-
                                                                     ……..petitioner
        1. STATE OF ASSAM
                                                                   ….. respondent
                                  B E F O R E
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
        For the appellant                             : Mr. B Borah (Amicus Curiae)
        For respondents                               : Mr. PS Lahkar (Addl. PP, Assam)
        Date of hearing                               : 31-07-2017
        Date of Judgment & Order                      : 31-07-2017
                              JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
                 Heard Mr. B Borah, learned amicus curiae and Mr. PS Lahkar, learned
        Addl. PP, Assam.
        [2]       This revision is directed against the judgment and order dated 30-11-
        2004 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Jorhat affirming the conviction and
Crl. Rev. P No.90/2005

                                                                                           2
        sentence of the revision petitioner in GR Case No.267/2002 by the CJM, Jorhat
        whereby the accused/revision petitioner was convicted under Section 326 IPC
        and sentenced to imprisonment for 2 (two) years and a fine of Rs.5,000/- with
        default stipulation.
        [3]       The prosecution case as unfolded during trial is that on 26-03-2002, the
        revision petitioner Bhola Kalita inflicted injury to victim Bubul Bora by a dao and
        an FIR was lodged by PW-2. On the basis of such FIR, police registered a case
        and eventually submitted charge-sheet against the revision petitioner Bhola
        Kalita under Section 326 IPC.
        [4]      In course of trial, learned Magistrate examined 11 witnesses.           The
        defence also examined one witness being the wife of the revision petitioner. On
        conclusion of trial, the learned Magistrate convicted the accused/revision
        petitioner and awarded sentence as indicated above.
         [5]       Aggrieved by the conviction and sentence awarded by the learned
        Magistrate, the revision petitioner filed an appeal before the learned Sessions
        Judge and the learned Sessions Judge by the impugned judgment and upheld
        the conviction and sentence awarded by the learned Magistrate.
        [6]       Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned appellate Court, the revision
        petitioner has preferred the instant appeal.
         [7]       From the evidence and materials on record, it appears that the learned
        Magistrate convicted the accused /revision petitioner basically relying on the
        evidence of Pw-1 and Pw-3. Pw-1 was the victim himself and Pw-3 was the sole
        eye witness. The other witnesses, who have been examined were not the eye
        witnesses to the occurrence, as they reached to the place of occurrence after the
        occurrence was over.
        [8]       Pw-1 the victim stated categorically in his evidence that for his business
        transaction with Nagen Kalita, Nagen Kalita was to pay him Rs.100/-. When he
        (Pw-1) went to Nagen Kalita to bring that Rs.100/-, Nagen Kalita told him that
        accused Bhola Kalita had asked him not to pay the said amount. Then he went
Crl. Rev. P No.90/2005

                                                                                        3
        to Bhola Kalita accompanied with Nagen Kalita to enquire, why he had prevented
        Nagen Kalita to pay the amount and Nagen Kalia also accompanied him. As soon
        as they reached the place of Bhola Kalita, Bhola Kalita suddenly snatched the dao
        from the hand of Nagen Kalita and inflicted injury on his leg.
        [9]        This categorical evidence of the victim has been supported by Pw-
        3, Nagen Kalita, who was an eye witness of the occurrence. Although both
        these two witnesses were subjected to cross-examination, they successfully
        withstood the cross-examination and the defence failed to create any dent in
        the testimony of the Pw-1 and Pw-3. The medical evidence adduced by Pw-5
        and the exhibit-4, the injury report also lent support to the oral evidence of
        Pw-1 and Pw-3.      On the basis of such evidence, the learned Trial Court
        convicted the accused/revision petitioner and awarded sentence as indicated
        above.
        [10]       The learned Sessions Judge also upheld the conviction and
        sentence concurring with the appreciation of evidence by the trial Court. This
        Court while exercising the revisional power is not supposed to replace the
        view of the learned Trial Court on appreciation of the evidence and on the
        factual finding arrived at by the learned Trial Court and concurred is first
        appellate Court, by its own view.
        [11]       Having considering the totality of the evidence, I am of the view
        that the learned Trial Court as well as the learned appellate Court has not
        committed any illegality or irregularity in the judgment, whereby the accused
        was convicted and sentenced to imprisonment. There is also no material to
        hold that the finding of the learned Trial Court or the first appellate court has
        suffered from any perversity. Therefore, unless the finding of the learned
        Trial Court is perverse or against the weight of the evidence, the revisional
        Court is not supposed to interfere with such finding of facts as well as the
        appreciation of evidence made by the learned Trial Court.
Crl. Rev. P No.90/2005

                                                                                     4
         [12]     In the above view of the matter, I am of the considered opinion
        that there is no reason to interfere with the judgment of the learned Trial
        Court convicting the accused/revision petitioner and upheld by the appellate
        Court. The quantum of sentence awarded by the trial Court, and upheld by
        the appellate Court demonstrates that both the Courts have been extremely
        lenient while awarding sentence, which appears to be quite commensurating
        with the offence, warranting no interference by this Court.
        [13]      Accordingly, the revision petition is dismissed.
        [14]      Appreciating the assistance rendered by Mr. B Borah, learned
        Amicus Curiae, I hereby provide that he will be entitled to fees, as Legal Aid
        Counsel as per the norms fixed by the Legal Services Authority Regulation.
        Upon production of a copy of this judgment, Guwahati High Court Legal
        Services Committee, shall pay the fee to Mr. Borah.
         [9]      Send back the LCR.
                                                                            JUDGE
        Smita
Crl. Rev. P No.90/2005


