                              IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
           Criminal Revision Petition No. 67 of 2013
                             Sri Biren Das,
                             Son of Late Nidhiram Das,
                             Resident of Assam Agricultural University Campus,
                             P.S. & Dist. Jorhat.
                                                             ----- Accused/petitioner
                                          – VERSUS –
                             The State of Assam
                                                             ----- Respondent.
                                               BEFORE
                  Hon’ble Mr. Justice Hitesh Kumar Sarma
                  Advocate for the appellant       : Mr. A Thakur, Ms. JR Thakur,
                                                      Mr. D Saikia, Advocates.
                  Advocate for Respondent            : Mr. K Sarma, Addl. Public Prosecutor.
                  Date of hearing Judgment & Order ::           27th of July, 2017.
                                      JUDGMENT & ORDER
                  This revision petition is filed, under Section 397/401/482 of the
       Code of Criminal Procedure, against the judgment and order dated
       21-12-2012, passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Jorhat, in Criminal
       Appeal No. 11/2011, upholding the judgment and order, dated 10-
       02-2012, passed by learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jorhat, in GR
       Case No. 1032/2009, convicting the accused-petitioner, under
       Section 381 of the IPC and sentencing him to pay a fine of Rs. 2,000/-,
       in default, to suffer simple imprisonment for one month.
       2.         I have heard Mr. A Thakur, learned counsel appearing on
       behalf of accused-appellant, and Mr. K Sarma, learned Additional
       Public Prosecutor, Assam.
       Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 67 of 2013                                                     Page 1 of 4

3.         The prosecution case, in brief, is that on 15-10-2009, some
articles, like one battery container, power cable 20 Nos., one old
electrical DB box, one Panasonic secondary battery, some other
power cables, 2 Nos. battery (dry) and one water tap were stolen
from the Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat (hereinafter referred to
as ‘the AAU’). The accused-petitioner was found carrying the said
articles from inside the AAU campus. He was apprehended while
selling the said articles, to someone carrying a handcart. The
accused-petitioner was apprehended, along with two others, who
were tried by the Juvenile Justice Board.
4.         On receipt of the FIR, Jorhat Police Station registered a case
being No. 502/2009, under Section 379 of the IPC, investigated into it,
collected evidence and submitted charge-sheet under Section 381
of the IPC against the accused-petitioner and two juveniles in conflict
with law. At present, before us is the accused-petitioner, Biren Das
only, he being not a juvenile.
5.         The prosecution examined as many as 7 witnesses and the
defence examined none.
6.         The evidence of PW5 is that he is a Security Personnel in the
AAU and the accused-petitioner is a master roll worker. At about 9.00
am, on the date of occurrence, while he was performing his duty at
Gate No. 2, he saw the accused-petitioner carrying a gunny bag
and cartoon of clothes on a bicycle. While enquired from him, he
said that the articles were brought from his own house. This witness
noticed that the accused-petitioner sold those articles to one
handcart puller and observing that the articles belong to the
University, he handed over the accused with articles to the AAU
authorities. Later on, police came and seized the articles vide Ext. 3.
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 67 of 2013                                      Page 2 of 4

7.         Coming to the point of seizure, it appears that PW7 is a witness
to the seizure of the articles. In his evidence, he is found to have
stated that the articles were seized from the Security Personnel of
AAU. His evidence does not indicate that the articles were seized
from the possession of the accused-petitioner.
8.         Now, coming to the evidence of PW1, the informant, it is found
that he appears to have admitted specifically in his cross-
examination that he neither witnessed the commission of theft by the
accused-petitioner, nor he has any personal knowledge about the
same. He was only informed about the commission of theft by the
accused-petitioner by the Security Personnel, Sri Tarun Gogoi, who
caught the accused-petitioner red handed while committing the
theft. Sri Tarun Gogoi was examined as PW5, who is heard saying in his
evidence that while the accused-petitioner was carrying articles, he
was told by the accused-petitioner that the articles belonged to him,
whereas the accused-petitioner was found selling the same to a
handcart puller and then only he observed that the articles sold,
belonged to the AAU. Admittedly, there is no evidence on record to
suggest that there is a particular way of identifying the articles
belonging to the University.
9.         PW6, another Security Personnel of the AAU, of course,
corroborated the evidence of PW5 that the articles were brought
from inside the University campus by the accused-petitioner.
10.        PW4 has not stated anything about commission of theft. He is a
witness to the seizure of a bicycle vide Ext.2 and the bicycle is,
admittedly, not the subject-matter of theft in this case.
11.        PW3, admittedly, did not have any personal knowledge about
the occurrence.
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 67 of 2013                                      Page 3 of 4

12.        The above being the evidence on record, let us see whether to
bring home the guilt of the accused-petitioner, under Section 381
IPC, by the learned trial Court, which was upheld by the learned
appellate Court, is based on the evidence on record.
13.        To prove an offence, as in the instant case, the prosecution is
to prove that the accused-petitioner, intending to take dishonestly
any movable property out of the possession of any person without
that person’s consent, move that property in order to such taking.
14.        To prove an offence of theft, it is necessary to establish the
possession of the articles alleged to have been taken away, with
some one. There is absolutely no evidence to this effect. Inspite of the
fact that the evidence on record makes it appear that the articles
were brought out from inside the AAU campus, yet there is no
evidence to specifically identify and to ascertain from the concerned
authority of the AAU, that the articles belonged to the University.
15.        In view of above, elementary ingredient for an offence under
Section 381 IPC being not established. There is apparently no reason
to record conviction of the accused-petitioner. Therefore, the
judgment and order passed by the learned trial Court and affirmed
by the learned appellate Court is set aside.
16.        The appeal is allowed accordingly.
17.        Send down the LCR along with a copy of this judgment and
order.
                                                                 JUDGE
Paul
Crl. Rev. Pet. No. 67 of 2013                                     Page 4 of 4


