                                                                                         1
                  IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     CRL. REV. P NO.295 OF 2005
            SRI ANIL DAS
            SON OF SRI PHUKAN DAS
            RESIDENT OF VILLAGE – NA-HETIA
            P.S – JORHAT, P.O – NA-HETIA
            DISTRICT – JORHAT.
                                      -Versus-
                                                                     ……..petitioner
        1. STATE OF ASSAM
        2. SRI MITHARAM DAS
            SON OF LATE KEN DAS
            R/O VILLAGE – KOKILAMUKH,
            P.S – JORHAT,
            DISTRICT – JORHAT (ASSAM)
                                                                   ….. opposite parties
                                  B E F O R E
                HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
        For the appellant                           : Mr. TJ Mahanta
        For respondents                             : Mr. PS Lahkar (Addl. PP, Assam)
        Date of hearing                             : 31-07-2017
        Date of Judgment & Order                    : 31-07-2017
                              JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
                  Heard Mr. TJ Mahanta, learned senior counsel for the revision petitioner
        and Mr. PS Lahkar, learned Addl. PP, Assam.
Crl. Rev. P No.295/2005

                                                                                        2
        [2]        This revision is directed against the judgment and order dated 30-11-
        2004 passed by the learned Sessions Judge in Criminal Appeal No.9/2004
        upholding the conviction and sentence of the revision petitioner by the SDJM
        Jorhat in GR Case No.534/2003, whereby, the revision petitioner was convicted
        under Section 326 IPC and sentenced to imprisonment for 3 (three) years and
        fine of Rs.5000/- with default stipulation.
        [2]        The prosecution case as unfolded during the course of trial is that on
        the date of occurrence, a cow of the informant caused damage to the paddy
        seedling of the accused and therefore, the accused killed the said cow. When the
        injured Mangala Das, owner of the cow went to the accused to ask about the
        cow, the accused assaulted him with sharp weapon causing injury on his
        abdomen. The FIR was lodged by the elder brother of the victim, on the basis of
        which, police registered a case and on completion of investigation submitted
        charge-sheet against the revision petitioner and two others.
        [3]       Although the FIR was lodged against three of the accused persons and
        charges were also framed against all the three persons named in the FIR,
        eventually learned Trial Court convicted the present revision petitioner under
        Section 326 IPC and sentenced to imprisonment as indicated above.
        [4]       Aggrieved by the judgment of conviction and sentence, the revision
        petitioner filed an appeal before the learned Sessions Judge and the learned
        appellate Court also upheld the conviction and sentence. Hence this revision
        petition.
        [5]         Learned senior counsel Mr. TJ Mahanta has not contested the
        impugned judgment of conviction on merit. However, relying on the decision of
        the Apex Court in Narinder Singh and Others Vs. State of P unjab and Another
        reported in (2014) 6 SCC 4665 , Mr. Mahanta submits that the injured and the
        revision petitioner had compromised the matter as both the parties are close
        neighbours and also relations and therefore, prayed for quashing the proceeding
        on the basis of the compromise arrived at between the parties. The learned
        counsel, further, submits that both the parties have filed a compromise petition
Crl. Rev. P No.295/2005

                                                                                          3
        before the learned Sessions Judge stating that they have compromised the case
        and prayed for dealing them leniently, but the learned appellate Court did not
        consider the said application with the observation that he had no jurisdiction to
        consider such prayers.
        [5]       The Apex Court, in Narinder Singh and Others (supra) laid down the
        following principles as guidelines for giving adequate treatment to the settment
        between the parties in non compoundable case by exercising inherent power
        under section 482 Cr.P.C.
                       29.1.     P ow er conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be
                       distinguished from the pow er w hich lies in the Court to
                       com pound the offences under Section 320 of the Code. No
                       doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has
                       inherent pow er to quash the crim inal proceedings even in those
                       cases w hich are not com pounable, w here the parties have
                       settled the m atter betw een them selves. How ever, this pow er is
                       to be ex ercised sparingly and w ith caution.
                       29.2.     W hen the parties have reached the settlem ent and on
                       that basis petition for quashing the crim inal proceedings is filed,
                       the guiding factor in such cases w ould be to secure:
                       i) ends of justice, or
                       ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court.
                       w hile ex ercising the pow er the High Court is to form an opinion
                       on either of the aforesaid tw o objectives.
                       29.3.        Such a pow er is not to be ex ercised in those
                       prosecutions w hich involve heinous and serious offences of
                       m ental depravity or offences like nurder, rape, dacoity etc.
                       Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious
                       im pact on society. Sim ilarly, for the offences alleged to have
                       been com m itted under special stature lik e the P revention of
                       Corruption Act or the offences com m itted by public servants
                       w hile w orking in that capacity are not to be quashed m erely on
                       the basis of com prom ise betw een the victim and the offender.
                       29.4.     On the other hand, those crim inal cases having
                       overw helm ingly and predom inantly civil character, particularly
                       those arising out of com m ercial transactions or arising out of
                       m atrim onial relationship or fam ily disputes should be quashed
Crl. Rev. P No.295/2005

                                                                                           4
                       w hen the parties have resolved their entire disputes am ong
                       them selves.
                       29.5.     W hile ex ercising its pow ers, the High Court is to
                       ex am ine as to w hether the possibility of conviction is rem ote
                       and bleak and continuation of crim inal cases w ould put the
                       accused to great oppression and prejudice and ex trem e
                       injustice w ould be caused to him by not quashing the crim inal
                       cases.
                       29.6.     Offences under Section 307 I P C w ould fall in the
                       category of heinous and serious offences and therefore are to
                       be generally treated crim e against the society and not against
                       the individual alone. How ever, the High Court w ould not rest its
                       decision m erely because ther is am ention of Section 307 I P C in
                       the FI R or the charge is fram ed under this provision. I t w ould
                       be open to the High Court to ex am ine as to w hether
                       incorporation of Section 307 I P C is there for the sake of it or the
                       prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, w hich if proved,
                       w ould lead to proving the charge under Section 307 I P C. For
                       this purpose, it w ould be open to the High Court to go by the
                       nature of injury sustained, w hether such injury is inflicted on
                       the vital/ delegate parts of the body, nature of w eapons used,
                       etc. M edical report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim
                       can generally be the guiding facts. On the basis of this prim a
                       facie analysis, the High Court can ex am ine as to w hether there
                       is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction
                       are rem ote and bleak. I n the form er case it can refuse to accept
                       the settlem ent and quash the crim inal proceedings w hereas in
                       the latter case it w ould be perm issible for the High Court to
                       accept the plea com pounding the offence based on com plete
                       settlem ent betw een the parties. At ths stage, the Court can also
                       be sw ayed by the fact that the settlem ent betw een the parties
                       is going to result in harm ony betw een them w hich m ay im prove
                       their future relationship.
        [6]       I have gone through the materials and evidences on record.             The
        evidence brought on record shows that there was no pre determination to cause
        the injury and the occurrence happened because of the dispute between the
        parties leading to killing of a cow.      The offence does not carry any moral
        turpitude and the accused is also not a habitual criminal. According to learned
        counsel the accused and injured are neighbourers and they are living peacefully
        after having compromised the case. Therefore, the result of the compromise is
Crl. Rev. P No.295/2005

                                                                                       5
        expected to bring peace and harmony between the parties who are close
        neighbourers.    Thus considering the totality of the matter and keeping in view
        the ratio laid down by the Apex Court in Narinder Singh and Others (supra) , I
        am of the view, that to secure ends of justice, compromise arrived at between
        the parties deserved to be accepted.
         [7]    Accordingly, I do hereby quash the proceeding in GR Case No.534/2003
        in the exercise of power under Section 482 Cr.P.C and set-aside the conviction
        and sentence of the accused.
        [8]       The revision petition stands disposed of.
        [9]        Send back the LCR.
                                                                              JUDGE
        Smita
Crl. Rev. P No.295/2005


