                                              Page No.1
                       IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
    (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                    CRP 131 OF 2017
ORION INDIA (PVT.) LTD.
A COMPANY REGISTERED UNDER THE INDIAN COMPANIES ACT, 1956 WITH ITS REGISTERED OFFICE AT 205,
2ND FLOOR, ORION TOWER, G S ROAD, GUWAHATI-781005, REPRESENTED BY ITS MANAGING DIRECTOR, DR
BIMAL PHUKAN
                                                                     - Appellant/Claimant
                                       Versus-
SRI MUKUL SHARMA
S/O- LATE KHARGESWAR SARMA,
 R/O- CHOWKDINGHEE WEST, DIBRUGARH, ASSAM
AT PRESENT RESIDING AT GS ROAD, GUWAHATI- 781005
                                               - Respondent/Opposite party
                                            BEFORE
                     HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
         Advocate for the appellant    Mr. D K Misha, senior counsel
                                        Mr. B Prasad
         Advocate for the respondent Mr. P Sharma, B D Deka.
         Date of hearing & Judgment: 17th July, 2017
                                 JUDGMENT AND ORDER
                                           (ORAL)
             Heard Mr. D K Misha, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. B Prasad, learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner. Also heard Mr. P Sharma, learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the respondent.
2.       The present petitioner is the defendant in Title Suit No.195/1998 filed by the
plaintiff/respondent. The plaintiff/respondent filed Title Suit No.195/1998 in the court of Civil
Judge No.1, Guwahati against the present defendant/ petitioner for specific performance of
the contract entered by them vide agreement dated 25.08.1992 (exhibit-1). In the said suit
following were the reliefs prayed for by the plaintiff/respondent:
CRP 131 of 2017

                                                   Page No.2
         “It is, therefore, prayed that your honour may be pleased to pass a decree for:
         i. Specific performance of the contract of Sub-Clause No. i, ii and iii of Clause No.1 of
         agreement bearing deed no.5581 dt. 25.2.92 by directing the defendant to allot the
         balance built up area of 4623.55 Sq.Ft. on the ground floor and first floor and
         remaining balance area in other floors to the plaintiff in the north block building
         known as “Orion Tower” as described in the schedule below.
         iii. directing defendant to deliver possession and execute necessary deeds to
         effectuate allotment as per the claim made by the plaintiff.
         iv. Rs.3,00,000/- towards principal amount and Rs.1,50,000.00 towards interest @
         12% per annum from July, 1994 to till 22.09.98.
         v. Further interest on the aforesaid amount of Rs.4,50,000.00 @ 12% P.A. from the
         date of filing of the suit till realization.
         vi. Rs.20,00,000/- towards compensation for loss of income due to non-fulfillment of
         the agreement.
         vii. Permanent injunction restraining the defendant, its Directors, representatives and
         employees etc. from raising further construction on the land as described in the
         schedule below and from selling or renting out any apartments, roofs, floors etc. till
         fulfillment of sub-clauses no.I, ii and iii of Clause No.1 of the agreement
         viii. Cost of the suit.
         ix. Any other relief or reliefs to which the plaintiff is found entitled under the Law and
         Equity.”
3.       The trial court vide judgment and decree dated 26.09.2005 partially decreed the suit.
The said judgment and decree of the trial court was challenged by the defendant/petitioner
in RFA 38/2006 in the High Court. The said First Appellate Court vide judgment and decree
dated 01.09.2015 set aside the judgment and decree passed by the trial court and remanded
the same to the trial court to decide an issue framed by it and pass the judgment afresh. In
the said First Appeal, this Court held that the plaintiff/respondent is entitled to get 12,172
square feet built up area including the common area as per agreement dated 25.08.1992. It
was further held that the plaintiff/respondent was not entitled for the specific performance of
Clause 1(i), (ii), (iii) of the agreement dated 25.08.1992. After holding as such, this Court as
First Appellate Court remanded the matter to the trial court to decide as to what extent of
total built up area including common area was handed over to the plaintiff/respondent and
how much balance built up area including common area is to be handed over to the
plaintiff/respondent on the 8th floor of the building.
CRP 131 of 2017

                                              Page No.3
4.       The plaintiff/respondent filed an appeal before the Hon’ble Apex Court against the
aforesaid judgment and order passed in first appeal. The Hon’ble Apex Court vide judgment
dated 10.05.2016 interfered with the judgment and decree of this Court only with regard to
the finding of the built up area. The Hon’ble Apex Court on the basis of exhibit-3 and 4
(letters written by the defendant/petitioner dated 09.03.1998 and 16.03.1998 to the
plaintiff/respondent) held that the defendant/petitioner cannot resile after accepting the
definition of the built up area as mentioned in the said exhibits-3 and 4. The Hon’ble Apex
Court thereafter remanded the matter to the trial court to make the calculation of
entitlement by plaintiff/respondent in terms of the judgment passed by the said Hon’ble
Apex Court.
5.       The plaintiff/respondent vide petition No.3547 dated 21.07.2016 filed an application
before the trial court to appoint a commission to ascertain and recalculate the complete
“built up area” of the “Orion tower” in pursuant to the order dated 10.05.2016 in SLP(C)
No.32544 of 2015 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. It is pertinent to mention here that
in the said petition, the plaintiff/respondent sought for some other reliefs like verification of
the undertakings filed by the tenants under the petitioner/defendant as per direction dated
29.11.2001 in Civil Appeal No.8172/2001 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Against the
said petition, the present defendant/petitioner raised its objection and suggested the trial
court to calculate the built up areas as follows:
    “17. The defendant submits that the ‘built up areas’ can be calculated by this Hon’ble
    Court on the basis of the above facts and circumstances, and determined as below:
         (i)    To calculate the ‘built up area’ to be allotted to the plaintiff, based on the
                definition of
                ‘built up area’ given by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that the ‘built up area’
                does not include common areas such as lift well, stairs, lobby, corridor, duct
                etc., by using the Drg. Nos. GBA/891/03A, GBA/891/04A & GBA/891/05A by
                M/S Gautam Baruwa & Associates (Exhibit-2).
         (ii)   To consider the ‘built up area’ already handed over to the plaintiff, vide
                Exhibit 1 at Annexure E, on the First Mezzanine and Third Floors of the
                building, constructed as per the drawing prepared by M/S Gautam Baruwa &
CRP 131 of 2017

                                                 Page No.4
                  Associates and approved by the Guwahati Metropolitan Development
                  Authority.
        (iii)     To calculate from the above, the balance ‘built up area’ to be handed over to
                  the plaintiff on the 8th Floor of the building.
                  18. In view of what has been stated above, this Hon’ble Court may kindly
                  peruse the judgment and order dated 01.09.2015 passed by the Hon’ble High
                  Court in RFA 38/06 and the judgment and order dated 10.05.16 passed by the
                  Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Civil Appeal No.4997/16 and may be pleased to
                  pass necessary orders as per the mandate of the said judgments.”
6.      The learned trial court vide its order dated 14.09.2016 passed in Title Suit
No.195/1998 allowed the said petition No.3547 dated 21.07.2016 in the following manner:
        “ Under the above circumstances considering the prayer made through petition
        No.3547/2016 praying for appointing of commissioner in order to calculate/measure
        the built up area, already handed over to the plaintiff and the position mentioned
        through the objection that commission shall be appointed only for the purpose
        indicated in the judgment and order dated 01.09.2015 passed by the Hon’ble High
        Court and also for compliance of the judgment dated 10.05.2016 passed by the
        Hon’ble Supreme Court and no other ground can be urged for appointment of the
        commission, this Court is with the opinion that in order to dispose the suit after
        calculating of the built up area as per direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court,
        appointing of commissioner to calculate the built up area (excluding common area
        such as corridor etc.) already handed over to the plaintiff will positively help proper
        adjudication of the matter in the line of the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
        Both the learned Advocate on behalf of the both sides suggested the people having
        proper experience in this line such as Chief Engineer, GMDA or Chief Engineer, GMC
        may be directed to cause measurement of the built up area.
                  Under the above circumstances at this stage it is directed that the Chief
        Engineer, Guwahati Metropolitan Development Authority will cause measurement of
        the built up area handed over to the plaintiff by engaging any technical person not
        below the rank of Assistant Engineer and to forward a report within the next fixed
        date of this case. The Chief Engineer Guwahati Metropolitan Development Authority
        is to forward the report touching the following point:
              (a) What area has been handed over to the plaintiff in the schedule property
                  excluding all common space.
                  Fixing 01.11.2016 for forwarding report and further order.”
7.      Thereafter the present defendant/petitioner filed an application under Section 151
CPC for modification/alteration/addition of direction dated 14.09.2016 for calculation of built
up area to be given to the plaintiff/respondent. In the said petition, the defendant/petitioner
sought for the following:
CRP 131 of 2017

                                                  Page No.5
    “                               Prayer
        (a) An order modifying the order dated 14.09.2016 passed by this Hon’ble Court to
             the extent of issuing the following two further directions;
             (i) Direction to the Chief Engineer of GMDA to also calculate the ‘built-up’ area
                        (as laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court) to which the non-applicant
                        (plaintiff) is entitled to as per Clause 1 of the written agreement
                        dt.25.8.92 between the parties, and
             (ii) Direction permitting the parties to this litigation to be present at the time of
                        measurements and calculations of ‘built-up’ area (as laid down by the
                        Hon’ble Supreme Court )to be made by the expert(s).
                        And
             (iii) Such further or other order or orders as deemed fit by this Hon’ble Court in
                        the interest of justice.
                        AND FOR THIS THE APPLICANT (DEFENDANT) AS IN DUTY BOUND
                        SHALL EVR PRAY.”
8.      The aforesaid petition which was registered as Petition No.5271/2016 was disposed
of vide order dated 15.03.2017 passed in MC No.666/2016 arising out of Title Suit
No.195/1998 holding as follows:
    “ I have perused the direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and found that the Hon’ble
    Supreme Court has set aside the judgment of the Hon’ble High Court with regard to
    finding of the built up area and directed this court to make calculations. I have
    considered the prayer in relation with this petition and found the followings:
        (i)        That the authority has forwarded report and at this stage, in presence of
                   other materials on record, in opinion of court there is no necessity to re-
                   measure the premises to calculate the built up area, particularly as per the
                   written agreement.
        (ii)       The Hon’ble Supreme Court directed this court only to make calculation in
                   terms of the judgment and to dispose the suit expeditiously and after the
                   report forwarded by the GMDA and in presence of the various exhibits, this
                   court is with the opinion that if the prayer is allowed, which is not necessary,
                   will only cause delay.
                   Considering all aspects, this court is not inclined to allow the prayer which
                   accordingly is rejected.
                   This misc. case is disposed of.”
9.      Being aggrieved, the petitioner/defendant has preferred this Revision petition
challenging the said order dated 15.03.2017 passed in MC No.666/2016.
10.     Mr. Mishra, the learned Senior counsel submits that there is clear finding by the High
Court that the entitlement of the plaintiff/respondent calculated as 12,172 square feet
includes common area. The said finding has not been interfered by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court. Therefore, it is necessary to calculate the entitlement of the plaintiff to the “built up
CRP 131 of 2017

                                             Page No.6
area” excluding common area in terms of the judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court and only
after that it would be relevant to find out how much “built-up area” without common area
had already been handed over to the plaintiff/respondent and what would be the balance
“built up area” to be handed over to the plaintiff/respondent.
11.      Mr. Mishra further submits that the agreement i.e. exhibit-1 was executed in the year
1992 and after five years of the said execution of exhibit-1, vide exhibit-H (i.e. the letter
dated 15.09.1997 written by the plaintiff/respondent to defendant/petitioner admitting
inclusion of common area in total entitlement of 12,127 square feet) understood that the
built up area include common area. Subsequently, the plaintiff/respondent disputed the said
position, and the present defendant/petitioner accepted and agreed to the meaning that
“built up area” does not include common area (vide Ext 3 and 4). The Hon’ble Apex Court
clearly held that the “built up area” would mean what is understood as per exhibit-3 and 4
inasmuch as the defendant/petitioner accepted the said definition as raised by the
plaintiff/respondent. Under such circumstances, the “built up area” so entitled for by the
plaintiff/respondent is supposed to be changed, inasmuch as, on the earlier occasion the
plaintiff/respondent understood the meaning of “built up area” to include common area but
subsequently the same was changed to which the defendant/petitioner accepted such
change in the meaning of the “built up area”. So it is quite natural that as per the said
definition as held by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the total entitlement would automatically be
changed inasmuch as the said entitlement would be exclusive of the common area. So Mr.
Mishra submits that the said proposition was urged before the trial court by filing the said
application under Section 151 of the CPC, which the court below ought to have accepted and
also a writ ought to have been issued to the commission to calculate the entitlement by the
plaintiff/respondent as a whole, the area, exclusively, without including any common area.
Having not done so, from the order impugned in this revision petition it is apparent that the
CRP 131 of 2017

                                             Page No.7
court below keeping constant the total entitlement of “built up area” as per Ext-1, is going to
substract the common area already accepted by the plaintiff/respondent vide Exhibit-H and
direct the defendant/petitioner to allot the total entitlement of 12,127 square feet excluding
the common area. Hence, apprehending such action which is beyond the jurisdiction of the
court below, the petitioner has filed the petition for proper direction from this court.
12.      Mr. Sharma, appearing on behalf of the respondent submits that the present
application under Article 227 is not at all maintainable. He submits that the order dated
14.09.2016 on the basis of which the trial court was satisfied to issue the commission,
remained unchallenged and the same has attained its finality. On the other hand, the
defendant/petitioner in the guise of an application under Section 151 CPC has, in fact sought
for review of the order dated 14.09.2016 which was dismissed by the trial court. Under such
circumstances, there is no point in exercising the jurisdiction under Article 227 by this Court.
It is further submitted that while disposing of the said application under Section 151 CPC
vide order dated 15.03.2017, the learned court below has expressed its satisfaction and
came to the finding that at the stage of the suit, and with other materials on record, there is
no necessity to re-measure the premises to calculate the “built up area” entitled by the
plaintiff/respondent other than the one stipulated in the written agreement. Once the court
below has applied its discretion, this Court cannot enforce any other discretion by this court
to act in a manner other than the one, opted by the trial court invoking jurisdiction under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India. There is no perversity, no failure of jurisdiction on
the part of the court below while passing the impugned order. So, Mr. Sharma submits that
there is no necessity for any interference by this Court so far the impugned order is
concerned.
13.      Mr. Sharma further submits that the entitlement of the plaintiff/respondent under no
circumstances could be changed, as the Hon’ble Apex Court has never gave its finding to
CRP 131 of 2017

                                              Page No.8
that effect nor the High Court while deciding the First appeal also changed the said
entitlement. As such, he submits that there is no force in the submission of Mr. Mishra that if
the common area is to be excluded from the entitlement of the plaintiff, then the area
without such common area is to be re-calculated and the entitlement by the plaintiff is also
to be re-calculated. Finally, Mr. Sharma submits that the revision petition is liable to be
dismissed.
1 4.    Mr. Mishra, in response to the submission that the jurisdiction under Article 227
cannot be invoked, submits that it can safely be concluded that while a court has misdirected
in its understanding and heading towards an act and/or action not permitted by the
jurisdiction it is confined, then this Court under Article 227 can correct such mis-direction. In
support of his submission, Mr. Mishra relies para 38(4) and (6) of Surya Dev Rai Vs. Ram
Chander Rai reported in (2003) 6 SCC 675 as follows:
        "38.(4) Supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution is exercised for
        keeping the subordinate courts within the bounds of their jurisdiction. When a
        subordinate court has assumed a jurisdiction which it does not have or has failed to
        exercise a jurisdiction which it does have or the jurisdiction though available is being
        exercised by the court in a manner not permitted by law and failure of justice or
        grave injustice has occasioned thereby, the High Court may step in to exercise its
        supervisory jurisdiction.
        (6) A patent error is an error which is self-evident i.e. which can be perceived or
        demonstrated without involving not any lengthy or complicated argument or a long-
        drawn process of reasoning. Where two inferences are reasonably possible and the
        subordinate court has chosen to take one view, the error cannot be called gross or
        patent.”
 15.    Mr. Mishra also relies para 27 of Sameer Singh Vs Abdul Rab reported in (2015) 1
SCC 379 as follows:
        “27. Whether the executing court, in the obtaining circumstances, has correctly
        expressed the view that it has become functus officio or not and thereby it has
        jurisdiction or not, fundamentally pertains to rectification of a jurisdictional error. It is
        so as there has been no adjudication. If a subordinate court exercises its jurisdiction
        not vested in it by law or fails to exercise the jurisdiction so vested, the said order
        under Section 115 of the Code is revisable as has been held in Joy Chand Lal Babu v.
        Kamalaksha Chaudhury and others[9]. The same principle has been reiterated in
        Keshardeo Chamria v. Radha Kissan Chamria and others[10] and Chaube Jagdish
CRP 131 of 2017

                                              Page No.9
        Prasad and another v. Ganga Prasad Chaturvedi[11]. Needless to emphasise, the said
        principle is well-settled. After the amendment ofSection 115, C.P.C. w.e.f. 1.7.2002,
        the said power is exercised underArticle 227 of the Constitution as per the principle
        laid down in Surya Dev Rai (supra). Had the executing court apart from expressing
        the view that it had become functus officio had adjudicated the issues on merits, the
        question would have been different, for in that event there would have been an
        adjudication.”
         Thus, reiterating his submission, Mr. Mishra submits that there is a strong
apprehension on the part of the petitioner that the learned trial Court is all set to act in
violation of the terms of the judgment passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and as such
this Court should interfere.
16.     Mr. Sharma objecting to the submission of Mr. Mishra, submits that this Court cannot
invoke the power of superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, merely,
on the drop of a hat, and in support of his submission relies Shalini Shyam Shetty and
Another Vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil reported in (2010) 8 SCC 329.
17.     Considered the submissions of the learned counsel. From the submissions, one thing
is clear that the dispute between the parties as of now, is restricted with regard to the
entitlement of the plaintiff/respondent so far 12,172 square feet is concerned, excluding the
common area. On one hand, the plaintiff/respondent submits that he is entitled as per the
terms made and accepted by the defendant/petitioner of Ext-1, Agreement which comes to
12,172 square feet built up area, but excluding the common area. On the other hand, the
defendant/petitioner submits that as there is a change in the understanding of the term
“built up area” as such the said entitlement of 12,172 square feet would change, inasmuch
as, admittedly the plaintiff/respondent vide exhibit-H specifically admitted that the said
entitlement of 12,172 square feet includes common area. Now owing to the change in the
situation the entitlement of the plaintiff/respondent would accordingly be the one after
substracting the common area included therein the total entitlement of 12,172 square feet of
built up area.
CRP 131 of 2017

                                             Page No.10
18.      This Court, is exercising the jurisdiction under Article 227 examining as to the
correctness of the order impugned in this petition i.e. the order dated 15.03.2017 as per the
jurisdiction conferred on it. This court is not sitting as the appellate court examining the
findings of the court below as per the claim of the parties to the suit. The Hon’ble Apex
Court has remanded the matter by setting aside the judgment of the High Court with regard
to the finding on the “built up area” and restoring the one passed by the trial court. This
indicates that the trial court is to decide the entitlement as per the definition of “built up
area” as held by the Hon’ble Apex Court. In such a situation, the opinion of this Court is that
the trial court while passing the impugned order dated 15.03.2017 was satisfied with the
materials on record and decided to adjudicate the dispute between the parties as per the
guideline laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court. The said discretion, in the opinion of this
Court ought not to be interfered, inasmuch as, if the defendant/petitioner find itself
aggrieved by any of the findings given by the trial court, that can be raised in the higher
forum as prescribed by law, which is always open to the petitioner.
19.      In the opinion of this Court, the passing of the said impugned order cannot be
termed to be failure on the part of the trial court to exercise the jurisdiction so circumscribed
by the Hon’ble Apex Court. It cannot be held that the trial court has exceeded its jurisdiction,
inasmuch as, the trial court has not yet given its finding with regard to the entitlement of the
plaintiff/respondent. The trial court had two options before it-(i) to go ahead within the
measurement already carried out by the commissioner as per order dated 14.9.2016 or (ii)
to consider the modification put forward by the defendant/petitioner through the petition
filed u/s 151 CPC. The trial court opted for the former option discarding the suggestion for
modification of order dated 14.9.2016 with a reasoning, that there are materials on record to
arrive at a finding as per the direction of the Hon’ble Apex Court. Such option preferred by
the trial court, as referred in the impugned order dated 15.03.2017 cannot be considered to
CRP 131 of 2017

                                              Page No.11
be a gross/patent error for interference by this court under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India, if considered in the light of the ratio laid down in Surya Devi Rai’s case (supra). The
submission of Mr. Mishra, that this Court should invoke Article 227 of the Constitution of
India on the basis of the apprehension that the trial court is going to exceed its jurisdiction
by declaring the entitlement of the plaintiff/respondent in a manner which ought not to have
been exercised by the trial court has not yet happened in reality. The defendant/petitioner
has its proper forum to agitate, in the event of such wrong exercise of jurisdiction even after
a finding is given by the trial court as per the discretion so opted by it. So there is no merit
in this petition and this Court refrains from interfering with the impugned order invoking
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
20.     Accordingly, this court dismiss this petition.
21.     Interim order passed earlier stands vacated.
                                                                                     JUDGE
Rakhi
CRP 131 of 2017


