                    THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
           CIVIL REVISION PETITON No. 193 OF 2015
                     Sri Saurav Sarmah Rajguru          … Petitioner
                          -Versus-
                     Sri Bipul Bhusan Borthakur       ..Respondent
                                BEFORE
          HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
Advocates for the Petitioner       : Mr. TJ Mahanta, Sr. Adv.,
                                     Ms. P. Bhattacharjee,
                                     Mr. B. Bora, Advs.
Advocates for the Respondents      : Mr. AK Purkayastha,
                                     Mr. BK Bhattacharya,
                                     Dr. R. Sarmah,
                                     Ms. P. Saha, Advs.
Date of hearing &
judgment                           : 21.06.2017
                   JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. T.J. Mahanta, the learned Senior Counsel
assisted by Mrs. P. Bhattacharya and Mr. B. Bora, appearing for the
petitioner and Mr. AK Purkayastha, the learned counsel appearing for
the respondent.
2)         By this application under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India, the petitioner has challenged the order dated 02.04.2015
CRP No. 193/2015                                         Page 1 of 6

passed by the learned Civil Judge, Jorhat in Money Suit No. 25/2015,
thereby rejecting the prayer made in petition no. 523/15 dated
02.03.2015, to send cheque to a handwriting expert to ascertain
whether the signature appearing as ‘Bipul Bhushan Borthakur’ in
cheque No. 835528 was of the plaintiff or not.
3)          With the consent of the learned counsels appearing for
the parties, the matter was taken up for hearing at the ‘admission’
stage itself in view of the short point involved in the case.
4)          The short argument advanced by the learned Senior
counsel for the petitioner is that in the suit, the respondent/plaintiff
claimed non-payment of money taken by the petitioner by way of a
loan. The defence of the petitioner/ defendant in the written
statement was that the payment was duly made and reference was
made to payment of a sum of Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two lakh fifty
thousand only) by way of cheque. In due course, the respondent/
plaintiff had adduced his evidence and during his cross examination
the cheque in reference was produced and exhibited by a Bank
official and marked as Ext.C. It is submitted that the respondent/
plaintiff had admitted all payments, except the payment made vide
cheque in reference.
5)          The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner submits that
as the respondent/plaintiff had denied his signature, which was
exhibited as Ext.C(1), the petitioner/ defendant had filed the said
petition for forensic examination of the disputed signature. It is
submitted that the initial onus to prove the payment was on the
petitioner/ defendant and only after he discharges his burden, the
CRP No. 193/2015                                           Page 2 of 6

burden of proof shall shift on the respondent/ plaintiff. It is also
submitted that the disputed signature could be sent to the expert for
his opinion as to handwriting at any stage of the suit as it would
enable the learned Trial Court to arrive at a just and proper decision.
It is also submitted that the delay in making such an application
and/or delay that may be caused in the disposal of the suit cannot
be a ground to deny the bona fide prayer by the petitioner/
defendant to obtain an opinion on the genuineness of the signature
[Ext.C(1)] appearing on the body of the cheque (Ext.C). In support
of his contentions, the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner/
defendant has relied on the decision of this court, rendered in the
case of Pawan Kumar Sethia Vs. Sakala Devi Thakur, reported in
(2015) 2 GLT 230.
6)         The learned Counsel for the respondent has vehemently
opposed this application. He has mainly urged two grounds, firstly,
that the application made at a belated stage ought not to be
encouraged as the evidence of the parties is already over and, as
such, the opinion of the handwriting expert at such a belated stage
may cause prejudice the respondent/ plaintiff, and secondly, on the
ground that if at this stage, when the case is ripe for final argument,
the documents are send for forensic examination by expert, there
would be further inordinate delay in the disposal of the suit. The
learned counsel for the respondent/ plaintiff, therefore, prays for
dismissal of this revision application with cost.
7)         In this case, there is a serious dispute between the parties
on whether or not the petitioner/ defendant paid a sum of
Rs.2,50,000/- to the respondent/ plaintiff by way of cheque No.
CRP No. 193/2015                                          Page 3 of 6

835528 dated 29.04.2008, drawn on Federal Bank, Jorhat Branch, in
the name of Bipul Bhushan Borthakur. Therefore, in the opinion of
this Court, if it can be ascertained about the genuineness of the
signature marked as Exhibit-C(1) through opinion of a handwriting
expert, it would definitely assist the learned Trial Court to arrive at a
just and fair decision.
8)          In so far as the issue of delay in filing the application for
sending the disputed signature to handwriting expert is concerned,
there appears to be no delay. Only when the Exhibit-C(1) was
introduced by DW-2 and the same was denied by the respondent/
plaintiff, only then without any delay, the petitioner/ defendant had
moved the learned court below for examination of disputed
document by handwriting expert. Therefore, this Court does not find
any infirmity in the impugned order in this ground.
9)          In so far as the issue of delay that may be caused in the
disposal of the suit, if the disputed document and/or disputed
signature is sent for examination by expert, the said issue has been
put to rest by this Court in the case of Pawan Kumar Sethia (supra).
The relevant paragraphs 15 and 16 thereof is quoted below:-
                   “15. According to me, the concerned exhibit can
                   help the Court to decide on a relevant aspect of the
                   case by weighing the evidence of the handwriting
                   expert and therefore the Court’s non-consideration
                   of the relevancy aspect of the Exbt.A(1) in my
                   opinion, has resulted in a jurisdictional error.
CRP No. 193/2015                                            Page 4 of 6

                   16. Moreover to ascertain the correct facts, the
                   Court can always invoke Section 151 of CPC at any
                   stage of the proceeding and the factum of delay in
                   disposal of the suit, could not have been made the
                   basis for rejection of the defendants’ application.”
10)        Thus, in view of the above, this Court also does not find
that delay in disposal of the suit can come in the way of the court to
take recourse of obtaining expert opinion, because the ultimate goal
of the Court is to arrive at a truth and therefore, the same is for the
ends of justice under the facts of this case in hand.
11)        It is also seen that the learned court below has not
touched upon the relevancy of such expert opinion on the evidence
already on record, which is the law laid down in the case of Pawan
Kumar Sethia (supra), which was the ground on which this Court had
interfered with the order impugned therein.
12)        For the foregoing discussions, the impugned order is not
found to be sustainable and it is found to suffer from jurisdictional
error as the said learned court did not consider the settled position of
law as laid down by this Court in the case of Pawan Kumar Sethia
(supra). Hence, the said order dated 02.04.2015, passed by the
learned Civil Judge, Jorhat in Money Suit No. 25/2015 is set aside.
The petition No. 523/15 dated 02.03.2015 to refer the Ext.C to
handwriting expert for ascertaining whether the signature made in
Ext. C(1) is that of the respondent/ plaintiff, namely, Bipul Bhushan
Borthakur, or not, stands allowed.
CRP No. 193/2015                                           Page 5 of 6

13)        The learned Civil Judge, Jorhat may pass consequential
orders required for the same. It is also provided that the said learned
court should ensure that such report is secured at the earliest so that
undue delay can be avoided.
14)        This application is allowed on the terms as indicated
above. The parties are left to bear their own cost.
15)        The parties are directed to appear before the Court of
learned Civil Judge, Jorhat on 10.07.2017 and produce a certified
copy of this order and seek further instructions from the said learned
Court.
                                                               JUDGE
MKS
CRP No. 193/2015                                         Page 6 of 6


