                        THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
        (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                          ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                              CRP 124 of 2014
              HIRA HUSSAIN & 2 ORS.                    … Petitioners
                                   -Versus-
              LAILA KHATOON & ANR.                     … Respondents
                                   BEFORE
              HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
       Advocates for the Petitioners     : Mr. G.N. Sahewalla, Sr. Adv.
                                         : Mr. J. Roy, Mr. R. Hazarika,
                                         : Mr. C. Chakraborty, Mr. A. Dhar
                                         : Mr. A. Chetia, Ms. B. Sarma,
                                         : Ms. D. Swami.
       Advocates for the Respondents     : Mr. D. Das, Sr. Adv.
                                         : Mr. Mr. R. Singha.
       Date of hearing                   : 04.05.17, 30.05.17, 15.06.17.
       Date of judgment and order        : 19.06.2017.
                      JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
           Heard Mr. G.N. Sahewalla, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. A.
Sahewalla, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners. Also heard Mr.
Diganta Das, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. R. Singha, learned
counsel appearing for the respondents.
2)         The challenge in this application under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India is the order dated 10.03.2014 passed by the learned
CRP 124/2014                                                      Page 1 of 19

Munsiff No. 1, Jorhat in Misc.(J) Case No. 46/2009, arising out of T.Ex. Case
No. 19/2004. By the said order the application filed by the respondents under
the provisions of Section 47 read with Section 151 of the Civil Procedure Code
(CPC for short), wherein it was prayed for restoration of the possession of the
Schedule-B property to the respondents by evicting the petitioners was
allowed.
3)         This case has seen third round of litigation and, as such, only the
facts and events relevant to the present application only is being put on
record and this judgment is not burdened with other facts not necessary to be
dealt herein.
4)         It would be sufficient to mention that on 25.02.1980, one Smt.
Salima Khatoon (since deceased), as plaintiff, had instituted T.S. No. 63/1980
which was tried in the court of Munsiff, Jorhat. There were nine defendants in
the suit, namely, Tamizuddin Munshi, Syed Jalabuddin Ahmed, Syed
Sahebjada Ahmed, Syed Mstan Ahmed, Sri Nirmal Ch. Ghosh, Sri Subhash Ch.
Sarkar, Sri Amit Sarkar, Syed Noor Ahmed @ Maju, and Smti. Khairunnissa.
The suit was for declaration of right, title, interest and possession in respect
of premises described in Schedule-A of the plaint, which consisted of 3 rooms
within a definite four boundary.
5)         Late Sagra Khatoon was the mother of the plaintiff. She died on
06.01.1980 leaving behind the plaintiff (daughter), Defendant No.1 (son),
Defendant No.8 (son), defendant No.9 (daughter), and defendants No.2, 3
and 4 (grandsons, being sons of defendant No.1). During her lifetime, Sagra
Khatoon had gifted away the three suit rooms along with land to the plaintiff
by executing a Gift Deed which was registered as Deed No. 3758 dated
15.09.1979. The plaintiff had accepted the gift and got the possession.
CRP 124/2014                                                       Page 2 of 19

6)          The said T.S. No. 63/1980 was decreed on 18.08.1982 in favour of
the plaintiff allowing the eviction of defendants No. 1 to 4 from the suit
premises described in Schedule-A. The petitioners herein are the substituted
legal representatives of the plaintiff in the suit. As per the decree drawn up in
T.A. No. 63/1980, the description of Schedule-A is as follows:
            “Southern three rooms of pacca C.I. sheet roofing house with front
            and back verandah. No. 1 Room is the southern most room rented
            out to Deft. 7 Amrit Sarkar where Sahitya Bhavan located. No. 2
            Room is the 2nd room from the south rented out to deft. No. 5
            Nirmal Ch. Ghosh, where quick photo house located. No. 3 room
            from the south rented out to deft. No. 6 where Subhas Cycle Mart
            located. These three room are bounded on the South- Masjid’s
            house North- Other rooms of the house possessed by Syed Saidulla
            Khan where Rajasthan Tailor locates at present. East- Land covered
            by Dag No. (old) 101 (new) 687. West- Mariani- Jorhat PWD Road.
            These three rooms are on Dag No. 683, 686 at Mariani Town Katani
            Mouza.”
7)          The defendant No. 1 therein, namely, Tamizuddin Ahmed preferred
an appeal said decree dated 18.08.1982. The said appeal was numbered as
T.A. No. 53/1982 and the same was dismissed by the learned Civil Judge,
Jorhat by judgment and decree dated 02.04.1985. The defendant No. 1,
namely, Tamizuddin Ahmed preferred a Second Appeal before this Court,
which was numbered as S.A. No. 100/1985. During the pendency of the said
appeal, the defendant No. 1, namely, Tamizuddin Ahmed had died and he
was substituted by the present respondents, namely, Laila Khatun and
Mehtab Ahmed. The said S.A. No. 100/1985 was also dismissed by this Court
vide judgment dated 07.08.1992. This was the end of the first round of
litigation.
CRP 124/2014                                                        Page 3 of 19

8)         The petitioners filed an application in order to execute the decree,
which was registered as T. Ex. Case No. 19/2004.
9)         In the said execution proceedings, the present respondents filed a
petition under Section 47 of the CPC, which was dismissed by the learned
Executing Court by its order dated 15.10.2004. Challenging the validity of the
said order dated 15.10.2004, the respondents filed a revision petition before
this Court, which was registered as CRP No. 243/2004. The said revision was
also dismissed by judgment and order dated 10.12.2004. This ended the
second round of litigation.
10)        The said decree dated 18.08.1982 passed in TS No. 63/1980 was
closed by order dated 12.01.2005, recording the full and final satisfaction of
the decree on the basis of report given by the Civil Nazir and receipt of
delivery of possession by the decree holders.
11)        Thereafter, the respondents filed an application under Section 144
read with Section 151 of the CPC, stating therein that the Civil Nazir had
handed over a fourth room as well as a two storied RCC building and, as
such, there was an excess execution beyond the decree and therefore, it was
prayed for restitution of the properties which were given in excess of the
decree. The said application was registered as Misc. (J) Case No. 2/2005 and
the same was dismissed by order dated 12.04.2005, inter-alia, holding that
the decree was legally and lawfully executed by the Civil Nazir with the help
and assistance of the concerned Lat Mandal and Police in presence of the
petitioners therein and other persons by taking all care to give possession as
per four boundary shown in the schedule of warrant issued to the Bailiff. It is
further mentioned therein that moreover, the petitioners in their application
have claimed compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- without specifically mentioning
against whom the compensation should be ordered. This lay to rest the third
round of litigation.
CRP 124/2014                                                      Page 4 of 19

12)         After about two years, the respondent herein filed T.S. No.
91/2007, which was tried in the Court of learned Munsiff No. 2, Jorhat. In the
said suit, the respondents herein had prayed for declaration of right, title,
interest and recovery of khas possession of the two storied building. The said
suit was dismissed by the learned Munsiff No. 2, Jorhat vide judgment and
decree dated 27.01.2009. The respondent herein preferred an appeal, which
was registered as T.A. No. 9/2009. The learned Single Judge, Jorhat
dismissed the said appeal by its judgment and decree dated 30.05.2009. This
ended the fourth round of litigation.
13)         Thereafter, the present respondents started the fifth round of
litigation by filing a second application under Section 47 read with Section 151
of the CPC in connection with T.A. No. 19/2004, which was numbered as
Misc.(J) Case No. 46/2009. By the said petition, the respondents had prayed
for restoration and possession over the two storied RCC building described in
Schedule-B of the said petition by evicting the petitioners therefrom. The
learned Munsiff No. 1 by the impugned order dated 19.03.2014 allowed the
said Misc.(J) Case No. 46/2009, directing the restoration of the possession of
the RCC building to the petitioners. Challenging the said order, the petitioners
have filed the present application. This Court, while issuing notice in this
revision, by order dated 10.04.2014, had stayed the operation of the
impugned order. By the said order, it was also directed that an attempt would
be made to dispose of this application at the admission stage, as such, the
matter has been taken up for hearing.
14)         Mr. G.N. Sahewalla, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
petitioners has submitted that by virtue of the Gift Deed, which is available in
the trial court record, a plot of land measuring 40 feet X 200 feet, which
existed there with the shop rooms were all gifted to the predecessor-in-
interest of the petitioners. It is submitted that while passing the impugned
CRP 124/2014                                                       Page 5 of 19

order, the learned Munsiff No. 1, Jorhat (hereinafter referred to as the
“executing court”) did not appreciate that in the first appellate judgment
rendered in T.A. No. 9/2009, it has been specifically held that the
respondents had failed to prove their right, tile and interest along with three
rooms over the two storied RCC building. He had laid stress on the relevant
paragraph No. 18 of the first appellate judgment in T.A. 9/2009, which is
reproduced herein below:
            “18. On scrupulous perusal of the evidence of the witness of the
            appellants, I have found that the appellants miserably failed to
            prove their right, title and interest over the two storied building. I
            have no hesitation to hold that not to speak about the better title,
            the appellants failed to prove prima facie title over the suit house.
            Producing a huge number of witnesses cannot prove a fact to be
            true or false. It is the quality of evidence that it necessary in this
            case. Needless to say that title overran immovable property can be
            acquired by some distinct manners like sale, inheritance and gift.
            (The appellants miserably failed to show as to how they acquired
            title over the suit house. Mere possession over a property does not
            amount to having title over the same). Hence, I hereby hold that
            the appellants have no right, title or interest over the suit house.
            This issue is answered in negative.”
15)         It is further submitted that the aforesaid finding, had attained
finality insofar as relates to the present respondents having no right, title and
interest over the said suit property. It is further submitted that it is an
admitted case of the respondents in paragraph 6 of CRP No. 243/04 that the
additional constructions over and above the three suit rooms was made on
obtaining permission from the Mariani Town Committee on 20.03.2004.
Hence, the said construction were not pre-existing, but had come up during
CRP 124/2014                                                        Page 6 of 19

the pendency of the execution case, and after long after the second appellate
judgment was delivered by this Court.
16)         It is submitted that as per the first appellate judgment rendered in
T.A. No. 2/2009, it was specifically held in connection with issue No. 2 that
the appellants had measurably failed to prove their right, title interest over
the two storied RCC building and they had no prima-facie title over the said
house, the respondents herein had no locus to intend a second application
under Section 47 of the Code as the finding of absence any right, title and
interest in the said appeal had attained finality. By referring to the five rounds
of chequered history of litigation, it is submitted that the present series of
litigation, which had commenced in the year 1980 is still pending for 37 years
now.
17)         The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has relied on the
following case law citations:
         a. R.P.A. Valliammal v. R. Palanichami Nadar, (1997) 10 SCC 209.
         b. Duraisami Mudaliar v. Ramasami Chettiar & Anr., (1979) 1 Mad.L.J.
            380 (print-out from ‘The Laws’.).
         c. B. Gangadhar v. B.R. Rajalingam, (1995) 5 SCC 238.
         d. G. Vanaja v. K. Ramasamy, (2014) 8 Mad.L.J. 735 (print-out from
            ‘The Laws’).
18)         Mr. Diganta Das, the learned senior counsel has argued in support
of the impugned order. He has referred to paragraph 22 of the first appellate
judgment dated 30.05.2009 passed by the learned Civil Judge, Jorhat in T.A.
No. 9/2009. The said paragraph is quoted below:-
            “I am of the considered view that the evidence of the respondent
            Jagat Rajkhowa is sufficient to decide this issue. The respondent
            was authorised to handover the vacant possession of the three
            rooms to the decree holder. He was not at all authorised to hand
CRP 124/2014                                                         Page 7 of 19

           over any land. When he handed over the land within the given four
           boundaries, he, in fact, handed over the possession of the two
           storied building which is situated within the four boundaries to the
           decree holder. This, I have no hesitation to hold that this is a case
           of excess execution. The respondent Jagat Ch. Rajkhowa illegally
           handed over the two storied building to the decree holder, because
           the aforesaid building (schedule-B property) was outside the
           purview of T. Ex. 19/04. I answer this in affirmative.”
19)        It is submitted that the said finding of the learned first appellate
court in T. A. No. 9/2009 had attained finality. Therefore, this was sufficient
to prove the case of the respondent that this was a case of excess execution
and the two storied R.C.C. building was illegally handed over to the petitioner
herein. It is also submitted that as per the provisions of Section 47 CPC, any
dispute which arise in respect of execution must be raised before the
executing court. Hence, it was on this count that the second filed by the
respondents was held to be not maintainable and, as such, the respondents
had not committed any wrong to approach the learned executing court once
under the provisions of Section 47 CPC. Therefore, the said application, which
was registered as Misc. (J) Case No. 46/2009 was maintainable and
resultantly, the impugned order also suffered from no legal infirmity and the
same was liable to be upheld.
20)        It is submitted that the respondents had rightly approached the
executing court by filing an application under Section 47 CPC for settling the
controversy between the parties which arose out of excess execution being
carried out in favour of the petitioners herein. It is further submitted that by
no stretch of imagination can the petitioners/ decree-holders to get property
more that what had been decreed. The learned senior counsel appearing for
the respondent has submitted that once it is proved to the satisfaction of the
CRP 124/2014                                                       Page 8 of 19

court that the execution was an excess of the decree, such an execution
would amount to illegality and fraudulent and as fraud had vitiated the
execution proceedings, the same was required to be set right by entertaining
the application under section 47 of the Code.
21)        In order to counter the submissions made by the learned senior
counsel for the petitioners, it was submitted that there was no injunction
operating against the respondents at any point of time. Therefore, when the
petitioners had not objected to such construction at the time when it was
being raised, the petitioners were only entitled to the suit rooms contained
the decree and the petitioners had illegally evicted the respondents from the
other portion of the double storied RCC building, standing outside the
decreetal suit rooms and, as such, the respondents were rightly held to be
entitled to restitution of the remaining property, which was handed over to
the petitioners in excess of the decree.
22)        In support of his contentions, the learned Senior Counsel for the
respondents has referred to the impugned order to show that Jagat Ch.
Rajkhowa, the Bailiff, who was made as party both in his personal capacity as
well as in his official capacity in T.S. No. 91/2007, had specifically stated in
his cross examination that he had given possession of four rooms by
exceeding his powers which was not conferred to him by the executing court
and he has further admitted the dispossession of the respondents from the
two storied RCC building. It was pointed out that the learned executing court
had arrived at a categorical finding that from the perusal of decree, it is
revealed that the decree-holders/petitioners herein were given the right, title
and interest over the suit rooms and direction was passed to deliver the khas
possession of the three suit rooms with the front and back verandah but from
the report of the Bailiff, it is revealed that the Bailiff had given possession of
the land, three suit rooms with front and back verandah found within the
boundary together with a RCC building standing in the land. He has also
CRP 124/2014                                                         Page 9 of 19

referred to the further finding that there was no averment from the
petitioners herein that the RCC building was constructed by changing the
nature and character of the three suit room with front and back verandah.
The learned senior counsel for the respondents, therefore, justifies the
impugned order for restoration of possession of the RCC building to the
petitioner.
23)         I have considered the rival submissions made by the learned senior
counsels for both sides and have considered the materials on record. This
court by order dated 13.02.2017, had called for the record of CRP No.
243/2004 which was disposed of by judgment dated 10.12.2014. The said
record has also been perused.
24)         There is no dispute at the Bar that Late Sagra Khatun had gifted
three suit rooms together with land thereunder to Smt. Salima Khatoon (since
deceased) vide registered gift deed no. 3758 dated 15.09.1979 and got
possession of the land. Thereafter, she instituted T.S. No. 63/1980 in the
Court of Munsiff, Jorhat for recovery of the three suit rooms only which
specific four boundaries as mentioned in the schedule of the plaint. The said
suit was decreed in favour of the plaintiff on 18.08.1982 for evicting the
defendant 1 to 4 therefrom. Against the said decree, the respondents
preferred T.A. No. 53/1982, which was dismissed on 02.04.1985. Thereupon
the respondents preferred Second Appeal No. 100/1985 before this Court,
which was also dismissed by judgment dated 07.08.1992, inter-alia, holding
that the gift deed to be valid. Thereafter, the decree was thereafter put to
execution which was registered as T.Ex. Case No. 19/2004. In the said
execution proceeding, the respondents had filed the petition under Section 47
CPC and they also filed the show cause under Order XXI Rule 22 of the CPC.
The learned execution court had dismissed the petition filed under Section 47
of the Code by holding, wherein it is mentioned that “the judgment debtors
are constructing RCC building over the suit land and hence, are trying to
CRP 124/2014                                                   Page 10 of 19

delay execution of the decree”. It was further observed that “they have got
every right to execute the lawful decree for eviction of the judgment debtor
from the suit property.” On the reasons as assigned in the said order, the
petition No. 1220/04 and 1339/04 filed by the judgment debtor under Section
47 of the Code was held to be devoid of any merit and the same was rejected
by order dated 15.10.2004. Thereafter, the said decree was executed and as
per order dated 12.01.2005, as per which the belief of the court had given
possession of the decree and land of house to the decree holder in presence
of witnesses and the decree holders (petitioners herein) had issued a receipt
of delivery of possession of the decreetal property and, as such, the execution
case was closed on full and final satisfaction. Thereafter, the respondents had
filed petition No. 86/2005 under Section 144 read with Section 151 of the CPC
for restoration of the fourth room as well as the two storied building, except
the three suit rooms. The said petition was numbered as Misc.(J) Case No.
2/2005, which was also dismissed by order dated 12.04.2005, inter-alia,
observing that “the decree was legally and lawfully executed by the Nazir with
the help and assistance of the concerned Lat Mandal and Police in the
presence of the petitioners and other persons by taking all care to give
possession as per four boundaries shown in the schedule of the warrant
issued to the Bailiff”. Thereafter, the respondents herein had instituted T.S.
No. 91/2007, which was tried by the Court of Munsiff No. 2, Jorhat. In course
of trial, the following issues were framed:
            1) Whether there is cause of action for the suit of the plaintiffs?
            2) Whether the plaintiff No. 1 has right, title and interest over the
                suit house?
            3) Whether the suit is bad and not maintainable for want of notice
                U/s 80 CPC?
            4) Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties?
            5) Whether the defendant No. 1 and 2 acted illegally by handing
                over the possession of the suit house which was not the subject
CRP 124/2014                                                      Page 11 of 19

               matter of the decree in T.S. 63/80 (T. Ex. 19/2004) and was
               also beyond the preview of the writ of execution?
           6) Whether the plaintiff No. 1 is entitled to a decree as prayed for?
           7) To what reliefs, the parties are entitled to?
           8) Whether the suit is not maintainable in law as well as on fact.
25)        It is seen that the said suit was dismissed by judgment and decree
dated 21.07.2009, by holding that the suit to be not maintainable. The said
judgment and decree was challenged by filing T.A. No. 9/2009, which was
also dismissed by first appellate judgment and decree dated 30.05.2009. After
the said first appellate judgment and decree had attained finality, the
respondents filed another application before the executing court under
Section 47 read with Section 151 of the Code in connection with T.Ex. Case
No. 19/2004, which was registered as Misc. (J) Case No. 46/2009 in which
the impugned order dated 10.03.2014 was passed, which is the subject
matter of the present application. It is also observed that in paragraph 6 of
CRP No. 243/2004, the respondents herein has made a categorical statement
they were under the bonafide impression that they are the lawful owners of
the suit property and had right, title and interest over the said suit property
and, as such, they had invested a huge sum of money in the development of
the suit land and had constructed RCC building by obtaining permission on
20.03.2004 from the Marinai Town Committee for construction of RCC
building upon the suit land. Therefore, it appears to be an admitted case of
the respondent that the construction of the RCC building was done in the year
2004, by which time not only T.S. No. 63/1980 was decreed on 18.08.1982,
against the respondent, their T.A. No. 53/1982 was also dismissed and the
decree passed by the learned Trial court had attained finality by dismissal of
S.A. No. 100/85 by this Court by judgment and decree dated 07.08.1992.
Therefore, the RCC structure, which was built within the boundary of the
decreetal premises, was created at the own risk of the respondent.
CRP 124/2014                                                      Page 12 of 19

26)       In my considered opinion there is nothing on record to show that at
the time when the suit was filed and decreed, there was any structure other
than the suit rooms within the boundary described in the schedule of the
decree. Therefore, in the absence of any evidence of right, title and interest
of the respondent over the land beneath the suit rooms within the four
boundaries of the decreetal property and, as such, without establishing their
independent right title and interest over the RCC building or the land beneath
it, the respondents cannot claim to be entitled to be restored of the
possession of any space within the four boundaries of the suit property
described in the decree in reference, because the said structure had come up
after the suit was decreed and the decree attained finality and during the
pendency of the execution proceeding. Moreover, the right, title, interest and
entitlement to possession claimed by the respondents was lost with the
dismissal of the T.S. No. 91/2007. Therefore, with that, the respondents are
deemed to have lost any right to be restored of the possession of any part of
the said R.C.C. building, which is within the four boundary of the decreetal
property. In this connection, I find support from the case of R.P.A. Valliammal
(supra). The relevant finding in paragraph-2 thereof is quoted below:
          “2. … It is not in dispute that petitioner's mother had already
          agitated the right title to the property and claimed that to the
          extent of her right, the execution was not valid in law. That right
          having been negatived and having become final, the petitioner
          cannot have any higher right than the mother herself had. The
          petitioner having allowed the orders to become final, it would not
          be open to the petition to raise the contentions thereafter. Even
          otherwise also, as held by the High Court, the objection as to
          excess execution has not been raised. Though Order 21, Rule
          90(3), CPC may not be strictly construed so as to the put a fetter
          on the Court, due to non-raising of the objection before
          proclamation of sale and the objection could be raised even at a
          later stage, but since the title has already been lost and has
          become final, the petitioner cannot agitate the executability of the
          decree in the absence of any legal title to question the correctness
CRP 124/2014                                                    Page 13 of 19

           of the execution. Under these circumstances, we do not think that
           we would be justified to exercise the power under Article 136 of the
           Constitution.”
27)        Therefore, in my considered opinion, as there was a lawful decree
in existence, the decree holder would not be required to file a fresh suit or
proceeding against any construction that had been made after the decree was
passed and had attained finality. The said constructions were at the risk of
the respondents. Though in excess, the execution is held to be rightly
proceeded. In this regard, I find support from the cases of (i) B. Gangadhar
v. B.R. Rajalingam, (1995) 5 SCC 238, (ii) G. Vanaja v. K. Ramasamy, 2014
(8) M.L.J. 735, and (iii) Duraisami Mudaliar v. Ramasami Chettiar & Anr.,
(1979) 1 M.L.J. 380, which were cited by the learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioners.
28)        The relevant extracts of paragraphs 6 and 8 of the case of B.
Gangadhar (supra) are quoted below:-
       “6.     … Ownership chiefly imports the right of exclusive possession
           and enjoyment of the thing owned. The owner in possession of the
           thing has the right to exclude all others from the possession and
           enjoyment of it. If he is wrongfully deprived of what he owns, the
           owner has a right to recover possession of it from the person who
           wrongfully gets into possession of it. The right to maintain or
           recover possession of a thing as against all others is an essential
           part of ownership. Ownership implies not so much the physical
           relation between the person and the thing as the relation between
           the person owning and the thing owned. Ownership is pre-
           eminently a right. The right to ownership of a property carries with
           it the right to its enjoyment, right to its access and of other
           beneficial enjoyment incidental thereto. If any obstruction or
           hindrance is caused for its enjoyment or use, the owner, of
           necessity, has the remedy to have it removed. If any obstruction is
           raised by putting up a construction pendente lite or prevents the
           passage or right to access to the property pendente lite, the
           plaintiff has been given right and the decree-holder is empowered
           to have it removed in execution without tortuous remedy of
CRP 124/2014                                                   Page 14 of 19

          separate suit seeking mandatory injunction or for possession so as
          to avoid delay in execution or frustration and thereby defeat the
          decree. The executing court, therefore, would be justified to order
          its removal of unlawful or illegal construction made pendente lite so
          that the decree for possession or eviction, as the case may be,
          effectually and completely executed and the delivery of possession
          is given to the decree holder expeditiously. Admittedly, pending suit
          the petitioner had constructed shops and inducted tenants in
          possession without permission of the court. The only course would
          be to decide the dispute in the execution proceedings and not by a
          separate suit.”
      “8. Rule 35(3) of Order 21 itself manifests that when a decree for
          possession of immovable property was granted and delivery of
          possession was directed to be done, the Court executing the decree
          is entitled to pass such incidental, ancillary or necessary others for
          effective enforcement of the decree for possession. That power also
          includes the power to remove any obstruction or super-structure
          made pendente lite. The exercise of incidental, ancillary or inherent
          power is consequential to deliver possession of the property in
          execution of the decree. No doubt, the decree does not contain a
          mandatory injunction for demolition. But when the decree for
          possession had become final and the judgment-debtor or a person
          interested or claiming right through the judgment-debtor has taken
          law in his hands and made any construction on the property
          pending suit, the decree-holder is not bound by any such
          construction. The relief of mandatory injunction, therefore, is
          consequential to or necessary for effectuation of the decree for
          possession. It is not necessary to file a separate suit when the
          construction was made pending suit without permission of the
          Court. Otherwise, the decree becomes inexecutable driving the
          plaintiff again for another round of litigation which the Code
          expressly prohibits such multiplicity of proceedings.”
29)       In the case of G. Vanaja (supra), the Hon'ble Madras High Court
has held as follows:
          “21.    In a suit instituted for declaration of title and recovery of
              possession, the legal heirs of the judgment debtor filed an
              application under Section 47 of C.P.C. contending that there is
CRP 124/2014                                                     Page 15 of 19

             no decree for removal of superstructure. This Court in 2007 (1)
             CTC 217 -Madaswamy vs. Govindaraj found that the
             construction was made pendente lite and relying on the
             principles laid down in the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court
             in B. Gangadhar Vs. B.G. Rajalingam -1996 (1) CTC 271,
             directed the Executing Court to deliver vacant possession of the
             suit property. Paragraph No.17 of the judgment is extracted
             hereunder:
             "17. When the construction was made pendente lite, the
                 Executing Court ought to have ordered removal of
                 obstruction of the superstructure made pendente lite. It
                 cannot be disputed that the respondent was trying to
                 prevent execution of the Decree in one way or other. In that
                 view of the matter, the impugned order is to be set aside,
                 directing the Executing Court to deliver possession of the
                 suit lane after removal of the obstruction or demolition, as
                 the case may be. As per the decision of the Supreme Court,
                 in the case cited supra, what is relevant is only a warning by
                 the Bailiff, to deliver peaceful possession and if the
                 respondent causes obstruction, the Bailiff is entitled to
                 remove the obstruction, cause the construction demolished
                 and deliver vacant possession to the Decree-Holder in terms
                 of the Decree."
         22.     Further, despite the fact that the petitioners were impleaded
             as defendants in the suit, they have not raised their objection to
             identify the suit property nor it is the case of the petitioners that
             they are in possession of any other property, besides the suit
             property. Admittedly, the petitioners have not agitated the
             factual issues in the suit proceedings and hence they are
             estopped from raising the said issue in the Executing
             Proceedings.
         23.     In the case on hand, it is even admitted by the petitioners
             that they were inducted after institution of the suit and the
             superstructure were put up pending suit. Keeping in mind the
             principles laid down by this Court referred to supra, the
             contentions of the petitioners that there is no proper description
             of property in the decree and the decree is inexecutable, as
             there is no decree for mandatory injunction, cannot be
             accepted.
CRP 124/2014                                                      Page 16 of 19

           24.     Indisputably the petitioners have put up superstructures
               pendente lite. Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that
               the judgments relied on by the petitioners for seeking
               compensation of the improvements are not applicable to the
               facts of this case and the principles laid down in 2007 (1) CTC
               217 - Madaswamy vs. Govindaraj, referred to supra, would be
               squarely applicable to the present case.”
30)        The relevant finding in paragraph 3 of the case of Duraisami
Mudaliar (supra) is quoted below:
       “3.     There will not be any difficulty with reference to a case where
           the superstructures came to be put up by the defendant either
           during the pendency of the suit or after the decree. In such a case,
           in execution of the decree for possession, the executing Court can
           order the removal or demolition of the construction made during
           the pendency of the suit or after the decree. Such was also the
           view expressed in Narain Singh v. Imam Din A.I.R. 1934 Lah. 978
           and that has been followed by D.S. Mathur, J., in Mohd. Ismail v.
           Ashiq Hussain, suggesting appropriate directions according to the
           needs of particular cases.”
31)        This court further reiterates that as the title suit filed by the
respondent i.e. T.S. No. 91/2007 was dismissed and the appeal filed against
the decree of dismissal was also dismissed and the first appellate judgment
rendered in T.A. No. 9/2009, having attained finality, any semblance of any
sought of right, title, interest or possession which the respondent had over
the two storied RSS building got extinguished. Hence, the learned executing
court is found to have misdirected itself by passing the impugned order dated
19.02.2014, to restore the possession of the two storied R.C.C. building, save
and except the suit rooms, to the respondents. If the same is allowed to
stand, it would amount to acknowledgment of the respondents’ right, title and
interest over the said building, whereas the dismissal of suit had nullified the
existence of such right against the respondents. The present case is not a
case where the building existed at the time of filing the suit or when the
decree was passed an upheld in second appeal and, as such, there was no
CRP 124/2014                                                     Page 17 of 19

omission by the petitioners to pray for reliefs in respect of the said building in
the suit. As extracted above two of the issues in T.S. No. 91/2007 were – “(2)
whether the plaintiff No. 1 (respondent No.1 herein) has right, title and
interest over the suit house? and (5) Whether the defendant No. 1 and 2
acted illegally by handing over the possession of the suit house which was not
the subject matter of the decree in T.S. 63/80 (T. Ex. 19/2004) and was also
beyond the preview of the writ of execution?”, were both decided against the
respondents, as such, the learned court below is found to have erred in law in
passing the impugned order for restoration of possession in light of dismissal
of T.S. No. 91/2007.
32)        This court is of the further opinion that every lis or proceeding must
come to an eventual and. If an aggrieved party is permitted to endlessly
prosecute the decree holder, there is bound to be a difference in opinion by
one court or the other and one view may be diametrically opposite to the
other. The scheme of the Civil Procedure Code is to avoid multiplicity of suits
and proceedings. This court is making this observation as it has been noticed
that not only T.S. No. 63/1980 was decreed and the said decree was upheld
up to the second appellate court, wherein the gift deed was held to be valid.
Thereafter, the decree was challenged by filing an application under Section
47 of the CPC, which was also dismissed by order dated 15.10.2004.
Thereafter, the respondent challenged the satisfaction of the decree by filing
the petition under Section 144 read with Section 151 of the Code and even
after the same was dismissed, T.S. No. 91/2007 was instituted which was
dismissed and thereafter T.A. No. 9/2009 was also dismissed. Therefore, it
was the duty of the learned court below to have noticed that the respondents
had exhausted all available remedies, as such, the learned court below is held
to have erred in law in entertaining a second application under Section 47 of
the CPC. This Court is, therefore, constrained to hold that the second
application under Section 47 of the Code was itself a nullity and the same was
CRP 124/2014                                                        Page 18 of 19

void ab initio, which ought not to have been entertained in the first place.
Consequently, even on that ground, the impugned order dated 19.03.2014, is
not found to be sustainable. In this connection if any authority is required
only by referred to the case of R.P.A. Valliammal (supra), wherein it has been
held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that the opportunity to executability of the
decree could be taken only once and repeated application was held to be
unwarranted. In that case the Hon’ble Apex Court had also observed that
since the title has already been lost and has become final, the petitioner
cannot agitate the executability of the decree in the absence of any legal title
to question the correctness of the execution. In the present case in hand, I
find the said observation of the Hon'ble Apex Court appropriately and aptly
applies.
33)        The cumulative effect of the opinion expressed by this court, as
above, is that the impugned order dated 19.03.2014, passed by the Court of
learned Munsiff No. 2, Jorhat in Misc.(J) Case No. 46/2009, by directing the
restoration of the possession of R.C.C. building to the respondent, suffers
from jurisdictional error for the reasons as indicated above. Hence, this Court
has no hesitation in setting aside and quashing the same.
34)        Accordingly, this revision stands allowed. The parties are left to
bear their own cost.
35)        De-tag the records of CRP 243/2004. Let the “Lower Court Records”
be returned forthwith.
                                                                    JUDGE
Mkumar.
CRP 124/2014                                                    Page 19 of 19


