                          THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                            C.R.P. No. 215 OF 2015
                      Sri Kailash Baruah
                                                           … Petitioner
                           -Versus-
                      Hinduja Leyland Finance Co.
                                                           ..Respondent
                                     BEFORE
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
For the petitioner            :     Mr. KK Mahanta,
                                    Mr. K. Singha,
                                    Mr. KM Mahanta,
                                    Mr. P. Baruah, Advocates.
For the respondent            :     Mr. PJ Barman,
                                    Mr. M. Chetia,
                                    Ms. P. Phukan, Adv.
Date of hearing               :     07.06.2017
Date judgment                 :     13.06.2017
                             JUDGMENT AND ORDER
             Heard Mr. K.K. Mahanta, the learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioner, namely, Kailash Baruah and Mr. P.J. Barman, the learned Counsel
for the respondent, namely, Hinduja Leyland Finance Co. Ltd.
2)           By filing the present application under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India, the petitioner has assailed the order dated 17.11.2014
passed by the learned Civil Judge, Sivasagar, in Title Suit No. 7 of 2013, by
CRP No. 215/2015                                                          Page 1 of 11

virtue of which the parties were referred to arbitration under section 8 of the
Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996.
3)         The petitioner herein is the plaintiff in the said suit, which contained
prayer for passing a decree of declaration that the repossession of the vehicle
by the defendant (respondent herein) is void ab initio, illegal and cannot be
acted upon, for recovery of the vehicle from unauthorized possession of the
defendant, for passing a decree to handover the vehicle in good and running
condition as well as ad-interim injunction and other reliefs as mentioned in
the plaint. The case of the petitioner in the plaint is that he was the
registered owner of a Tata winger (Mini Bus) bearing registration No. AS-04-
AC-2337. The same was purchased in the month of May, 2011 to give
employment to his son. The total cost of the said vehicle was Rs.5,56,500/-
and the petitioner had availed a finance of Rs.4,38,000/- from the
respondent. The petitioner admitted that he had executed a loan agreement,
agreeing to repay the loan in 48 months by paying 47 monthly installments of
Rs.13,994/- each. After paying a sum of Rs.2,48,395/- till the month of
October, 2012, the petitioner was diagnosed of cancer as a result of which
there was default in repaying the loan. However, in the middle part of
December, 2012, the respondents arbitrarily dispossessed the petitioner of his
property, as such, the petitioner had filed the said suit.
4)         The respondent entered appearance in the suit and filed an
application under section 8(1) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 and
contended that in cause 23.0 of the Loan Agreement dated 31060 dated
31.05.2011, there existed a clause for settlement of all disputes through
arbitration. The petitioner contested the said petition by filing written
objection. The learned Civil Judge, Sivasagar, by the impugned order referred
hereinbefore, referred the parties to arbitration, which is challenged herein.
CRP No. 215/2015                                                                Page 2 of 11

5)         On the prayer made by the learned Senior Counsel for petitioner,
this Court by order dated 04.11.2016 had directed the respondent to produce
the original copy of the Agreement. Accordingly, in course of time, the said
Agreement bearing No. ASGWJO00249 was produced. The learned Senior
Counsel for the petitioner had informed this Court that he along with his
instructing counsel had inspected the same.
6)         The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has made a short
submission during the hearing of the matter. The points urged were -
           a. none of the pages of the said agreement was signed by the
              lender, but only it contained rubber stamp impression of lender
              as "Abdul Mazid, Emp. Code: 16074", but it contained no
              signatures and, as such, without admitting but assuming that
              the said agreement could have been valid for any other
              purpose, the same was not a valid document for under section
              7(4)(a) read with section 2(b) of the Arbitration & Conciliation
              Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as "1996 Act" for brevity); and
           b. that along with the application under section 8(1) of the said
              1996 Act, the respondent had filed only a photocopy and did not
              produce the original of the same before the learned Trial Court
              and, as such, in view of the mandate of law enshrined under
              Section 8(2) of the said 1996 Act, the learned Trial Court ought
              not to have entertained the said application; and
           c. that the learned Trial Court, by overlooking the said statutory
              provisions of law had acted illegally and with material
              irregularity, which has caused failure of justice.
7)         Per contra, the learned Counsel for the respondent has strenuously
argued in support of the impugned order. His points of argument was as
follows -
CRP No. 215/2015                                                             Page 3 of 11

           a. By referring to the petition No. 1205 dated 20.06.2013, filed
              under section 8(1) of the 1996 Act, it was submitted that a duly
              notarized copy of the said Agreement containing arbitration
              clause was produced before the learned Trial Court. However, at
              that time, the petitioner’s side raised no objection that the
              original agreement was not produced. Hence, the same
              amounts to acquiescence and, as such, the petitioner is
              precluded from agitating the said issue for the first time before
              this Court.
           b. It is further submitted that the petitioner has admitted in the
              plaint that there existed an agreement between the parties and,
              as such, he cannot be permitted to deny the said agreement.
           c. There is no mandate under section 7(4)(a), that the agreement
              must be physically signed by the parties and, as such, the
              affixing of rubber stamp of the concerned officer/staff of the
              respondent constitutes due signature of the respondent in the
              agreement.
           d. The back-cover-page of the original agreement contained the
              signature of two officers/staff of the respondent and, as such,
              no fault can be found with the non-availability of signatures on
              all pages of the Agreement, which is not even the requirement
              of law.
           e. The petitioner had availed the benefit from the said loan
              agreement by purchasing the mini bus and, as such, he cannot
              be permitted to deny the agreement under any circumstances,
              even assuming but not admitting that the said agreement was
              not signed.
           f. Oxford dictionary meaning of "parties" includes "a person or
              persons forming one side of the agreement" and, as such, the
              word "parties" as contained in section 7(1) must be given a
CRP No. 215/2015                                                           Page 4 of 11

                 liberal meaning and not a restricted meaning and, as such, as
                 the said agreement contained the signatures of the borrower
                 and the guarantor, the alleged absence of the signature of the
                 respondent cannot be held to be fatal so as to deprive the
                 respondent of their right to refer the parties to arbitration as per
                 law and as provided under clause 23.0 of the loan agreement,
                 which is binding on the parties.
           g. Under the doctrine of severability, even if the agreement is
                 abrogated, the clause providing for arbitration shall remain
                 valid.
           h. In support of his argument, the learned Counsel for the
                 respondent has relied on the following case citations:-
               i.    Jugal Kishore Rameshwar Das V. Mrs. Goolbai Hormusji, AIR
                     1955 SC 812 (FB).
              ii.    Seth Banarsi Das V. The Cane Commissioner & Anr., AIR
                     1963 SC 1417 (Constitution Bench).
             iii.    National Agricultural Co-op. Marketing Federation India Ltd.
                     V. Gains Trading Co., (2007) 5 SCC 692 (Single Bench).
             iv.     Great Offshore Ltd. V. Iranian Offshore Engineering &
                     Construction Company, (2008) 14 SCC 240 (Single Bench).
8)         On perusal of the trial court records, it is seen that in the plaint,
there is a specific statement made in paragraph 4 of the plaint that "... the
plaintiff had signed all the relevant documents including the Hire Purchase
Agreement with the defendant on May, 2011....". The respondent herein, in
their petition filed under section 8(1) of 1996 Act had specifically stated in
paragraph 2 - "That the suit in dispute between the Plaintiff and the
defendant on the basis of loan Agreement No. 31060 dt.31-5-11 in respect of
the Vehicle bearing Engine No. 483DLTC55BYY704514, Chassis No. MAT
460071BUB01227 purchased by the plaintiff with the financial assistance from
CRP No. 215/2015                                                                 Page 5 of 11

the defendant." In paragraph 3(a), it has been stated in sub-paragraph
thereof that "Copy of the loan Agreement is filed herewith and market (sic.)
as Annexure-A." In paragraph 4 it has been specifically stated "that the
plaintiff and the guarantor had signed the agreement...", but nowhere there
is a mention that the respondent herein signed the loan agreement. However,
the copy of the loan agreement containing Sl. No. 31060, Contract No.
ASGWJO 00249, attested by the Notary public on 19.06.2013, has been filed
as Annexure-A. In page 1 thereof, the date of Agreement is mentioned as 31
day of June, 2011. It would be relevant to mention here that the learned
Counsel for the respondent had produced the original Loan Agreement before
this Court, which does not contain any date and the date column is left totally
blank as follows - "This Loan Agreement is made on this ___ day of
____20___." The reverse-side of the front cover-page of the said original
Loan Agreement contains two illegible initial/short signatures, one of Produce
Executive and the other of Credit Administrator, but those two signatures are
below the column under heading "Agreement & PDC Checklist". The page
containing the said check-list together with two initial/short signatures is,
however, not available in the notary attested copy of the Loan Agreement
filed with the application under section 8(1) of the 1996 Act. But as stated
herein before, all other pages of the Loan agreement paper-book, containing
the First Schedule, Second Schedule appended thereto, only contains the
rubber stamp impression of "Abdul Mazid Emp. Code: 16074" without any
signature of any person on behalf of the respondent.
9)          Thus, owing to the mention of the date of 31 day of June, 2011,
which is not contained in the original Loan Agreement, it cannot be accepted
that the document which was filed as Annexure-A to petition No. 1205/13
dated 20.06.2013 was the true copy or certified copy of the original
document. Moreover, as there no 31st day in the month of June, 2011, the
insertion of said date in the copy attested by Notary gives an impression that
CRP No. 215/2015                                                           Page 6 of 11

the copy of the Loan Agreement as produced before the learned trial court is
prima facie unreliable.
10)        The provisions of Section 7 of the Act, which sets out the
requirement of a written arbitration agreement, reads as under:
            “7.        Arbitration agreement- (1) In this Part, "arbitration
            agreement" means an agreement by the parties to submit to
            arbitration all or certain disputes which have arisen or which may
           arise between them in respect of a defined legal relationship,
            whether contractual or not.
            (2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration
            clause in a contract or in the form of a separate agreement.
            (3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.
            (4) An arbitration agreement is in writing if it is contained in-
                  (a) a document signed by the parties;
                  (b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams or other means of
                  telecommunication which provide a record of the agreement;
                  or
                  (c) an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which
                  the existence of the agreement is alleged by one party and
                  not denied by the other.
           (5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an
           arbitration clause constitutes an arbitration agreement if the
           contract is in writing and the reference is such as to make that
           arbitration clause part of the contract.”
11)        From a plain reading of the provisions of Section 7(3) of 1996 Act it
is provided that an arbitration agreement has to be in writing. The written
arbitration agreement can also be inferred from other documents as specified
CRP No. 215/2015                                                              Page 7 of 11

in Section 7 (4) (a), (b) and (c). Further, Section 7(5) states that a reference
in a contract “to a document containing an arbitration clause” would by itself
constitute an arbitration agreement “if the contract is in writing and the
reference is such as to make that arbitration clause part of the contract.”
12)        Going by the above requirement as spelt out in the provisions of
Section 7 of the 1996 Act, the present agreement in original as produced
before this Court does not pass the said requirement of law or test. As
narrated above, the original agreement does not contain the date of “31 day
of June 2011”, as mentioned in the Notary attested copy produced before the
learned trial Court. Therefore, it would be difficult to even arrive at a prima
facie finding as to which of the two agreements were actually valid between
the parties. Thus, in the absence of any other material to prima facie show
which agreements the parties have been acting upon all this time, because
both the said agreements have been brought on record by the respondent
from their own custody and both do not contain the signature of the
respondent’s representative. As already stated above, the check-list signed by
someone in the inside page of front cover was not accompanying the
application under section 8(1) of the 1996 Act, nor it is shown to the
satisfaction of this Court that the said signature was of the person whose
rubber stamp was affixed on other pages.
13)        The fact remains that for the purposes of Section 7 of the Act,
there has to be an arbitration agreement in writing. There are no
contemporaneous documents, in the form of correspondence exchanged
between the parties, from which an arbitration agreement can be inferred.
Therefore, it is futile to look to Section 7(4) or Section 7(5) of the 1996 Act to
find out whether apart from the two agreements produced by the respondent,
there is any other document from which existence of arbitration agreement
can be inferred, both the said provisions do not help in sustaining any of the
CRP No. 215/2015                                                              Page 8 of 11

said two agreements for the purpose of section 8(1) of the 1996 Act because
both of them are unsigned by the respondent. I hasten to clarify that this is
not to be confused with there being no agreement at all between the parties,
because the fact remains that the petitioner did take a loan to purchase a
commercial vehicle and, as such, the non-availability of signature of the
respondent in the agreement shall not preclude the said party from availing
any other remedy that the respondent may have under the law in force.
14)        I am not inclined to accept the purported agreement containing
signature of only the petitioner, which makes the document only a unilaterally
signed document and does not satisfy the requirement of section 7(4)(a) of
1996 Act.
15)        In so far as the non- filing of original agreement containing
arbitration clause, I am of the opinion that the same is not fatal and the same
is a curable defect, but the original agreement or its certified copy is required
to be produced or brought on record at the time when the court is
considering such application. In this connection I find support from the below
referred two judgments:-
           a. In the case of Bharat Sewa Sansthan Vs. U.P. Electronics,
               Corporation Ltd., 2007 (7) SCC 737, the Hon’ble Apex Court has
               held that photocopies of the agreement could be taken on
               record under Section 8 for ascertaining the existence of
               arbitration clause. Following was stated in paragraph 24:
               "24.           The respondent Corporation placed on record of
               the trial court photocopies of the agreements along with an
               application under Section 8(1) of the Arbitration Act. The High
               Court, in our view, has rightly held that the photocopies of the
               lease agreements could be taken on record under Section 8 of
               the Arbitration Act for ascertaining the existence of arbitration
CRP No. 215/2015                                                             Page 9 of 11

               clause. Thus, the dispute raised by the appellant Sansthan
               against the respondent Corporation in terms of the arbitration
               clause contained in the lease agreement is arbitral."
           b. In the case of Ananthesh Bhakta represented by Mother Usha A.
               Bhakta V. Nayana S. Bhakta, (2016) 7 Supreme 633: AIR 2016
               SC 5359, it was held as follows:-
               “22.           Section 8(2) has to be interpreted to mean that
               the court shall not consider any application filed by the party
               under Section 8(1) unless it is accompanied by original
               arbitration agreement or duly certified copy thereof. The filing of
               the application without such original or certified copy, but
               bringing original arbitration agreement on record at the time
               when the Court is considering the application shall not entail
               rejection of the application under Section 8(2).”
16)        Therefore, as the respondent did not produce the original
agreement when the application under section 8(1) of 1996 Act was being
heard, in terms of the ratio of the case of Ananthesh Bhakta (supra), the non-
filing thereof when the matter was heard, was fatal. There cannot be a
defence that the other side did not object to the said document, because it is
contrary to the provisions of section 8(1) and 8(2) of 1996 Act, or the defect
could have been cured at the time of hearing, which was not done.
17)        Therefore, on two counts, the impugned order is not found to be
sustainable. First, being that the original agreement was not produced before
the learned trial court at the time when the learned court below was finally
hearing the matter, which is not in terms of the provisions of section 8(1) of
the 1996 Act. Secondly, none of the two agreements shown to this court
satisfied the requirement of section 7(4)(a) of the 1996 Act, both not showing
the signature of any representative of the respondent.
CRP No. 215/2015                                                             Page 10 of 11

18)        For the aforesaid reasons, this court finds that the learned trial
court has committed jurisdictional error by referring the parties to arbitration.
19)        Consequently, this application is allowed. As a result, the order
dated 17.11.2014, passed by the learned Civil Judge, Sivasagar, in Title Suit
No. 7 of 2013, is set aside and the said suit is restored to the file of the
learned Civil Judge, Sivasagar, for disposal in accordance with law. The
parties are directed to appear before the said learned court on 03.07.2017
without any further notice to seek further instruction from the said learned
court.
20)        It is clarified to make it clear that the observations made herein are
only for the purpose of deciding the issues arising in the present matter
before this Court and, as such, the trial court shall not be prejudiced by the
observations made herein.
21)        The parties are left to bear their own cost.
                                                                       JUDGE
MKS
CRP No. 215/2015                                                             Page 11 of 11


