                          THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                               CRP No. 398 OF 2016
                         Sri Rintu Lahon
                                                              … Petitioner
                              -Versus-
                         Sri Surender Prasad Shah @ Kanu and others
                                                              ..Respondents
                                      BEFORE
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
For the petitioner              :      Mr. PJ Saikia,
                                       Mr. AK Gupta,
                                       Ms. M. Kechie, Advocates.
For the respondent              :      Mr. GP Bhowmick, Sr. Adv,
                                       Ms. P. Chetia,
                                       Ms. M. Kalita, Advs.
Date of hearing                 :      07.06.2017
Date judgment                   :      16.06.2017
                              JUDGMENT AND ORDER
                 Heard Mr. PJ Saikia, the learned counsel for the petitioner as
well as Mr. GP Bhowmick, the learned senior counsel for the respondents.
2)               By filing this revision application under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India, the petitioner has challenged the judgment and
order dated 19.09.2016 passed by the learned Civil Judge, Dibrugarh in
CRP No.398 /2016                                                                Page 1 of 12

Misc. Appeal No. 8/2014 by which the order dated 30.08.2014 passed by
the learned Munsiff No.1, Dibrugarh in Misc (J) Case No.55/2014 was
reversed. The learned Munsiff No.1, Dibrugarh had directed the parties to
maintain status quo in respect of the suit land. The appellate court by
setting aside the order of status quo, directed the parties not to alienate
the suit property so that suit property can be preserved till disposal of the
main suit.
3)            Owing to the nature of the dispute raised in the present
revision, I do not like to burden this judgment with the disputed facts of
the case as set out in the pleadings of the parties. It would be sufficient
to indicate herein that while the plaintiff has claimed right, title and
interest over the suit land described in Schedule–B of the plaint, the
defendant No.1 has also set up a claim for right, title and interest over the
same land, which is being adjudicated in Title Suit No. 49/2014 which is
pending for adjudication before the court of learned Munsiff No.1,
Dibrugarh.
4)            Being aggrieved by the order dated 30.08.2014, by which
the learned Munsiff No.1, Dibrugarh had directed the parties to maintain
status-quo in respect of the suit land, the defendant No.1 had filed an
appeal being Misc. Appeal No.8/2014 before the court of learned Civil
Judge, Dibrugarh. The learned first appellate court on the basis of
materials available on record, formulated the point of determination-
whether the order dated 30.08.2014 passed by the learned Munsiff No.1,
Dibrugarh in Misc.(J) Case No.49/2014 requires any interference in appeal.
5)            The learned first appellate court arrived at a finding that the
learned trial court had failed to consider that the suit land was in
possession of the defendant No.1 and that the court below did not
CRP No.398 /2016                                                             Page 2 of 12

discussed the three golden principles of injunction i.e., existence of prima
facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable loss and injury while
directing the parties to maintain status quo in respect of the suit land.
6)              The learned first appellate court on the basis of the decision
of the Apex Court in Terene Traders vs. Ramesh Chandra Jamma Das and
Co. reported in AIR 1987 SC 1492, had arrived at a conclusion that the
party not in khas possession are not entitled to injunction. It was further
held that as the defendant No.1 was in possession of the suit land, any
order preventing him from carrying out his construction work will definitely
cause inconvenience to the opposite party/defendant No.1 than the
petitioner/plaintiff and if the plaintiff is able to establish his case in the
trial, then the construction made by the defendant No.1 could be
demolished at the cost of defendant No.1. It was further held that the
learned Munsiff No.1 had failed to consider the three golden principles
while discussing the petition under Order XXXIX Rule 1 & 2 of Code of Civil
Procedure, which requires interference and the order of status quo against
the construction by the defendant No.1 was set aside but both the parties
are directed not to alienate the suit property so that the suit property can
be preserved till disposal of the main suit.
7)                    The learned counsel for the petitioner has made his
submissions on two specific grounds, firstly, that merely because a
construction can be demolished, is not a ground to permit the construction
to come in the first place because if any construction comes up on a land,
it will definitely cause damage to the land and secondly, under the same
principle on which the appellate court had applied with regard to the
absence of three golden principles i.e., existence of prima facie case,
balance of convenience, irreparable loss and injury, being the ground on
CRP No.398 /2016                                                              Page 3 of 12

which the order of the trial court was reversed, the same principles had
vitiated the appellate judgment because while issuing the direction not to
alienate the suit property in any manner to preserve the suit property , the
said order also amounted to grant of injunction. But, while passing the
said order, even the appellate court did not follow its own finding and
those three golden principles of injunctions have not even been discussed
in the appellate judgment. Hence, it was argued that on both these
grounds, the appellate judgment is not sustainable.
8)             Per contra, Mr. GP Bhowmick, the learned senior counsel for
the respondents submits that by virtue of prayer (f) made in the plaint, if
the plaintiff succeeds in the suit he would become entitled to a decree for
khas and vacant possession by evicting the defendants and by
demolishing his construction of the pucca house standing thereon and by
removing their materials from the suit land. It is submitted that this is
indicative that there exists a pucca house in the suit land. Therefore, it is
not material if a fresh pucca house is constructed on the suit land or the
old pucca house remains in the suit land because in both the cases, the
construction would have to be demolished in terms of the prayer made in
the plaint. It is further submitted that in his written statement, the
defendant No.1 had set up his own title in respect of the suit land.
Therefore, he further submits that it is not in dispute that the defendant
No.1 is in possession of the suit land and, as such, till the possession is
not disturbed by a lawful decree, the defendant No.1 cannot be prevented
from enjoying his own land as per his desire.
9)             Having heard both sides, I have perused the materials on
record. It is seen that the learned first appellate court had taken note of
CRP No.398 /2016                                                             Page 4 of 12

the principles to be followed by the appellate court for grant of temporary
injunction, by referring to the cases of :-
       1) Wander Ltd. and another vs. Antox India P. Ltd. , 1990 (SUPP)
SCC 727 by quoting the following–
                      “The appeals before the Division Bench were against
              the exercise of discretion by the Single Judge. In such
              appeals, the Appellate Court will not interfere with the
              exercise of discretion of the court of first instance and
              substitute its own discretion except where the discretion has
              been shown to have been exercised arbitrarily,               or
              capriciously or perversely or where the court had ignored the
              settled principles of law regulating grant or refusal of
              interlocutory injunctions. An appeal against exercise of
              discretion is said to be an appeal on principle. Appellate
              Court will not reassess the material and seek to reach a
              conclusion different from the one reached by the court below
              if the one reached by the court was reasonably possible on
              the material.”
       2)     Radhabari Tea Company (P) Ltd. vs. Mridul Kumar
Bhattacharjee and others, 2010(1) GLT 189;
                      (45) Thus, an appeal against exercise of discretionary
              jurisdiction is really an appeal in principle and that is why,
              unlike a regular appeal, in ordinary sense, where whole
              evidence on record is examined anew by the appellate Court,
              what is really examined, in an appeal against exrcise of
              discretionary jurisdiction, is the legality and validity of the
CRP No.398 /2016                                                             Page 5 of 12

              order and it can be set aside and should be set aside only
              when there is a patent error on the face of the record or the
              order is against the established or settled principles of law.
              If two views are possible and a view, which is reasonable
              and logical, has been adopted by a trial Court, the other
              view, howsoever appealing, would not be allowed to be
              substituted in place of the trial Court’s views, which are,
              otherwise, reasonable and logical.”
       3)     Sharmila Vijay Shetty vs. Hemendra Prasad Barooah and
others, (2016) 3 GLR 50.
                     “Injunction   is   a   discretionary   relief  pending
              adjudication of the suit. Discretion has to be exercised on
              sound principals keeping in mind the golden principles
              governing grant of injunction.    Appeal against exercise of
              discretion is an appeal on principle. Appellate Court would
              normally not interfere with the exercise of discretion if the
              conclusion reached by the trial Court is reasonably possible
              based on the materials on record.”
       Thereafter, the learned first appellate court had relied on the case
of Terene Traders (supra), wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that-
                     “…..The City Civil Court on a careful consideration of
              the evidence came to a definite conclusion that the plaintiff-
              respondent No. 1 was not in possession of any portion of the
              suit premises on the date of the institution of the suit. Even
              the learned single Judge has not come to a different
              conclusion as he observes that the plaintiff was not in 'khas'
CRP No.398 /2016                                                            Page 6 of 12

               possession. There was no occasion for the High Court to
               have granted temporary injunction. It is not the case that
               the City Civil Court acted either illegally or with material
               irregularity in dismissing the plaintiff's application for
               temporary injunction.”
10)            The learned first appellate court had arrived at a finding that
the defendant No.1 was in possession of the suit land and preventing him
from constructing any house in accordance with legal permission would
definitely cause inconvenience to the opposite party than the petitioner at
this stage, further it was held that if the respondent is able to establish its
case after trial/ appeal then the structure constructed by the opposite
party can be demolished at the cost of the defendant No.1.
11)            A perusal of the judgment of Terene Traders (supra), what
appears is that the Hon’ble Apex Court did not decide the issue of
injunction at all. As reflected in the said judgment, the said civil court in
exercise of its discretion refused to grant injunction and arrived at a
finding that plaintiff No.1 was not in possession of any portion of the
premises on the date of institution of the suit. In the said judgment, it
does not contain information about any facts involved in the said case. It
is, however, mentioned that in that event, the learned City Judge has not
come to a different conclusion as he observed that the plaintiff was not in
a khas possession, there was no occasion for the trial court to grant
temporary injunction. The relevant part starts thereafter that- “….It is not
the case that the said civil court acted either illegally or with material
irregularity in dismissing the plaintiff’s application for temporary injunction.
That being so, the High Court could not have invoked its jurisdiction under
CRP No.398 /2016                                                                Page 7 of 12

Section 115 of the Code.” The said judgment is a very short judgment
and, as such, the same is quoted below:
              “(1.) Leave granted. Arguments heard.
              (2.) In this case a learned Judge of the Bombay High Court
              by his order dated July 1, 1986 has in revision set aside the
              order of the Bombay City Civil Court dated September 5,
              1983and allowed the plaintiffs' application for grant of
              temporary injunction under Order XXXIX, R. 1 of the Code of
              Civil Procedure, 1908. (3.) Normally, this Court does not, as
              a rule, interfere with an interlocutory order of this nature
              except under very exceptional circumstances. Unfortunately
              this is a case of that kind. The learned single Judge in
              dealing with the revision observes that even though
              respondent No. 1 Rameshchandra Jamnadas and Company
              were not doing business for some time because of financial
              hardship and were not in 'Khas' possession, that was not a
              ground on which it can be denied temporary injunction. We
              are afraid, the learned Judge was quite oblivious to the
              limitations of the powers of the High Court under S. 115 of
              the Code. The Bombay City Civil Court in a suit for
              declaration and injunction brought by plaintiff-respondent
              No.1 Rameshchandra Jamnadas and Company, after hearing
              both the parties, refused to grant its application under Order
              XXXIX, R. 1 of the Code. The grant or refusal of temporary
              injunction was in the discretion of the City Civil Court. No
              doubt, that discretion was a judicial one to be exercised in
              accordance with reason and on sound judicial principles. It
CRP No.398 /2016                                                            Page 8 of 12

                was not satisfied that the plaintiff had any prima facie case
                to justify the grant of such temporary injunction or that the
                balance of convenience required it. The City Civil Court on a
                careful consideration of the evidence came to a definite
                conclusion that the plaintiff-respondent No. 1 was not in
                possession of any portion of the suit premises on the date of
                the institution of the suit. Even the learned single Judge has
                not come to a different conclusion as he observes that the
                plaintiff was not in 'khas' possession. There was no occasion
                for the High Court to have granted temporary injunction. It
                is not the case that the City Civil Court acted either illegally
                or with material irregularity in dismissing the plaintiff's
                application for temporary injunction. That being so, the High
                Court could not have invoked its jurisdiction under S. 115 of
                the Code.”
12)             Therefore, on perusal of above quoted judgment of Terene
Traders (supra), the principle or ratio of the said case is that unless the
trial court is found to have exceeded its jurisdiction, or if it is found that it
had acted illegally or with material irregularity in dismissing the plaintiff’s
application of temporary injunction, the High Court could not have invoked
its jurisdiction under Section 115 of the Code to reverse the judgment and
substitute its discretion or views on the judicial discretion exercised by the
trial court.
13)             It further appears that the learned first appellate court had
interfered with the injunction order passed by the trial court on the ground
that there was no discussion about three golden principles for grant of
injunction i.e., the existence of prima facie case, balance of convenience
CRP No.398 /2016                                                                 Page 9 of 12

and the irreparable loss and injury, however, the first appellate court also
did not discuss those principles while passing an injunction directing both
the parties not to alienate the said property so that the suit property can
be preserved till disposal of the main suit.
14)           In my opinion, the meaning of ‘status quo’ is that the court
is not adjudicating the rights of the parties finally. By passing the said
orders of status quo, the civil court only gives direction to the parties in
terms of the order passed by the said court, without giving any finding on
any of the issues in respect of which the order of status quo was passed
and the legal commutation of the word ‘status quo’ it implies the existence
state of things at the said given point of time.
15)           In the present case in hand, when the trial court had passed
the order of status quo, the learned first appellate court appears to be
correct to hold that status quo which amounted to prevent the defendant
No.1 from making any construction is equivalent to an order of temporary
injunction. However, when the first appellate court is passing an order of
status quo, directing the parties not to alienate the suit premises in any
manner the said order indicates the mind of the court that the intention of
the court is that the suit property can be preserved till disposal of the
main suit. Although both orders are akin to an order of injunction, but in
the later case, it is not required for the court passing any order of status
quo of such nature to discuss the three golden principles for grant of
injunction.   Whereas in the first case, the parties were directed to
maintain status quo by the trial court, it had the effect of preventing the
proposed construction where it was obligatory for the trial court to discuss
the reasons for which the construction was stopped till the disposal of the
suit.  Hence, for the aforesaid reasons, I do not find any error in the
CRP No.398 /2016                                                           Page 10 of 12

appellate judgment whereby it was held that the trial court had not
discussed the three golden principles while dismissing the petition under
Order XXXIX Rule 1 & 2 read with 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
16)            Therefore, for the reasons given above, I do not find any
infirmity in the impugned judgment passed by the first appellate court
wherein it had not discussed the three golden principles for grant of
injunction as I find that such a discussion was not warranted in the facts
of that case where ‘status quo’ was granted only to prevent alienation of
the suit land, which in any way is covered by the doctrine of lis pendens.
17)            Insofar as the lack of possession over the suit land by the
plaintiff is concerned, I am of the opinion that when prayer (f) of the
plaint empowers the court to demolish the construction standing on the
disputed land, it is also prima facie indicative that a pucca construction is
indeed standing over the suit land on the date when the plaint was filed.
Hence, if any further construction is made over the suit land will continued
to be covered by the said prayer.
18)            Needless to state herein that whatever construction is being
made by the defendant No.1, would obviously be subjected to the decision
in the main suit.
19)            Therefore, notwithstanding the learned first appellate court
had not correctly interpreted the ratio of the judgment and Terene
Traders (supra), I find that the said error has not caused any prejudice to
the appellant herein, because the learned trial court while making the ad-
interim injunction/status quo absolute till the disposal of the suit, had not
discussed the three golden principles for grant of injunction, which is
mandatory.
CRP No.398 /2016                                                            Page 11 of 12

20)           For the said view of the matter, I do not find it a fit case for
interference with the impugned judgment and order dated 19.09.2016
passed by the learned Civil Judge, Dibrugarh in Misc. Appeal No.8/2014.
Hence, this revision is dismissed.
21)           Parties are left to bear their own costs.
                                                               JUDGE
MKS/
CRP No.398 /2016                                                             Page 12 of 12


