                        THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                           C.R.P. No. 332 OF 2016
                        Sri Prasana Kumar Keshan
                                                                … Petitioner
                             -Versus-
                        Sri Pradip Gogoi
                                                              ..Respondent
                                      BEFORE
              HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
For the petitioner              :       Mr. GN Sahewalla, Sr.Adv.
                                        Md. Aslam,
                                        Mr. D. Senapati,
                                        Ms.B. Sarma, Advocates.
For the respondent              :       Mr. TJ Mahanta, Sr. Adv.
Date of hearing                 :       20.07.2017
Date of Judgment                :       03.08.2017
                       JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
                 Heard Mr. GN Sahewalla, the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner as well as Mr. TJ Mahanta, the learned senior counsel for the
respondent.
2.               The petitioner is a tenant of the respondent in respect of a land
measuring 3.5 Kathas together with structures standing thereon claiming to
be the tenant since the time of his forefathers and in possession of the suit
premises since the year 1939.
CRP No.332/2016                                              Page 1 of 12

3.              The petitioner filed a suit being Title Suit No.50/2014 in the
court of learned Munsiff No.1 at Jorhat, stating therein that as per the
agreement, the petitioner had been paying the agreed annual rent. It was
stated that the petitioner had received a phone call from the respondent on
01.09.2014 asking him to come to Jorhat for discussion. On 06.09.2014 when
he went to meet the respondent at the agreed time at about 1:00 PM, 4/5
youths with 3 unknown ladies locked the plaintiff in the room and made him
signed some document and stamp papers without allowing him to read those
documents. Facing threat, the petitioner signed the documents to vacate the
suit premises immediately. On 07.09.2014, the petitioner lodged an FIR and
Jorhat PS Case No.1531/2014 was registered under Section 384/34 IPC
against the respondents and others.        Upon being threatened with eviction
from the suit premises on 07.09.2014, the petitioner filed a suit i.e., Title Suit
No.50/2014 with the prayer for declaring him as a tenant and for declaration
that the petitioner/plaintiff has the right, interest and possession over the suit
premises as a tenant and the respondent/defendant has not right to evict him
from the suit premises without following the procedure of law and for a
permanent injunction and other reliefs.
4.              The respondent/defendant filed the written statement as well
as counter claim, claiming the allegations made against him to be false and
prayed for dismissal of the suit and for declaring the respondent/defendant
having joint right, title, interest and possession over the Schedule -1 and
Schedule -2 lands together with other legal heirs of late Lakheswar Gogoi and
for declaring that the petitioner was never the tenant of the respondents, and
for declaration that the petitioner had no right, title, interest and possession
as tenant over the Schedule -1 and Schedule-2 lands and also for permanent
injunction restraining the petitioner and his men, workers, agents, caretakers,
family members etc. from entering into the Schedule-1 land and not to disturb
the peaceful possession of the respondent/defendant and other legal heirs of
Late Lakheswar Gogoi over the suit land.
CRP No.332/2016                                             Page 2 of 12

5.               In the meanwhile, the learned Munsiff No.1, Jorhat by an order
dated 19.09.2014        passed in Misc.(J) Case No.81/2014, restrained the
respondent from taking forceful possession of the tenanted premises from the
petitioner till disposal of the suit. Thereafter, the respondent filed a petition
seeking leave to file additional written statement under Order VIII Rule 9 read
with Section 151 CPC and the same was registered as Misc.(J) Case
No.81/2014. The learned Munsiff No.1, Jorhat vide order dated 03.03.2015
rejected the prayer for filing additional written statement and, as such, the
Misc.(J) Case No.81/2014 was dismissed.
6.               Thereafter, the respondent filed an application for amendment
of the written statement under Order VI Rule 17 CPC. The petitioner filed his
written objection and the learned Munsiff No.1, Jorhat, vide order dated
12.07.2016 allowed the proposed amendment and thereby allowed the
Misc.(J) Case No.73/2015.         The said order is under challenge in this
application.
7.               The learned senior counsel for the petitioner has submitted
that the amendment which was sought for vide Misc.(J) Case No.73/2015
could not have been allowed because of the dismissal of Misc.(J) Case
No.81/2014, which was an application under Order VIII Rule 9 read with 151
CPC.    It is further submitted that in the Misc.(J) Case No.81/2014, the
additional written statement was sought to be filed by the respondent
because his counsel who had drafted the written statement and counter claim
had also committed a mistake and because of the hurry shown and projected
by his counsel, the petitioner could not read out the written statement and
counter claim properly and therefore, he failed to state material facts. The
learned senior counsel for the petitioner has referred to paragraph-6 of
Misc.(J) Case No.81/2014 to show that there was an admission that the
defendants did not give the required or necessary information to the counsel
due to inadvertence and it was also mentioned therein that the written
statement and the counter claim was not read properly, which ought to have
CRP No.332/2016                                            Page 3 of 12

been done. It is submitted that the said ground was not accepted by the
learned trial court while rejecting the application for filing additional written
statement and the subsequent Misc.(J) Case No.73/2015 for amendment of
the plaint was made on the same ground. It is further submitted that in view
of the same, the subsequent amendment was barred by the principle of res-
judicata and/or constructive res-judicata.
8.              It is further submitted by the learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioner that the amendments cannot be permitted for the purpose of
withdrawing an admission made in the written statement. In this regard, he
relies on the case of Uttam Chand Kothari vs. Gauri Shankar Jalan and others,
2007 (1) GLT 37.
9.              Per contra, the learned senior counsel for the respondent has
argued in support of the impugned order.            He submits that the first
application was under Order VIII Rule 9 CPC which is for filing subsequent
pleadings.   It is submitted that an order passed for refusing leave to file
additional written statement cannot be treated to be a bar for filing an
application for amendment of the pleadings under Order VI Rule 17 CPC. It is
further submitted that in the present case, the trial was yet to commence and
therefore, there was no legal bar under the provisions of Order VI Rule 17 to
amend the plaint. It is further submitted that the provision of Order VI Rule
17 CPC is required to be construed liberally. In the present case, amendment
was required in the written statement. It is submitted that the yardstick for
permitting amendment of the plaint is somewhat more stringent, but when it
comes to amendment of the written statement, the approach of the court
ought to be liberal in allowing the amendment. It is further submitted that the
amendment was necessary for the purpose of determining the real question
of controversy between the parties.       The learned Senior Counsel for the
respondent submits that the facts of the case of Uttam Chand Kothari (supra)
does not apply to the present fact situation. It is explained that in the case of
Uttam Chand Kothari (supra), the petitioner/tenant has made an admission
CRP No.332/2016                                            Page 4 of 12

which was sought to be withdrawn by way of amendment and it is on that
factual circumstances that the judgment was passed in the said case.
However, in the present case in hand, the facts situation is just the reverse.
In the original written statement, the respondent /defendant had denied that
the petitioner was tenant under him and denied the existence of any
agreement. But by virtue of the proposed amendment, the respondent has
admitted the tenancy and the agreement referred to in the plaint was also
admitted. Therefore, this is not a case where the petitioner would be
dislodged if the amendment of the plaint was allowed, rather if the proposed
amendment was allowed then the effect of the same would be that the
respondent would be admitting the tenancy which was denied earlier.
10.             Having heard the learned Senior Counsel for the parties and on
perusal of the materials on record, it is seen that the application for leave to
file additional written statement and the ground for filing the application for
amendment are more or less common. The relevant pargarph-6 & 7 of the
Misc.(J) Case No.81/2014 are quoted below:
                        “6. That the Advocate who drafted the written
                        statement –cum-counter claim for and on behalf of the
                        defendant committed mistake in writing – “the written
                        statement –cum-counter claim and the relief sought
                        thereof. “ The defendant indeed did not give required,
                        and necessary instructions to the Lawyer due to
                        inadvertence. But because of hurry as shown and
                        projected by the Lawyer, the defendant could read the
                        written statement –cum- counter claim properly which
                        ought to have been done. So, the Lawyer could not
                        present the real and true fact relating to the tenancy
                        with other aspect as stated herein above; and failed to
                        plead/state material facts including necessary
                        particulars for adjudication of the suit/case for ends of
                        justice.
                        7.       That the replication is for subsequent pleadings
                        by way to additional written statement sought to be
                        filed, may not be treated as nature of amendment of
                        written statement u/r 17 order 6 of code civil
                        procedure, 1908.        In fact, by this Addl.Written
                        statement sought to be filed may not be treated as new
CRP No.332/2016                                              Page 5 of 12

                      case inconsistent with the earlier written statement. As
                      such, under the circumstances, the defendant by
                      finding no other alternative to focus the facts relating to
                      the defendant’s case and for bringing admitted/facts
                      (by the plaintiff), filed the petition for permission for the
                      hon’ble court to file/grant leave to file additional written
                      statement u/o VIII rule 9 (subsequent pleadings).”
11.            The ground for filing Misc.(J) Case No.73/2015 is also quoted
below, the relevant paragraphs are- 2,3 & 4:
                      “2. That in the said written statement cum-counter
                      claim was seemed to be not drafted properly in the
                      context of the case of the defendant, but the drafting
                      was done from the side of the Advocate drafter without
                      understanding the real case of the defendant, admitting
                      may points and bringing certain facts, not necessary to
                      plead in the written statement. The said facts which are
                      not pertinent to the real facts of the case of the
                      defendant were pleaded without any instruction but the
                      drafter substantialize the same in the said unnecessary
                      contents in the pleading without understanding the
                      facts and Laws relating to the what matter, indeed,
                      required to be drafted in the written statement. In this,
                      it is further stated that the drafter of the written
                      statement also, by virtue of innocence and ignorance,
                      made the case of the defendant clumsy i.e. difficult to
                      handle or use and also proceed with the case in the
                      right direction which the facts are stand to plead the
                      case in right direction. Those facts constituting the
                      almost all matters were remained in the pleading
                      without any real basis and also suffer from wrong
                      admission.
                      3.      That the defendant being an old and ailing
                      persons, though put his signature on the written
                      statement, yet because of his difficulties i.e. physical as
                      well as partial absence of prompt recollection of the fact
                      from the study, could not understand the facts relating
                      to his written statement- whether as per the facts,
                      instruction – given to the drafter Advocate. Hence, at
                      this moment, the amendment of written statement
                      (pleading became imperative to focus and convey the
                      truth, real facts on the basis of the defendant is
CRP No.332/2016                                              Page 6 of 12

                        required to present his case before the court with
                        existing facts and basis for relief; otherwise i.e. in
                        absence of amendment of the written statement, the
                        defendant would suffer from difficulties in running,
                        proceeding with his case. So that of the same, the
                        written statement need to be corrected by amendment
                        of the written statement. In this process of seeking
                        amendment of written statement (pleadings), the
                        defendant seeks to only elaborate and clarify the earlier
                        inadvertence and confusion made in written statement.
                        In this respect, there were some admission made in the
                        earlier written statement which also required
                        explanation for the purpose of amendment of written
                        statement etc. etc.
                        3.       That, it is further stated that the earlier written
                        statement suffers from certain inconsistency features
                        and real facts required to be added and pleaded in the
                        amendment of written statement. The said amendment
                        of written statement, when issues are not framed, it
                        would not cause injustice or irreparable loss to the
                        plaintiff or raise any new case or new cause of action.”
12.             The learned trial court while considering the proposed
amendment observed that in the present case, the defendants by the
proposed amendment is not withdrawing any admission but on the other
hand he was admitting many facts stated by the plaintiff, hence, the court
found that no prejudice was being caused to the defendant as he did not
defeat any legal rights that had accrued in favour of the plaintiff and the
proposed amendment was also pertinent to the real question of controversy in
the suit.   It was further held that as the proposed amendment does not
displace the plaintiff’s case but by such amendment, the tenancy agreement
which was earlier denied was admitted.            The amendment of such nature
would be very much necessary for determining the controversy between the
parties. The learned court below further observed that it is also seen that in
the original written statement, there was no admission made in favour of the
plaintiff and therefore, the amendment was allowed.
CRP No.332/2016                                              Page 7 of 12

13.             It is no longer res-integra that amendment which is necessary
for the purpose of determining the controversy between the parties can be
permitted to be made. If one needs an authority on the same, the case of
Sushil Kumar Jain vs. Manoj Kumar and others, (2009) 14 SCC 38, may be
referred to. In the said case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has referred to the
case of Panchdeo Narayan Srivastava vs. Km. Jyoti Sahay, (1984) Supp 1 SCC
594, Baldev Singh and others vs. Monohar Singh and another, (2006) 6 SCC
498 and Usha Balasaheb Swami and others vs. Kiran Appaswami and others ,
(2007) 5 SCC 602.
14.             Therefore, it is now required to be seen if the rejection of the
application for leave to file additional written statement can be constituted to
prohibit the application for amendment under Order VI Rule 17 CPC. In this
regard, the provisions of Section 11 CPC is quoted below:
                11. Res judicata.- No court shall try any suit or issue in
                which the matter directly and substantially in issue has been
                directly and substantially in issue in a former suit’ between the
                same parties, or between parties under whom they or any of
                them claim, litigating under the same title, in court competent
                to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has
                been subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally
                decided by such court.
                Explanation I: The expression “former suit” shall denote a suit
                which has been decided prior to the suit in question whether or
                not it was instituted prior thereto.
                Explanation II : For the purposes of this section, the
                competence of a court shall be determined irrespective of any
                provisions as to a right of appeal from the decision of such
                court.
                Explanation Ill: The matter above referred to must in the
                former suit have been alleged by one party and either denied
                or admitted, expressly or impliedly, by the other.
                Explanation IV: Any matter which might and ought to have
                been made ground of defence or attack in such former suit
                shall be deemed to have been a matter directly and
                substantially in issue in such suit.
CRP No.332/2016                                             Page 8 of 12

                Explanation V: Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not
                expressly granted by the decree, shall, for the purposes of this
                section, be deemed to have been refused.
                Explanation VI: Where persons litigate bona fide in respect of a
                public right or of a private right claimed in common for
                themselves and others, all persons interested in such right
                shall, for the purposes of this section, be deemed to claim
                under the persons so litigating.
                Explanation VII: The provisions of this section shall apply to a
                proceeding for the execution of a decree and reference in this
                section to any suit, issue or former suit shall be construed as
                references, respectively, to a proceeding for the execution of
                the decree, question arising in such proceeding and a former
                proceeding for the execution of that decree.
                Explanation VIII :An issue heard and finally decided by a Court
                of limited jurisdiction, competent to decide such issue, shall
                operate as res judicata in a subsequent Suit, notwithstanding
                that such court of limited jurisdiction was not competent to try
                such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been
                Subsequently raised.”
15.             In the opinion of this Court, when the application for leave to
file additional written statement was refused, not only the trial court had gone
into the issue of instructions given to the counsel by the respondent but also
considered the fact that the respondents intended to take entirely different
stand to that of his stand taken earlier. In the order dated 30.03.2016 passed
in Misc.(J) Case No.81/2014, the learned trial court has specifically referred
that ‘from the copy it reveals that this time the defendant has specifically
admitted that plaintiff was a tenant under their father late Lokeswar Gogoi
and that there was a tenancy agreement between the Lokeswar Gogoi as
landlord and the plaintiff on and from 01.03.1983……’.           Situated thus, it
appears that the defendants had tried to bring on record the tenancy vide
Tenancy Agreement executed by the father of the plaintiffs and has taken the
plea that the area mentioned in the tenancy agreement was not in
consonance      with   that  of  the suit land and premises as stated by the
plaintiff and thus, the defendant had projected a dual stand which is
CRP No.332/2016                                            Page 9 of 12

inconsistent with that of his earlier pleadings. It was further observed – “that
apart, the stand proposed to be taken by the defendant by filing additional
written statement would also be inconsistent with the prayer made in his
counter claim, wherein he had prayed for declaration that the plaintiff is not a
tenant under him.”
16.             The same ground which was rejected earlier by the order
dated 03.03.2015 is sought to be introduced by way of amendment under
Order VI Rule 17 CPC. Thus, in the opinion of this Court, it normally falls
within the principles of res-judicata which prohibits that no court shall try any
suit or issue in which the matter directly and substantially in issue has been
directly and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same parties.
It is a well settled proposition of law that the principle of res-judicata applies
also as between two stages in the same litigation. In the present case in
hand, the respondents had accepted the order dated 03.03.2015 passed in
Misc.(J) Case No.81/2014 and the said order had attained finality. Therefore,
the same issue cannot be permitted to be re-agitated at a subsequent stage
of the same proceeding. In this regard, the case of – (1) U.P. State Road
Transport Corporation vs. State of U.P., (2005) 1 SCC 444 (paragraph-11) and
(2) C.V. Rajendran and another vs. N.M. Muhammed Kunhi, (2002) 7 SCC 447
(paragraph– 6) may be reproduced below.
                In the case of U.P. State Road Transport Corporation vs. State
        of U.P., (2005) 1 SCC 444, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held in
        paragraph-11 that-
                “11. The principle of res judicata is based on the need of giving
                a finality to judicial decisions. The principle which prevents the
                same case being twice litigated is of general application and is
                not limited by the specific words of Section 11 of Code of Civil
                Procedure in this respect. Res judicata applies also as between
                two stages in the same litigation to this extent that a court,
                whether the trial court or a higher court having at an earlier
                stage decided a matter in one way will not allow the parties to
                re-agitate the matter again at a subsequent stage of the same
CRP No.332/2016                                             Page 10 of 12

                proceedings. (See Satyadhan vs. Smt. Deorajin Devi AIR 1960
                SC 941).”
                In the case of C.V. Rajendran and another vs. N.M. Muhammed
        Kunhi, (2002) 7 SCC 447, the Hon’ble Apex Court held in paragraph-6
        that-
                “6.     In the light of the above discussion we hold that as the
                question whether Section 15 of the Act bars the present
                eviction petition, was decided against the appellants by the
                Appellate Authority at the earlier stage of suit and it was
                allowed to become final, it is not open to the appellants to re-
                agitate the same at the subsequent stage of the suit. In this
                view of the matter, we do not find any illegality in the order
                under appeal to warrant any interference.”
17.             This Court is conscious that amendment of the plaint can be
allowed, permitting withdrawal of admission. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in
the case of Panchdeo Deo Narayan (supra) had held on the facts as stated
therein that – “we find no justification for the High Court interfering with the
order made by the learned trial court granting the application for amendment
to the plaint. We accordingly allow this appeal and set aside the judgment of
the High Court restoring the order of the learned trial Judge”. However, as
seen in the present case that the matter which has formed a part of the
application for amendment was raised at the former stage of the said
proceeding when the respondents had filed an application for leave to file
additional written statement and the learned trial court after considering the
facts stated therein, had rejected the prayer for filing additional written
statement. Therefore, notwithstanding that by an amendment, contradictory
stand was permitted in the case of Sushil Kumar Jain (supra), but in the facts
and circumstances of the present case, on finding that the issue was raised
earlier in form of an application for leave under Order VIII Rule 9 CPC, the
application for amendment is found to be hit by the principle of res-judicata,
in view of the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of U.P. State
Transport Corporation (supra). Accordingly, this Court is inclined to hold that
the learned trial court had committed jurisdictional error in allowing the prayer
CRP No.332/2016                                           Page 11 of 12

for amendment, which in the opinion of this Court is barred under the
principles of Section 11 CPC. Therefore, the revision stands allowed.
18.             Resultantly, the impugned order dated 12.07.2016 passed by
the learned Munsiff No.1, Jorhat in Misc.(J) Case No.73/2015 arising out of
Title Suit No.50/2014 is hereby set aside.    Parties are left to bear their own
costs.
19.             Both the parties are directed to appear before the learned
Court of Munsiff No.1, Jorhat on 21.08.2017 without any further notice of
appearance and by producing a certified copy of this order, shall seek further
instructions from the said learned court.
                                                                     JUDGE
MKS
CRP No.332/2016                                          Page 12 of 12


