                      THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
            CIVIL REVISION PETITON No. 433 OF 2016
                      Sri Tarini Kanta Bora                … Petitioner
                           -Versus-
                      Sri Hem Chandra Bora & others         ..Respondents
                                  BEFORE
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
Advocates for the Petitioner         : Mr. D. Mazumdar, Sr.Adv.,
                                       Mr. PD Nair,
                                       Mr. G. Alom,
                                       Mr. R. Sarma,
                                       Mr. H. Rahman
Advocates for the Respondents        : Mr. P. Sundi, for res.No.1
Date of hearing                      : 12.06.2017
Date judgment                        : 11.07.2017
                          JUDGMENT AND ORDER
           Heard Mr. D. Mozumdar, the learned Senior Counsel,
assisted by Mr. R. Sarma, appearing for the appellant and Mr. P. Sundi,
the learned counsel appearing for the respondent No.1.
2)         By filing this application under Article 227 of the Constitution
of India, the petitioner has challenged the order dated 01.10.2016
passed by the learned Munsiff, Kaliabor, in Title Execution Case No.
CRP No. 433/2016                                                  Page 1 of 9

3(K)/2014, by which his prayer for the measurement of the suit land
was rejected.
3)         In the said execution proceeding, the Respondent No.1 is the
Decree holder (hereinafter referred to as DH). The petitioner is the
Judgment Debtor No.1 (hereinafter referred to as 'JD-1' for short). The
Respondent No.2 is the Judgment Debtor No.2 (hereinafter referred to
as 'JD-2' for short). The Respondent No.3 herein is the Proforma
Judgment Debtor No.3, against whom no decree was passed. The
parties are arrayed as per the execution proceeding. All the parties are
brothers and they are the sons of Late Fatik Chandra Bora. The suit
land was left behind by the father of the parties at the time of his
death, which was inherited by his four sons. It is projected that during
his lifetime, he had given to his daughters share in landed property, as
such, they did not claim any share in the property situated at
Jakhalabandha Town, which is inclusive of the suit land.
4)         The DH had filed a suit for declaration of right, title and
interest over land described in Schedule-A of the plaint, for recovery of
possession of land described in Schedule-B and C by removing the
constructions over it and for permanent injunction. The suit was
numbered as Title Suit No. 10(K)/2010. The said suit was dismissed by
judgment and decree dated 30.04.2013, passed by the learned
Munsiff, Kaliabor. The said decree was challenged in appeal. The
learned first appellate court had allowed the appeal by judgment and
decree dated 18.03.2014 passed by the learned Court of Civil Judge,
Nagaon in Title Appeal No. 29/2013.
5)         As per the plaint, the DH was entitled to an equal share of 3
katha- 10 lecha land described in Schedule-A, but at the time of
partition, JD-1 and JD-2 were found to be encroaching over 1 katha
CRP No. 433/2016                                               Page 2 of 9

land each, described in Schedule-B and Schedule-C. Hence, the suit
and on dismissal of the suit, the appeal was preferred, which was
allowed and decreed.
6)         The decree was put to execution before the learned Munsiff,
Kaliabor, and the said case was registered as T. Ex. Case No. 3/2014.
In the said proceeding, the boundary of the decreetal land was
determined by the Lat Mandal and thereafter the decree was executed
on21.07.2016. At the time of execution, the JD-1 was allegedly absent
from his home. As per the report of the Bailiff of the Court, 5 lecha out
of the decreetal land could not be handed over to the DH, as a portion
of the building of the JD-1 fell within that area.
7)         The JD-1 then moved a petition before the learned executing
court, alleging that in his absence the Lat Mandal, in collusion with the
DH had incorrectly measured the land by leaving out around 10 feet
from the boundary wall from the western portion of the suit land and
thereby 10 feet extra land was sought to be usurped, over which the
JD-1 was having a 5 storied RCC building and, as such, it was prayed
that the land be correctly measured again in the presence of the Circle
Officer of Kaliabor Revenue Circle. The said prayer was objected to by
the JD. By upholding the objection, the learned executing court had
rejected the prayer for fresh measurement of the decreetal land by
passing the order impugned herein.
8)         The learned Senior Counsel for the JD-1 has projected that
he has instructions to submit that the DH may be given the decreetal
land, but by incorrectly measuring the land by leaving behind 10 feet
land from the boundary of the western portion of the suit land, the JD-
1 cannot be deprived of his land. It is submitted that from the reading
of the petition No. 402/16 dated 09.09.2016 (Annexure-I), filed before
CRP No. 433/2016                                               Page 3 of 9

the learned executing court, the JD-1 had produced a copy of the sale
deed dated 22.05.2013, by which the DH had sold 1 katha land to the
JD-2 during the pendency of the suit and he had also produced a copy
of the order by which the said 1 katha land sold to JD-2 was also
mutated in favour of JD-2 and that all these were done without
informing the trial court and it is submitted that thereby the DH had
obtained an in-executable decree. It is submitted that after withholding
such sale from the trial court and the first appellate Court, a fraudulent
decree was obtained and thus, the real intention of the DH is to still
get the decree executed for 3 katha-10 lechas land described in
Schedule-A, whereas from out of the said land the DH had sold 1 katha
land to JD-2. Hence, it is submitted that in any view of the matter, the
land-holding of the DH cannot be more than 2 katha-10 lechas by
deducting the 1 katha land sold to JD-2. It is submitted that by
withholding the sale, the DH has got the land incorrectly measured by
leaving 10 feet land as narrated above and is attempting to dispossess
the JD-1 from his land and in the process, get his five storied RCC
building demolished in a most illegal manner.
9)          The learned senior counsel for the JD-1 submits that he had
raised an issue before the learned executing court relating to his
threatened dispossession from his own land, which was outside the
scope of execution, but the said issue was not addressed at all.
10)         Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent No.1/ DH,
while supporting the order impugned herein, has submitted that in the
petition filed by the JD-1, no provisions has been quoted and, as such,
the JD-1 was not entitled to any relief and the learned court below was
not required to address each and every issue raised by the JD-1,
because, in the impugned order, the said learned court had held that
CRP No. 433/2016                                                Page 4 of 9

the decree can be executed without any local inspection being carried
out as the decreetal land was duly identified.
11)         It is submitted by the learned counsel for the DH that in
terms of the prayer (2) made in the plaint, the DH was entitled to get
possession of the Schedule-A land by removing the structures standing
thereon. Hence, if any structure has been made over the decreetal
land, the same is liable to be demolished and this court ought not to
be concerned if the JD-1 has illegally constructed the five storied RCC
building of any portion of land to which the DH was legally entitled to.
12)        The learned counsel for the DH has also submitted that the
conduct of the JD-1 can be found out from the impugned order, where
it is mentioned that by filing petition No. 408/16, the DH had informed
the learned executing court that the JD had dragged out seven pillars
from the land which was handed over and in this connection, an FIR
was lodged with Jakhalabandha Police Station and, as such, the said
learned Court had passed an order to restrain the JD, his men, women
and agents from committing any such acts and should not disturb the
possession which has been handed over to the decree holder.
13)        It is also submitted that if the prayers made by the JD-1 is
allowed, it would amount to allowing the learned executing court to go
behind the decree, when the JD-1 has accepted the first appellate
judgment and decree, which has attained finality because to their
knowledge, no appeal or revision had been preferred by the JD-1
against the first appellate decree.
14)        It was further submitted by the learned counsel for the DH
that there is a specific finding by the learned first appellate court in
CRP No. 433/2016                                              Page 5 of 9

paragraph 34 of the judgment that the JD-1 had dispossessed DH from
1 katha- 10 lechas land and that the JD-2 had dispossessed the DH
from 14 lechas land. It is also submitted that in paragraph 9 of the
written statement, the stand of the all the three JDs was that the "...
plaintiff's undefined 1/4th share of land includes residential houses,
kitchen, bathroom, latrine with septic tank and shop rooms, etc. ...",
which indicated that there would be some constructions over the
decreetal land and, as such, in terms of the judgment, the DH was
entitled to get the fruits of the decree. Hence, it was submitted that
the revision was liable to be dismissed.
15)         Thus, the only issue raised in the present application is
whether the learned executing court was right in refusing appointment
of a Commission to carry out local inspection. Owing to the nature of
the issue raised before this Court, it is deemed fit to dispose this
application at the "admission" stage itself, without calling for the
records, as such, this court has heard the learned counsels for both
sides and has perused the materials available in the record.
16)         One of the issues raised by the learned counsel for the DH is
that the JD-1 had not quoted any provisions in their petition No.
402/16. In this connection, this court is of the opinion that a mere non
quoting of the relevant provision of law in the petition by any party will
not prevent the court from exercising jurisdiction and a party will not
be disentitled to the relief sought for, if a case is found to be otherwise
made out under the facts of the case. Therefore, misquoting or non-
quoting of a provision of law cannot make the proceeding illegal.
17)         Thus, the real issue in controversy is that whether at the
execution stage, the JD-1 is entitled to get a Commission appointed for
CRP No. 433/2016                                                 Page 6 of 9

making a local inspection, when there is already a report from the Lat
Mandal in this regard.
18)        On examination of the pleadings, the statements made in
paragraph 9 of the written statement do not indicate that the houses
and structures fall within the share of the DH. But on reading the
complete paragraph, it appears that the JDs were referring to the
existence of houses and structures, by stating that without actual
physical demarcation, there could not be a perfect partition of the said
paternal property in metes and bounds. Thus, the foundation of
physical demarcation was laid in the written statement.
19)        Moreover, on reading paragraph 34 of the first appellate
court judgment, there is a reference to Commissioner's report showing
the JD-1 to be occupying 1 katha 4 lechas of land of DH and JD-2 was
occupying 14 lechas of plaintiff's land, but the finding recorded in the
same paragraph is that the DH was entitled to possession of 1 katha
18 lechas out of which the DH-1 was dispossessed by JD-1 and 14
lechas by JD-2. Therefore, there is apparently some mistake in
calculation, because 1 katha 10 lechas and 14 lechas land makes a
total of 2 katha 4 lechas, which does not match with the
Commissioner's report showing DH-1 occupying 1 katha- 4 lechas land.
20)        Under the circumstances, this court is of the view that when
there is ambiguity in the judgment, one option for the court would be
to declare the decree in-executable and the other option would be to
make an attempt to uphold the decree by referring to the pleadings of
the parties, their evidence on record or to appoint a Commission for
the purpose of elucidating the truth and, as such, for the said limited
purpose. Therefore, in the opinion of this Court, the executing court
can go behind the decree for the said limited purpose to find out from
CRP No. 433/2016                                              Page 7 of 9

the pleadings or evidence or by appointing a Commission under the
provisions of Order XXVI Rule 9 read with Order XXVI Rule 18-A of the
Civil Procedure Code to ensure that not only the decree is upheld, but
at the same time the decree is correctly executed.
21)         On the perusal of the decree, finds that very surprisingly,
there is no decree for removing and/or demolishing of the structures
belonging to the JD-1. Thus, there is one overwhelming reason for a
re-look into the matter, because while exercising superintending
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, it is also the
duty of this Court to keep the courts within the bounds of law.
22)         In the present case in hand, it is seen that in course of the
execution proceeding, the learned executing court is proposing to
demolish a five storied RCC building. Moreover, the admitted case of
the parties is that during the pendency of the suit, the DH had sold 1
katha land to JD-2. This fact was concealed from the trial court as well
as before the learned executing Court. Therefore, the JD-1 appears to
have a genuine grievance that without correctly measuring the land in
his presence, in guise of execution, the DJ-1 may be dispossessed from
his own land. Hence, the said circumstances, calls for interference in
the matter. Accordingly, this Court is of the view that by not
considering the said fact, the rejection of the prayer for appointment of
a Commission to make local inspection, may occasion a failure of
justice, which amounts to jurisdictional error as the learned executing
court failed to exercised jurisdiction vested in it by law. This is not a
case where the JD-1 is seeking to fish out evidence, but the purpose is
to enable the Court to arrive at a just and proper decision. Hence, this
Court has no hesitation to set aside the impugned order dated
01.10.2016 passed by the learned Munsiff, Kaliabor, in Title Execution
CRP No. 433/2016                                                Page 8 of 9

Case No. 3(K)/2014, by allowing appointment of Commission to make
a local enquiry so that ends of justice be allowed to prevail in a case
where the litigating parties are brothers. The learned executing Court
may pass consequential orders so as to enable the Commission to
carry out local inspection, which may be done by giving a fixed date,
so as to enable the parties or their representative to be positively
present, failing which the non-attending party would forfeit their
respective right for a fresh Commission on the same issue.
23)        As indicated herein before, there is no decree for removing
or demolishing the RCC building or other structures standing on the
decreetal land. Therefore, this Court is of the view that it would be
open for the JD-1 to agitate his grievance before the learned executing
court to get a decision on the issue as to whether the decree entitled
the learned executing court to remove the existing structures or not.
24)        As a result, this revision stands allowed. The issue is decided
in favour of the petitioner. The parties are left to bear their own cost.
25)        The parties are directed to appear before the learned
Munsiff, Kaliabor on 26.07.2017 without any further notice to appear
and to seek further instruction from the said learned court.
                                                                 JUDGE
MKS/
CRP No. 433/2016                                                 Page 9 of 9


