                           THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                              ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                  CRP 430 of 2016
       SMT. SHILPA AGARWALLA                        …..Petitioner
                                        -Versus-
       NAVEEN TAYAL                                …..Respondent
                                       BEFORE
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
       Advocates for the Petitioners       : Mr. G.N. Sahewalla, Sr. Adv.
                                           : Mr. Md. Aslam, Ms. B. Sarma,
                                           : Mr. P. Deka, Mr. A. Chetia.
       Advocates for the Respondents       : Ms. P. Choudhury, Mr. M. Dutta,
                                           : Ms. M. Barman.
       Date of hearing                     : 12.07.2017.
       Date of judgment and order          : 02.08.2017.
                           JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
           Heard Mr. G.N. Sahewalla, learned Senior Counsel, assisted by Ms.
Bijita Sarma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner as well as Ms. P.
Choudhury, learned counsel appearing for the respondent.
2.         By filing this application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India,
the petitioner has challenged the order dated 17.08.2016 passed by the learned
Principal Judge, Family Court, Guwahati in Misc. (J) Case No. 160/15 arising out
of F.C.(Civil) Case No. 548/15, filed under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955.
3.         The case as revealed from the record is that the parties are estranged
wife and husband. They were married on 29.01.2005. A daughter was born out
CRP 430/2016                                                                     Page 1 of 7

of the marriage. On the allegation that the petitioner was compelled to live a
miserable life, in the month of June, 2013, the petitioner had to leave her
matrimonial home with her minor daughter. She had gone to Bangaluru and
started to live there with her daughter. On receipt of notice in F.C.(Civil) Case
No. 548/15, the petitioner entered appearance. By filing Misc. (J) Case 160/15
under section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the petitioner claimed
maintenance for herself and her minor daughter.
4.         Bereft of unnecessary details, by filing the said Misc. case, the
petitioner alleged that the husband was not paying any maintenance to her as
well as her minor daughter, who is reading in 3rd standard and is 9 years old, as
such, she had taken shelter in a Non- Govt. Organization (NGO for short), named
Art of Living and they were living on whatever basic amenities that was being
provided by the said NGO. She claimed that her minor daughter was also
studying in a school managed by the said NGO. She claimed that her parents
came to Bangaluru from Tezpur to accompany her and her daughter to attend
the court proceeding at Guwahati. Claiming that the respondent had a flourishing
chain of business, the petitioner claimed maintenance for herself and her
daughter at the rate of Rs.30,000/- per month and a further sum of Rs.40,000/-
as cost for her date wise appearance. The respondent opposed the said
application and claimed that the petitioner was a Graduate and an Interior
Designer and she was doing various projects at Bangaluru and was having
income of around Rs.40,000/- per month. The respondent denied the claim of
the petitioner that he had various business. He projected that the petitioner
could have lived in Tezpur or other smaller cities, but she was living in an
expensive city like Bangaluru and the respondent expressed his inability to
maintain her at Bangaluru. As per the petition, registered as I.A.(C) No. 289/17
filed herein, the respondent appears to be doing business in the name of M/s.
Stylum and not various other firms as claimed by the petitioner.
CRP 430/2016                                                                  Page 2 of 7

5.          By the order impugned herein, the learned Family Court arrived at a
finding that the documents submitted by the petitioner revealed that while
staying with NGO, she was receiving nominal money, but while working with an
organization called ‘Madhurya’ since 02.01.2014 as a Interior Designer, she was
having a salary of Rs.40,000/- per month. During the pendency of the
proceeding, the petitioner made a request with her employer to relieve her and
accordingly, she was relieved w.e.f. 16.06.2016 at her request. According to the
petitioner, she was suffering from a rare disease – Sarcoidosis, and she having
received continuous treatment, the petitioner claimed to have been advised rest
for 6 months. Thus, the learned Family Court arrived at a conclusion that while
the earning of the respondent was Rs.30,000/- per month, the petitioner was
earning Rs.40,000/- per month and, as such, held that the petitioner was not
entitled to any maintenance. It is reiterated at the cost of repetition that
unnecessary details have been truncated herein, being not relevant or the
purpose of deciding the grievance raised herein.
6.          The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that at
the time when the impugned order was passed, there was no material before the
learned Family Court that the petitioner was having any decent income to sustain
herself or her minor daughter. It was submitted that she had resigned for her job
and was living with NGO and that she and her daughter were being maintained
by the NGO and the NGO was also taking care of the education of the minor
daughter were itself sufficient for the learned court below to award maintenance
in favour of the petitioner and her minor daughter. It was submitted that the
owing to the rare disease – Sarcoidosis, the petitioner was advised to take
complete rest and, as such, she was compelled to leave her job and, as such,
this court could take judicial notice of income from working as ‘sevika’ in ‘Art of
Living’. The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner states that the petitioner is
only seeking a decent maintenance and merely because she has chosen to live at
Bangaluru was not a ground to refuse maintenance, because she is opting to live
independently without becoming a burden for her parents. It is further submitted
CRP 430/2016                                                                    Page 3 of 7

that education and well being of the minor daughter was also one of the
liabilities of the respondent. The petitioner had duly stated in her application
before the learned Family Court that her parents had come to Bangaluru from
Tezpur and had provided tickets, and other cost for her appearance to defend
the divorce proceeding at Guwahati. It is submitted that the respondent was
quite capable of providing a reasonable maintenance of Rs.30,000/- per month
for herself and her daughter and the petitioner must also bear the cost of travel
and stay at Guwahati.
7.           Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent has objected to the
prayers made by the petitioner. It is submitted that the petitioner had not
disclosed her income with the NGO- Art of Living either before the learned Family
Court and nor before this Court. It is submitted that it is a mere oral version of
the petitioner’s Senior Counsel that the petitioner was working as a ‘sevika’ with
the Art of Living, without the petitioner having filed any document to substantiate
the same. Moreover, the petitioner had suppressed the fact that she was working
as an Interior Designer with an organization and that at the time when she had
presented the petition for maintenance, she was drawing a salary of Rs.40,000/-
per month, which was much more than the earning of the respondent. It was
submitted that the petitioner cannot be granted maintenance on the basis of the
income/ earning of other members of the family, and further that when the
respondent had proved his income to be about Rs.30,000/- per annum, the
burden was shifted on the petitioner to disprove it. However, the learned counsel
for the respondent has stated that it was the specific stand of the respondent
that he was ready to pay a reasonable maintenance for the minor child.
8.           Having heard the learned counsels for the parties, this court has
perused the materials on record. It is observed that the petitioner had claimed in
Misc. (J) Case No. 160/15 that she had joined ‘Art of Living’ and was living her
life with her daughter with the basic amenities provided by them. In the said
petition,    the petitioner did not disclose her earning.   However, as per order
CRP 430/2016                                                                   Page 4 of 7

dated 30.05.2016, passed by the learned Principal Judge, Family Court,
Guwahati, in Misc. (J) Case No. 160/15, the petitioner herein had submitted her
salary details. It was disclosed thereby that the petitioner was working as a
Interior Designer with Madhurya w.e.f. 02.01.2014 and in the month of April,
2016, she was getting a net salary of Rs.40,000/- per month. Till that point, the
said fact about her employment was not disclosed before the learned court
below. Moreover, even as on date, the petitioner has not disclosed her income.
In the opinion of this court, as the petitioner was claiming maintenance and it
had come out in course of trial that she was having a source of employment and,
as such, the non-disclosure would lead to a presumption under section 114
Illustration (g) of the Evidence Act, 1872 that if the document is produced, the
same would not be favourable to the petitioner. Thus, this court does not find
any jurisdictional error by the learned Principal Judge, Family Court, Guwahati, to
have refused maintenance to the petitioner.
9.          The application for maintenance was filed under Section 24 of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. The said provisions read as follows:-
               "24.   M aintenance      pendente      lite   and    expenses      of
            proceedings- Where in any proceedings under this Act it appears to
            the Court that either the wife or the husband, as the case may be, has
            no independent income sufficient for her or his support and the
            necessary expenses of the proceedings, it may, on the application of
            the wife or the husband order the respondent to pay to the petitioner
            the expenses of the proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding
            such sum as, having regard to the petitioners own income and the
            income of the respondent, it may seem to the Court to be reasonable:
               Provided that the application for payment of the expenses of the
            proceeding and such monthly sum during the proceeding, shall, as far
            as possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of notice on
            the wife or the husband, as the case may be.”
CRP 430/2016                                                                     Page 5 of 7

10.        The law, thus, is very clear. A plain reading of the Section makes it
amply clear that to claim the maintenance pendente lite under Section 24 of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the spouse who moves the application must show that
she or he has no sufficient income to maintain and support herself or himself.
Obviously, the word "support" visualizes a situation where the spouse is entitled
to enjoy the same status as that of the respondent spouse. Therefore, where
there are great disparities in the income of the husband and the wife, the Court
may have to bring about a balance between the two by awarding maintenance
pendente lite to the spouse who is earning a lesser amount. However, in my
humble opinion, this is not to be done on mathematical basis. The purpose is not
that if the husband is earning Rs.10,000/- and the wife is earning Rs.5,000/-
then both are to be brought to the level of Rs.7,500/-. That is not the purpose of
Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. But, the purpose of Section 24 is to
provide immediate relief to the spouse who is unable to support or maintain
himself or herself.
11.        In the present case, what has been proved on record is that on the
date when the petitioner- wife had filed the petition for maintenance, she was
earning Rs.40,000/- per month as salary, which was more than the respondent-
husband. Thereafter, during the pendency of the case, she had quitted the job
and joined ‘Art of Living’, but did not prove her income from the said source.
However, if her income was meager, there was no reason for not disclosing the
same. The withholding of income calls for drawing adverse presumption under
Section 114 Illustration (g) of Evidence Act. The petitioner has not been able to
prove that the disparity of the income between her and the respondent- husband
is so large as to enable this Court to say that the wife is unable to maintain
herself as per the status of the husband.
12.        However, as per medical certificates produced by the petitioner, she is
reported to be suffering from Sarcoidosis, which is “a systematic granulomatous
disease that predominantly affects the lungs with resulting fibrosis. The said
CRP 430/2016                                                                  Page 6 of 7

disease is claimed to be a rare disease and with the said disease, the petitioner
has to take care of the minor child both for her healthy growth and for her
education. Therefore, while finding no merit in this application, but having
noticed that it is pleaded that the petitioner is ill and has to take care of the
minor daughter, this court is inclined to clarify that this court is of the view that
the dismissal of this application shall not be construed to be a bar for the
petitioner to invoke Section 125 of the Criminal Procedure Code, if so advised.
13.         This court is conscious of the fact that the maintenance under section
24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1956 is only for interim maintenance and, as such,
this order shall not preclude the learned Family Court to pass such appropriate
orders for maintenance under the relevant provisions of law to which the
petitioner and the daughter of the parties are found to be entitled to.
14.         It is further clarified that the observations by this Court was solely for
the purpose of this order and nothing stated herein shall be construed to be the
opinion of this Court on the merit of the main case, which has not been gone into
by this Court. Hence, the learned Family Court shall not be influenced by the
observations made herein.
15.         In view of the discussions above, this revision stands dismissed. The
parties are left to bear their own cost.
16.         The parties shall appear before the Court of the learned Principal
Judge, Family Court, Guwahati, on 17.08.2017 without any further notice for
appearance and seek further instructions from the said learned court.
                                                                               JUDGE
Mkumar
CRP 430/2016                                                                      Page 7 of 7


