                            THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                               ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                    CRP 80 of 2017
        PURABI BORAH DAS                                   …..Petitioner
                                         -Versus-
        KIRAN SAIKIA                                      …..Respondent
                                        BEFORE
                  HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
        Advocates for the Petitioners       : Mr. M. Biswas, Mr. G.J. Saikia.
        Advocates for the Respondents       : Mr. G.N. Sahewalla, Sr. Adv.
                                            : Mr. D. Senapati, Md. Aslam, Ms. B. Sarma,
        Date of hearing and Order           : 15.06.2017
                            JUDGMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
            Heard Mr. M. Biswas, learned counsel for the petitioner as well as Mr.
G.N. Sahewalla, learned senior counsel assisted by Ms. D. Swami, learned
counsel appearing for the respondent.
2)          By filing this application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India,
the petitioner had challenged the impugned order dated 20.01.2017 passed by
the learned Additional District Judge-II (FTC), Tinsukia in T.S. (Election) No.
33/2015. By the said order, petition No. 2292/2016 filed by the respondent
herein (petitioner in the election petition case) was allowed by directing the
Returning Officer/sub-Divisional Officer, Margharita to produce the Ballot Papers
Accounts submitted by the Presiding Officer and the final result sheet to the
court in a sealed packet to enable the petitioner to prepare and file her evidence
in affidavit.
CRP 80/2017                                                                     Page 1 of 17

3)         The petitioner herein was elected as a Ward Commissioner of ward
No. 6 of Dibgoi Town Committee as a candidate of the Indian National Congress,
defeating the respondent herein who was a candidate of Bhartiya Janta Party by
a margin of one vote. The respondent who was the defeated candidate, filed a
proceeding for challenging the election of the petitioner as a Ward Commissioner
under the provisions of Section 16 of the Assam Municipal Act, 1956 read with
Rule 101, 102, 103 and 104 of the Rules for the Election of Commissioners of
Municipal Boards under the Assam Municipal Act, 1956. The said proceeding was
numbered as T.S.(Election) No. 33/2015. The petitioner appeared in the said
proceeding and contested the suit. The following prayers are made in the said
election petition:
           a. To admit this petition and to issue notice to the respondents to
                show cause as to why the petition shall not be allowed.
           b. To direct the concerned authorities to produce all the papers
                including all the ballot papers of Ward No. 6 of Digboi Town
                Committee in sealed condition.
           c. To grant leave to the petitioner to adduce evidence in support of
                this case.
           d. To grant to amend the petition or to add further facts as and when
                required in the interest of justice.
           e. To cause verification of the ballot papers by the Ld. Court and to
                cause recounting of ballot papers after scrutiny of all the ballot
                papers and to declare the result of the election of Ward No. 6 of
                Digboi Town Committee afresh and to declare the earlier result as
                null and void and cancelled.
4)         On an earlier occasion, the petitioner had approached this Court by
filing W.P.(C) No. 6309/2016 when the learned court below had allowed one
interlocutory application whereby the recounting of votes was directed. At that
CRP 80/2017                                                               Page 2 of 17

time, this Court by order dated 06.10.2016, had allowed the writ petition, by
setting aside the order dated 17.09.2016, inter-alia, on noting that in the election
petition itself there was a prayer for recounting and thus, interim prayer was
same as that of the final prayer which could have been availed by the election
petitioner only when she would have succeeded in the proceedings. In the
context of what was stated in the said order, the order impugned therein was set
aside, directing the learned court below to take up the matter expeditiously on
day to day basis and shall dispose of the same after affording adequate
opportunity of adducing evidence of both the sides.
5)          Thereafter, by filing petition No. 2292/2016 on 01.11.2016, the
respondent herein had prayed before the learned court below to pass necessary
orders directing the Returning Officer/Sub-Divisional Officer, Margharita to
produce the Ballot Papers Accounts submitted by the Presiding Officers and the
Final Result Sheet to enable the petitioner to prepare and file her evidence in
affidavit for the ends of justice. The petitioner herein had filed her written
objection on 17.11.2016 and the learned Additional District Judge-II (FTC),
Tinsukia upon hearing the counsel for both sides, vide             an order dated
20.01.2017, allowed the prayer by directing the said documents to be produced
in a sealed packet to enable the petitioner to prepare and file her evidence-in-
affidavit. The said order dated 20.01.2017 is assailed herein.
6)          The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that as prayer (b) of
the election petition contains a prayer to direct the authorities to produce the
papers including all the ballot papers of Ward No. 6 of the Dibgoi Town
Committee in a sealed condition, on the same ratio of the judgment passed by
this Court in the earlier writ petition between the parties i.e. W.P.(C) 6309/2016,
as the prayer to produce all the papers is one of the main relief, an order in the
said interlocutory application could not have been passed by the learned court
below. It is further submitted that in the present case issues were framed by the
learned trial court on 16.09.2015. Therefore, under the provisions of Order XVI
CRP 80/2017                                                                 Page 3 of 17

Rule 1(1) of the CPC (herein referred to as the ‘CPC’ for short), it was incumbent
on the respondent to file a list of witnesses whom they proposed to call either to
give evidence or to produce documents not later than 15 days from the date on
which the issues have settled. It is submitted that as the application to call for
the Ballot Papers Accounts and the Final Result Sheet was filed beyond the
limitation prescribed in Order XVI Rule 1(1) CPC, the order allowing the prayer is
not sustainable when no list of witness was submitted by the respondent. It is
further submitted that unless the list of witness was filed, the respondent could
not have obtained an order within the meaning of Order XVI Rule 2 CPC to issue
summons securing the attendance of a witness to produce the records.
7)          By relying on the provisions of Order XVI Rule 1(3) CPC, it is
submitted that unless the sufficient cause is shown for the omission to mention
the name of list of witness, a civil court would not have the power to issue
summons of production of witness to produce the documents at a belated stage.
It is further submitted that the provisions of Order XVI Rule 6 CPC is not in
derogation of the provisions of Order XVI Rule 1 CPC and unless the conditions of
Rule 1 of Order XVI is complied with, no order to issue summons for production
of documents under Order XVI Rule 6 CPC is permissible. In support of his
submission, the learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the following
case citations, (i) Vidhyadhar v. Manikrao and another, (1999) 3 SCC 573 , (ii)
Gauranga Mandal and Ors. v. Debadas Sarkar, (2012) 5 GLT 144 and (iii) Mange
Ram v. Brij Mohan and Ors., (1983) 4 SCC 36. The relevant paragraphs on which
he has placed reliance is quoted below:
                    (i) Vidhyadhar v. Manikrao and another (supra):
                    “31. These two Rules read together clearly indicate that it is
               open to a party to summon the witnesses to the Court or may,
               without applying for summons, bring the witnesses to give
               evidence or to produce documents. Sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 provides
               that although the name of a witness may not find place in the list
CRP 80/2017                                                                 Page 4 of 17

          of witnesses filed by a party in the Court, it may allow the party to
          produce a witness though he may not have been summoned
          through the Court. Rule 1A which was introduced by the CPC
          (Amendment) Act, 1976 with effect from 1.2.1977 has placed the
          matter beyond doubt by providing in clear and specific terms that
          any party to the suit may bring any witness to give evidence or to
          produce documents. Since this Rule is subject to the provisions of
          Sub-rule (3) of Rule 1, all that can be contended is that before
          proceeding to examine any witness who might have been brought
          by a party for that purpose, the leave of the Court may be
          necessary but this by itself will not mean that Rule 1A was in
          derogation of Sub-rule (3) of Rule 1. The whole position was
          explained by this Court in Mange Ram v. Brij Mohan and Ors. , in
          which it was held that Sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 and Rule 1A operate
          in two different areas and cater to two different situations. It was
          held:
                 There is no inner contradiction between Sub-rule (1) of Rule
          1 and Rule 1A of Order XVI. Sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of Order XVI
          confers a wider jurisdiction on the Court to cater to a situation
          where the party has failed to name the witness in the list and yet
          the party is unable to produce him or her on his own under Rule
          1A and in such a situation the party of necessity has to seek the
          assistance of the Court under Sub-rule (3) to procure the presence
          of the witness and the Court may if it is satisfied that the party has
          sufficient cause for the omission to mention the name of such
          witness in the list filed under Sub-rule (1) of Rule 1, the Court may
          still extend its assistance for procuring the presence of such a
          witness by issuing a summons through the Court or otherwise
          which ordinarily the Court would not extend for procuring the
          attendance of a witness whose name is not shown in the list.
CRP 80/2017                                                             Page 5 of 17

          Therefore, Sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 and Rule 1A operate in two
          different areas and cater to two different situations.”
                 (ii) Gauranga Mandal and Ors. (supra):
                  “11. From the aforesaid judgments of the Supreme Court, it
          is apparent that Rule 1a enables any party to suit to bring any
          witness to give evidence or to produce documents without
          submitting a list of witness and without applying for summons. It
          also follows that for application of sub-rule (3) of Rule (1), a list of
          witnesses must have been filed in terms of Sub-rule (3) of Rule 1
          and application of sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 cannot arise in a case
          where no such list of witnesses had been filed.”
                 (iii) Mange Ram (supra):
                  “8. Sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of order XVI casts an obligation
          on every party to a proceeding to present a list of witnesses whom
          it t proposes to call either to give evidence or to produce
          documents and obtain summonses to such persons for their
          attendance in Court. Sub-rule (2) requires that the parties seeking
          the assistance of the Court for procuring the attendance of a
          witness must make an application stating therein the purpose for
          which the witness is proposed to be summoned. Sub-rule (3)
          confers a discretion on the Court to permit a party to summon
          through Court or otherwise any witness other than those whose
          names appear in the list submitted in sub-rule (1), if such party
          shows sufficient cause for the omission to mention the name of
          such witness in the said list. Rule 1A in its amended form in force
          since 1977 enables a party to bring any witness to give evidence
          or to produce documents but this enabling provision is subject to
          the provision contained in sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 of order XVI. If a
CRP 80/2017                                                             Page 6 of 17

          reference to Rule 22 of the High Court Rules is recalled at this
          stage, it merely reenacts sub-rule (2) of Rule 1 of order XVI.”
                “9. If the requirements of these provisions are conjointly
          read and properly analysed, it clearly transpires that the obligation
          to supply the list as well as the gist of the evidence of each
          witness whose name is entered in the list has to be carried out in
          respect of those witnesses for procuring whose attendance the
          party needs the assistance of the Court. When a summons is
          issued by the Court for procuring the presence of a witness, it has
          certain consequences in law. If the summons is served and the
          person served fails to comply with the same, certain consequences
          in law ensue as provided in Rule 10 of order XVI. The consequence
          is that where the witness summoned either to give evidence or to
          produce documents fails to attend or to produce the documents in
          compliance with such summons, the Court on being satisfied of the
          service as provided therein and is further satisfied that the person
          has without lawful excuse failed to honour the summons, the Court
          may issue is a proclamation requiring him to attend to give
          evidence or to produce the document at a time and place to be
          named therein; and a copy of such proclamation shall be affixed in
          the manner therein provided. Simultaneously, the Court may, in its
          discretion, issue a warrant, either with or without bail, for the
          arrest of such person, and may make an order for the attachment
          of his property for such amount as it thinks fit. Even if thereafter
          the witness fails to appear, the Court may impose upon him such
          fine not exceeding five hundred rupees as it thinks fit, having
          regard to his condition in life and all the circumstances of the case,
          and may order his property, or any part, thereof, to be attached
          and sold as provided in Rule 12 of order XVI. In view of this legal
          consequence ensuing from the issuance of a summons by the
CRP 80/2017                                                             Page 7 of 17

          Court and failure to comply with the same, the scheme of Rules 1,
          1A of order XVI and Rule 22 of the Rules framed by the High Court
          clearly envisaged filing of a list only in respect of witnesses whom
          the parties desire to t examine and procure presence with the
          assistance of the Court. There, however, remains an area where if
          the party to a proceeding does not desire the assistance of the
          Court for procuring the presence of a witness, obviously the party
          can produce such witness on the date of hearing and the Court
          cannot decline to examine the witness unless the Court proposes
          to act under the proviso to sub- sec. (1) of Sec. 87 of the '1951
          Act' which enables the Court for reasons to be recorded in writing,
          to refuse to examine any witness or witnesses if it is of the opinion
          that the evidence of such witness or witnesses is not material for
          the decision of the petition or that the party tendering such
          witness or witnesses is doing so on frivolous grounds or with a
          view to delay the proceedings. It, therefore, unquestionably
          transpires that the obligation to supply the list of witnesses within
          the time prescribed under sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of order XVI is in
          respect of witnesses to procure whose presence the assistance of
          the Court is t necessary. And this ought to be so because the
          Court wants to be satisfied about the necessity and relevance of
          the evidence of such witness whose presence will be procured with
          the assistance of the Court. This not only explains the necessity of
          setting out the names of witnesses in the list but also the gist of
          evidence of each witness. If mere omission to mention the name
          of a witness in the list envisaged by sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 of order
          XVI would enable the Court to decline to examine such witness,
          Rule 1A of order XVI would not have omitted to mention that only
          those witnesses kept present could be examined whose names are
          mentioned in the list envisaged by sub-rule (1) and who can be
          produced without the assistance of the Court. Viewed from this
CRP 80/2017                                                             Page 8 of 17

          angle, Rule 1A becomes wholly redundant. If it is obligatory upon
          the party to mention the 1 names of all witnesses irrespective of
          the fact whether some or all of them are to be summoned and
          even the names of those whom the party desires to produce
          without the assistance of the Court are also required to be
          mentioned in the list on the pain that they may not be permitted
          to be examined, Rule 1A would have given a clear legislative
          exposition in that behalf and the marginal note of Rule 1A clearly
          negatives this suggestion. Marginal note of Rule 1A reads as
          'Production of witnesses without summons' and the rule proceeds
          to enable a party to bring any witness to give evidence or to
          produce documents without applying for summons under Rule 1. If
          it was implicit in Rule 1A that it only enables the party to examine
          only those witnesses whose names are mentioned in the list filed
          under sub rule (1) of Rule 1 whom the party would produce before
          the Court without the assistance of the Court, it was not necessary
          to provide in Rule 1A that the party may bring any witness to give
          evidence or to produce documents without applying for summons
          under R Rule 1. Rule 1A of order XVI clearly brings to surface the
          two situations in which the two rules operate. Where the party
          wants the assistance of the Court to procure presence of a witness
          on being summoned through the Court, it is obligatory on the
          party to file the list with the gist of evidence of witness in the
          Court as directed by sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 and make an
          application as provided by sub-rule (2) of Rule 1. But where the
          party would be in a position to produce its witnesses without the
          assistance of the Court, it can do so under Rule 1A of order XVI
          irrespective of the fact whether the name of such witness is
          mentioned in the list or not.”
CRP 80/2017                                                            Page 9 of 17

                       “10. It was, however. contended that Rule 1A is subject to
                sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 and therefore, the Court must ascertain how
                far sub-rule (3) would carve out an exception to the enabling
                provision contained in Rule 1A. There is no inner contradiction
                between sub-rule (1) of Rule 1 and Rule 1A of Order XVI. Sub-rule
                (3) of Rule 1 of Order XVI confers a wider jurisdiction on the Court
                to cater to a situation where the party has failed to name the
                witness in the list and yet the party is unable to produce him or
                her on his own under Rule 1A and in such a situation the party of
                necessity has to seek the assistance of the Court under sub-rule
                (3) to procure the presence of the witness and the Court may if it
                is satisfied that the party has sufficient cause for the omission to
                mention the name of such witness in the list filed under sub-rule
                (1) of Rule 1, the Court may still extend its assistance for
                procuring the presence of such a witness by issuing a summons
                through the Court or otherwice which ordinarily the court would
                not extend for procuring the attendance of a witness whose name
                is not shown in the list. Therefore, sub-rule (3) of Rule 1 and Rule
                1A operate in two different areas and cater to two different
                situations.”
8)          Per-contra, the learned senior counsel for the respondent has made a
short submission. It is submitted that as the respondent is required to prove his
own case, he had merely sought for collection of documents, which is wherein
the scope of Order XIII Rule 10 CPC read with provisions of Order XVI Rule 6
CPC. He has submitted that documents on record is the essential for proving her
case and ordinarily such a prayer to call for the records ought not to be refused
as it the duty of the court to find out the truth and therefore, the procedural
aspects of calling for the record should be dealt not in very strict interpretation,
but the procedural chain should not act as a fetter for the court so as to prevent
it to arrive at the truth. In support of his contention, the learned senior counsel
CRP 80/2017                                                                Page 10 of 17

for the respondent has relied on the case of Lakshmi and another v. Chinnammal
Alias Rayyammal and Ors., (2009) 13 SCC 25. He has placed reliance on
paragraphs 13, 17 to 21.
                    “13. If bringing on record a document is essential for proving
              the case by a party, ordinarily the same should not be refused; the
              Court's duty being to find out the truth. The procedural mechanics
              necessary to arrive at a just decision must be encouraged. We are
              not unmindful of the fact that the court in the said process would
              not encourage any fishing enquiry. It would also not assist a party
              in procuring a document which he should have himself filed.
                    17. In a Civil Suit, a document has to be proved. The report
              of an expert is also required to be brought on record in terms of
              the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act. Having regard to the
              provisions contained in Order XIII, Rule 8 of the Code, the Civil
              Court would furthermore be entitled to substitute the original
              document by a certified copy. We, therefore, fail to appreciate as
              to why the said original document could not be called for.
                    18. We may notice that a Division Bench of the Calcutta High
              Court in Union of India & Anr. v. The State & Anr. [1961 XLII ITR
              753] held that a document may also be called for from the
              authorities under the Income Tax Act, stating :
                    "Further, it may be pointed out that Order XIII, rule 10(I) of
              the Civil Procedure Code does not refer to a judicial proceeding. It
              refers to a suit or proceeding. Even if the proceeding in connection
              with the issue of a search warrant under the Foreign Exchange
              Regulation Act be considered a non-judicial proceeding on the part
              of the Magistrate, such a non-judicial proceeding would still be
              within the scope of Order XIII, rule 10(1) of the Civil Procedure
CRP 80/2017                                                              Page 11 of 17

          Code. In the circumstances, we cannot accept the contention of
          Mr. Dutta that as there was no proceeding before the Chief
          Presidency Magistrate the requisition no proceeding before the
          Chief Presidency Magistrate the requisition under Order XIII, rule
          10 of the Civil Procedure Code made by the Income-tax Officer
          would not be a valid requisition."
                 19. In Kailash v. Nanhku & Ors. [(2005) 4 SCC 480], this
          Court has categorically held :
                 "All the rules of procedure are the handmaid of justice. The
          language employed by the draftsman of processual law may be
          liberal or stringent, but the fact remains that the object of
          prescribing procedure is to advance the cause of justice. In an
          adversarial system, no party should ordinarily be denied the
          opportunity of participating in the process of justice dispensation.
          Unless compelled by express and specific language of the statute,
          the provisions of CPC or any other procedural enactment ought not
          to be construed in a manner which would leave the court helpless
          to meet extraordinary situations in the ends of justice."
                 20. In Uday Shankar Triyar v. Ram Kalewar Prasad Singh &
          Anr. [(2006) 1 SCC 75], it was observed :
                 "17. Non-compliance with any procedural requirement
          relating to a pleading, memorandum of appeal or application or
          petition for relief should not entail automatic dismissal or rejection,
          unless the relevant statute or rule so mandates. Procedural defects
          and irregularities which are curable should not be allowed to
          defeat substantive rights or to cause injustice. Procedure, a hand-
          maiden to justice, should never be made a tool to deny justice or
          perpetuate injustice, by any oppressive or punitive use. The well
          recognized exceptions to this principle are :
CRP 80/2017                                                            Page 12 of 17

              i) where the Statute prescribing the procedure, also prescribes
              specifically the consequence of non-compliance.
              ii) where the procedural defect is not rectified even after it is
              pointed out and due opportunity is given for rectifying it;
              iii) where the non-compliance or violation is proved to be deliberate
              or mischievous;
              iv) where the rectification of defect would affect the case on merits
              or will affect the jurisdiction of the court.
              v) in case of Memorandum of Appeal, there is complete absence of
              authority and the appeal is presented without the knowledge,
              consent and authority of the appellant."
                      21. In view of the aforementioned pronouncements, we are
                of the opinion that the learned Trial Judge should have acceded to
                the prayer of the appellants herein.”
9)          On hearing the learned counsel for both the sides and on perusal of
the materials available on record, considering the question raised in the present
application, I am of the opinion that the matter can be disposed of at this
admission stage to avoid any further delay in the progress of the election
petition. It may be pertinent to state that by the order dated 06.10.2016 passed
by this Court in W.P.(C) 6309/2016, while allowing the said writ petition, this
Court has mentioned in paragraph 8 as follows:
                      “8. The writ petition stands allowed. The order dated
              17.09.2016 is hereby set side. the learned District Judge, to whose
              court the election petition is pending, shall take up the matter
              expeditiously on day to day basis and shall dispose of the same
              after affording adequate opportunity of adducing evidence to both
              the sides.
CRP 80/2017                                                               Page 13 of 17

10)         As per the liberty given by this Court granting opportunity of adducing
of evidence, the respondent had filed a petition No. 2292/2016 on 01.11.2016 for
production of (i) Ballot Papers Accounts submitted by the Presiding Officer and
(ii) the Final Result Sheet. As per the said petition, the same was to enable the
petitioner to prepare and file her evidence in affidavit for the purpose of giving
evidence in the case. The said prayer was allowed by the impugned order. At this
juncture, it would be pertinent to mention that the learned counsel for the
petitioner had referred to the order dated 04.04.2015 passed by the learned
court below, recording that the sub-Divisional Officer (Civil), Margharita, by a
letter informed the court that the ballot papers had been sent to the court.
Therefore, what was now required by the respondent was the Ballot Papers
Accounts submitted by the Presiding Officer and the Final Result Sheet.
11)         In my opinion, a direction to the Returning Officer/Sub-Divisional
Officer, Margharita to produce the ballot papers cannot be read to mean that the
said authority was issued a summons in the status of a witness to produce the
documents. I am unable to accept the submissions made by the learned counsel
for the petitioner in this regard, that the provisions of Order XVI Rule 6 CPC is
not in derogation to the provisions of Order XVI Rule 1. In my opinion, I find that
the provisions are differently worded, in Rule 1 of Order XVI it is categorically
mentioned that the party shall present in case a list of witness whom they
proposed to call either to give evidence or to produce documents and obtain
summonses to such persons for their attendance in court. However, as per the
language used in the provisions of Rule 6 of Order XVI CPC, it refers to “any
person” may be summoned to produce a document, without being summoned to
evidence. Therefore, ‘any person’, may include a witness under Order XVI Rule 1
CPC, but ‘any person’ can also include the person who is not called as a witness.
Therefore, if any person is directed to produce a document, he cannot be put to
position of ‘a witness’ within the meaning of Order XVI Rule 1 CPC. Hence, in my
opinion the provisions of Order XVI Rule 6 is independent, and in addition to and
not subservient to the provisions of Order XVI Rule 1 CPC and the Civil Court has
CRP 80/2017                                                                Page 14 of 17

the powers to issue direction to anyone to produce a document without any
reference to the provisions of Order XVI Rule 1 CPC.
12)        Insofar as the further arguments of the learned counsel for the
petitioner is concerned, which is that once there is a prayer for main relief in the
suit, such relief cannot be granted in an interlocutory application, for which he
has referred to the ratio laid down by this Court in his previous writ petition
being W.P.(C) 6309/2016. In my opinion, in the earlier round of litigation, the
issue was about recounting of votes. Therefore, if a recounting is ordered to be
done before hearing or before decision in the main suit, it would amount to
fishing out of evidence. If that evidence comes on record, there is nothing more
to be proved in a suit or in an election petition. However, the same ratio cannot
be applied to further prayers like (b), (c) and (d) of the election petition. Because
if that ratio is accepted then by going of the prayer made therein, the learned
trial court would not be permitted to allow the amendment of the petition or
even to grant permission to the election petitioner to give any evidence in
respect of the case because those are also the prayers in the election petition.
Therefore, in my opinion, in the present case in hand, it would lead to travesty of
justice to accept the argument advanced by the learned counsel for the
petitioner by equating the interlocutory prayer for recounting of votes with the
other prayers made in the election petition in the present case, which relates to
grant leave to the petitioner to adduce evidence in respect of his case, which is
contained in prayer (c) of the election petition. As already stated earlier, this
Court in W.P.(C) 6309/2016 had granted liberty to the parties to give evidence.
Therefore, there is no infirmity in the impugned order, directing the production of
Ballot Papers Accounts submitted by the Presiding Officer and Final Result Sheet
in a sealed packet to enable the petitioner to prepare and file the evidence in
affidavit.
13)        Referring to the case of Lakshmi and Ors.(supra), it is apparent that as
per the facts narrated in the said case, the Hon’ble Apex Court has approved the
CRP 80/2017                                                                 Page 15 of 17

decision of the Hon’ble Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Union of
India v. State, (1961) 42 ITR 753, wherein it was held that a document may also
be called for from the authorities under the Income Tax Act. The relevant
passage already been quoted above. In view of the said ratio of the Hon’ble Apex
Court in the case of Lakshmi and Ors.(supra), notwithstanding that no provisions
has been quoted in the petition No. 2292/2016 dated 01.11.2016, but the
prayers made therein cannot be said to be a prayer under the provisions of Order
XVI Rule 1 CPC.
14)        Coming to the citations referred by the learned counsel for the
petitioner, the Hon’ble Apex Court in all the three cases were confronted with the
issue of summoning of witness with the assistance of the court or to production
of witness without summons. The ratio laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and
this Court in the above cited cases are well settled and are the correct
proposition of law, which I have full regard. However, in the present case in
hand, as the direction was for issuance of a summon only to produce the
documents is not covered by the situation under Order XVI Rule 1 CPC, but
covered by the provision of Order XVI Rule 6 as well as Order XIII Rule 10 CPC
as appears from the case of Lakshmi and Ors.(supra), the facts of the present
case is distinguishable from the facts of the above referred three cases cited by
the learned counsel for the petitioner, for which the ratio in those cases are not
applicable to the distinguishable facts of the present case.
15)        The cumulative effect of my opinion has narrated above, is that the
learned court below did not commit any error of jurisdiction warranting
interference of this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. Hence,
this revision is liable to be dismissed.
16)        Accordingly, this revision is dismissed. There shall be no order as to
cost.
CRP 80/2017                                                              Page 16 of 17

17)        The parties are directed to appear before the learned court of Additional
District Judge-II (FTC), Tinsukia on 03.07.2017 and seek further instruction from
the said learned court.
                                                                            JUDGE
Mkumar.
CRP 80/2017                                                               Page 17 of 17


