                    THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
             CIVIL REVISION PETITON NO. 88 OF 2016
                    Sri Rajesh Pincha           … Petitioner
                               -Versus-
                    Sri Mahesh Kumar Rathi      ... Respondent
                               BEFORE
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
Advocates for the Petitioner      : Mr. AC Das, Mr. DK Das,
                                    Mr. H Betala.
Advocates for the Respondent      : Mr. SC Keyal, Ms. P. Baruah.
Date of hearing                   : 14.07.2017
Date judgment                     : 20.07.2017
                    JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
           Heard Mr. A.C. Das, learned counsel assisted by Mr. H.
Betala, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner as well as Mr.
S.C. Keyal, learned counsel assisted by Ms. P. Barua, the learned
counsel appearing for the respondent.
2)         By this application filed under section 115 of the Civil
Procedure Code, the petitioner has challenged the first appellate
judgment dated 30.11.2015, passed by the learned Civil Judge, Jorhat,
in Misc. (J) Appeal No. 7/2014. By the said judgment, the order dated
28.08.2014 passed by the learned Munsiff No.1, Jorhat was set aside
and consequently, the application filed by the respondent- plaintiff
                                                             Page 1 of 10
CRP 88/2016

under section 6 and 7 of the Assam Urban Areas Rent Control Act,
1972 for restoration of electricity connection and to repair the northern
side wall was allowed.
3)         In view of the issue raised in the present application, with
the consent of the learned counsels for the parties, the matter was
taken up for disposal at the admission stage.
4)         The case of the respondent- plaintiff is that since the year
1975, his father was the tenant of the petitioner in respect of two
separate premises, viz., (i) Shop No. 4 consisting of old tin shed
premises, and (ii) Godown, bearing Godown No.6, consisting of new
Tin Shed godown, both standing over a plot of land covered by Dag
No. 3682/4197, K.P. Patta No. 101/350, under Municipal Holding
No.20, situated at Pincha Market, Ground Floor, Chamber Road, Jorhat
Town, Jorhat. On the death of his father on 06.02.1982, the
respondent was accepted as the tenant under the petitioner, paying
monthly rent for the said tenanted premises and also the electricity
charges separately. The respondent is carrying business of empty bags
from the said tenanted premises. On 04.12.2010, the tenanted
premises caught fire, resulting damage to stocks and to the tenanted
premises. The C.I. sheet roof, northern side boundary wall and
electricity lines and fittings got badly damaged. The requests for
carrying out repairs were not considered and, as such, the respondent
had filed an application under section 6 and 7 of the Assam Urban
Areas Rent Control Act, 1972 for restoration of electricity line, which
was an essential service and for carrying out repair of the CI Sheet
roof and northern wall of the tenanted premises. However, in the said
application, the respondent had mentioned in the Schedule that the
premises was one shop room totaling 1784 square feet with C.I. Sheet
                                                               Page 2 of 10
CRP 88/2016

roof and was situated on a part of Holding No. 19. The petitioner-
landlord denied the description of the tenanted premises and in the
written objection, the correct description of the two tenanted premises
was given. It was also mentioned that there existed two separate rent
agreements in respect of two separate premises.
5)         The schedule of the tenanted premises remained un-rectified
and the learned Munsiff No.1, Jorhat, by order dated 28.08.2014
rejected the prayer, inter-alia, on the ground that the respondent had
failed to satisfy the court as to the identity of the suit premises and
therefore, held that until the court can come to a conclusion about the
identity of the rented premises, it cannot direct the repair or
restoration of electricity connection.
6)         The said order was put to challenge by filing Misc. Appeal
before the Court of Civil Judge, Jorhat, and the said appeal filed under
Order XLI Rule 1 and 2 of Civil Procedure Code was numbered as Misc.
Appeal No. 7/2014. The respondent had, inter-alia, taken a ground of
appeal that the minor discrepancy in the schedule is not a ground for
rejection of the petition when the petitioner had admitted that the
respondent herein was a tenant.
7)         The learned first appellate court, by the order impugned
herein, inter-alia, held that it was an admitted position that there is
relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties and that it was
evident that there is no discrepancy regarding the identification of the
tenanted premises and upon such finding, the appeal was allowed by
setting aside the order passed by the learned Munsiff No.1, Jorhat, and
directing repair and restoration of electricity connection. This order is
assailed in the present application.
                                                              Page 3 of 10
CRP 88/2016

8)        The learned counsel for the petitioner has made a short
submission to the effect that -
       a. There existed landlord and tenant relationship only in respect
          of two separate premises under Holding No.20, and not in
          respect of one shop covered by Holding No.19. There was no
          material before the learned first appellate court to arrive at a
          conclusion that it was an admitted position that there is
          landlord and tenant relationship between the parties; and
       b. As the description of suit premises is not similar to one at
          site, the finding recorded by the learned first appellate court
          that there was no discrepancy regarding the identity of the
          suit premises is perverse; and
       c. An alternative submission was made that the courts below
          may enforce the order passed by the learned first appellate
          court, but there must be a rider that such repair and
          restoration of electricity cannot be done outside the schedule
          of premises given by the respondent i.e. it must be restricted
          to one shop premises covered by Holding No.19 only; and
       d. It is also submitted that this court is exercising jurisdiction
          under section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code, where this
          court must appreciate the impugned order in light of
          whether the learned court below had exercised jurisdiction
          with material irregularity.
9)        The learned counsel for the respondent has argued in
support of the impugned order. By referring to the order dated
12.06.2017, it is submitted that this court had allowed the prayer made
for permitting the respondent to produce copy of plaint and other
related documents in support of his stand. But, on the basis of
                                                               Page 4 of 10
CRP 88/2016

instructions received, and going by the contents of the two tenancy
agreements, it is admitted by the learned counsel for the respondent
that there has been an inadvertent error in giving the description of
the tenanted premises in his application before the learned trial court.
He however, submits as follows:-
       a. The respondent had handed over all the papers to his
           counsel and, as the respondent had no knowledge about
           law, he could not locate the defect of mis-description of the
           tenanted premises in his application before the learned trial
           court. However, the same is a bona fide mistake and, as this
           revision is an extension of the suit, this court had the
           jurisdiction to allow the respondent to amend his petition to
           give the correct description of the suit premises.
       b. It is submitted that the mis-description of the suit property
           cannot prevent this Court to exercise inherent powers under
           section 151 read with section 152 of Civil Procedure Code to
           correct the schedule provided in his application before the
           learned Trial court.
       c. The courts should be liberal and under the garb of
           technicalities, justice cannot be denied to a tenant, who has
           an indefeasible right to have the tenanted premises kept in
           good repair and for restoration of electricity connection,
           which are essential services.
       d. It is submitted that the Assam Urban Areas Rent Control Act,
           1972 enjoins or casts a duty on the landlord to keep the
           tenanted premises in good repair and electricity connection
           is an essential services, which is liable to be restored and
           such right cannot be allowed to be defeated just because the
           respondent and his counsel incorrectly described the
                                                               Page 5 of 10
CRP 88/2016

          tenanted premises, there being no dispute as regards
          existence of tenancy under Holding No.20.
       e. It is further submitted that the tenanted premises was
          gutted by fire on 04.12.2010 and now for about 7 years, the
          respondent is continuing to occupy the tenanted premises,
          which is in totally damaged condition and without electricity
          connection. It is urged that repair of house and electricity
          connection are both essential services, which the landlord is
          required to maintain.
       f. An alternative argument is made that if this court is not
          inclined to accept the submissions advanced on behalf of the
          respondent on account of mis-description of suit premises,
          for the purpose of doing complete justice in this case, liberty
          may be granted to the petitioner to either to amend the
          schedule in course of this revision and/or to approach the
          court afresh for repair and for restoration of electricity
          connection, as essential services cannot be denied to the
          tenant on account of defective pleading.
10)        This court has perused the two separate rent agreements,
which are annexed to this revision as a part of Annexure-B (i.e. written
objection by petitioner before trial court). It is seen that there is no
doubt that (i) the agreement dated 05.05.2007 is in respect of 'Shop
No.4', being an old construction of tin-shed shop, standing on part of
Municipal Holding No.20, and (ii) the second agreement dated
05.05.2007 is in respect of 'Godown No.6', being a new construction of
tin-shed godown, standing on par of Municipal Holding No.20. Thus, it
indeed appears that in Misc. (J) Case No. 7/2014, there is a definite
mis-description of the tenanted premises because in the Schedule
                                                              Page 6 of 10
CRP 88/2016

appended thereto, the tenanted premises is shown to be one shop
covered by part of Municipal Holding No.19.
11)        In view of above, as the tenanted premises is not in respect
of any construction covered by Holding No.19, the finding by the
learned first appellate court about the (i) existence of relationship of
landlord and tenant between the parties; and (ii) there is no
discrepancy regarding the identification of the tenanted premises is not
found to be sustainable. The two tenancy agreements dated
05.05.2007 show that the two tenanted premises are said to exist in a
part of Municipal Holding No.20. Hence, the said finding, as recorded in
the judgment dated 30.11.2015 passed by the learned Civil Judge,
Jorhat deserves to be set aside, and is set aside.
12)        This leads to another question as to whether it would be
proper for this revisional court to pass any observation in terms of
alternative submissions made by the learned counsels for both the
sides viz., (i) that the courts below may enforce the order passed by
the learned first appellate court, but there must be a rider that such
repair and restoration of electricity cannot be done outside the
schedule of premises given by the respondent i.e. it must be restricted
to one shop premises covered by Holding No.19 only, as submitted by
the learned counsel for the petitioner; and (ii) whether liberty may be
granted to the petitioner to either to amend the schedule in course of
this revision and/or to approach the court afresh for repair and for
restoration of electricity connection.
13)        In this regard, this court is of the unhesitant opinion that it
would be most impractical for this court to direct enforcement of the
order passed by the learned trial court on an erroneous schedule and,
                                                               Page 7 of 10
CRP 88/2016

as such, the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner
cannot be allowed.
14)        However, insofar as the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the respondent is concerned, this court is of the view that
the civil court retains the power both under section 151 and sections
152 read with 153 of the Civil Procedure Code to permit correction of
the description of the Schedule of the suit property, which may be
done at any stage and even at the execution stage to ensure that the
judgment, decree or order should be frustrated. However, as on date,
except for a verbal prayer, there is no application for correction of
description of the tenanted premises on part of the respondent.
15)        At this stage, this court deems it fit to refer to the Full Bench
decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Bhavan
Vaja V. Solanki Hanuji Khodaji Mansang, reported in (1973) 2 SCC 40:
AIR 1972 SC 1371: (1972) 0 Supreme (SC) 87. In the said case, the
following was observed [extract from (1972) 0 Supreme (SC) 87]:
                 “19.         It is true that an executing court cannot go
            behind the decree under execution. But that does not mean
            that it has no duty to find out the true effect of that decree.
            For construing a decree it can and in appropriate cases, it
            ought to take into consideration the pleadings as well as the
            proceedings, leading upto the decree. In order to find out
            the meaning of the words employed in a decree the Court,
            often has to ascertain the circumstances under which those
            words came to be used. That is the plain duty of the
            execution Court and if that Court fails to discharge that duty
            it has plainly failed to exercise the jurisdiction vested in it.
            Evidently the execution court in this case thought that its
                                                                  Page 8 of 10
CRP 88/2016

           jurisdiction began and ended with merely looking at the
           decree as it was finally drafted. Despite the fact that the
           pleadings as well as the earlier judgment rendered by the
           Board as well as by the appellate Court had been placed
           before it, the execution Court does not appear to have
           considered those documents. If one reads the order of that
           Court, it is clear that it failed to construe the decree though
           it purported to have construed the decree. In its order there
           is no reference to the documents to which we have made
           reference earlier. It appear to have been unduly influenced
           by the words of the decree under execution. The appellate
           Court fell into the same error. When the matter was taken
           up in revision to the High Court, the High Court declined to
           go into the question of the construction of the decree on the
           ground that a wrong construction of a decree merely raises
           a question of law and it involves no question of jurisdiction
           to bring the case within Section 115, Civil Procedure Code.
           As seen earlier in this case the executing Court and the
           appellate Court had not construed the decree at all. They
           had not even referred to the relevant documents. They had
           merely gone by the words used in the decree under
           execution. It is clear that they had failed to construe the
           decree. Their omission to construe the decree is really an
           omission to exercise the jurisdiction vested in them.”
16)       Therefore, as per the ratio of the said case, the executing
court also has the power to peruse the relevant pleadings to find out
the correct description of the decreetal property. Hence, considering
the facts of the present case, this court could have allowed correction
of the schedule to be carried out, but this court has refrained from
                                                                 Page 9 of 10
CRP 88/2016

doing so in the absence of a written prayer to that effect. However,
there is no reason for this court to prevent the respondent to apply
afresh for getting the tenanted premises repaired and essential service
of electricity to be restored by allowing the respondent to file a fresh
application. Hence, under the facts of this case, despite objection
raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, this Court has no
hesitation in granting leave the petitioner to approach the learned trial
court once again with a fresh petition for seeking such relief as he may
be advised in respect of the correct schedule or suit premises. If such
application is filed, the learned court of Munsiff No.1, Jorhat may
entertain the same without being influenced by its previous order
dated 28.08.2014, passed in Misc. (J) Case No. 7/2014 or by the first
appellate judgment dated 30.11.2015 passed by the learned Civil
Judge, Jorhat in Misc. Appeal No. 7/2014. As this is being done under
the unique facts of this case, this order is not intended to be cited as a
precedent.
17)        Thus, this revision stands allowed, in terms of the
observations made above, with liberty to the respondent to approach
the learned trial court again, if so advised.
18)        The parties are left to bear their own cost.
                                                               JUDGE
 Mks/
                                                              Page 10 of 10
CRP 88/2016


