                          THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                              ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                   CRP 89 of 2017
       GULENA BEGUM & 2 ORS.                        …..Petitioners
                                       -Versus-
       AZAD ALI & 7 ORS.                          …..Respondents
                                      BEFORE
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
       Advocates for the Petitioners      : Mr. S. Ali, Mr. B. Barman,
                                          : Ms. J. Begum, Mr. A. Ikbal.
       Advocates for the Respondents      : Mr. M. Choudhury, Sr. Adv.
                                          : Mr. M. Mahanta.
       Date of hearing                    : 05.06.2017.
       Date of judgment and order         : 12.06.2017.
                          JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
              Heard Mr. S. Ali, the learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. M.
Choudhury, the learned Senior Counsel assisted by Mr. M. Mahanta, appearing
for the respondent.
2)         The challenge in the present application under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India read with section 151 of the Civil Procedure Code
(hereinafter referred to as “the Code”), is the order dated 14.02.2017 passed by
the learned Munsiff No.2, Kamrup (Metropolitan), Guwahati, in Title Suit No.
123/2009, by which the prayer made by the petitioners to submit written
statement and to allow them to adduce evidence along with fresh exhibits was
rejected.
CRP 89/2017                                                                Page 1 of 15

3)         Owing to the nature of challenge, I do not deem it fit to burden this
judgment with the pleadings of the parties. It would be sufficient to state that
the petitioners herein are substituted legal representatives of the defendant
No.1, namely, Md. Faizur Rahman, who had died on 03.02.2016. During his life
time, Ahidur Rahman, who the petitioner No.3 herein had submitted his
evidence- on- affidavit as the supporting witness on behalf of the defendant
No.1.
4)         After the death of the defendant No.1, the petitioners were not given
any opportunity by the learned trial court to file their written statement. Hence,
by filing petition No. 3425 dated 03.12.2016, the petitioners prayed for allowing
them to file their written statement and then to adduce their evidence. It was
further prayed that the petitioner No.3 herein i.e. defendant No.1(c) may be
permitted to withdraw his evidence on affidavit with liberty to file the same
afresh along with the exhibits. The respondent/ plaintiff filed his written objection
to the said petition.
5)         The matter arising out of the said petition dated 03.12.2016 was
heard by the learned trial court and by order dated 14.02.2017, the learned trial
court rejected the said petition. While rejecting the prayers made by the
petitioners, the learned trial court observed that by order dated 26.04.2016, the
defendants No. 1(a), 1(b) and 1(c) were substituted in place of the deceased
defendant and thereafter, steps were taken in respect of the substituted
defendant No.1(d) and 1(e) and since 04.10.2016, the case was proceeding ex
parte against the defendants No.1(d) and 1(e). But, the said defendants did not
make any prayer to file their written statement or evidence. On the said grounds,
the plea of the petitioners that they did not get any opportunity to file written
statement was not sustainable, but they were given enough opportunity to to
submit before the Court or to submit written statement, but they did not do so
and accordingly, the suit proceeded for cross examination of official witnesses on
22.11.2016. The learned trial court held that the Civil Procedure Code or in the
Evidence Act were silent about the withdrawal of evidence-on- affidavit filed by
CRP 89/2017                                                                    Page 2 of 15

any party at their own convenience and, as such, the prayer of defendant
No.1(c) to withdraw his evidence was rejected and the evidence-on- affidavit
filed by the original defendant was expunged as he had died. Thus, the petitoin
was rejected.
6)         The learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that as per the
provisions of Order XXII Rule 4(2), any person made a party is entitled to make
any defence appropriate to his legal character as legal representative of the
deceased defendant. Hence, the impugned order was not sustainable both on
facts and in law. It was submitted that in the written objection filed by the
respondent/ plaintiff before the learned trial court as well as in the impugned
order, there is no reference to any order by virtue of which any chance was
given to the petitioners to submit their written statement. Thus, there was a
incorrect finding in the said impugned order to the effect that the petitioners
were given enough opportunity to submit before the Court or to submit written
statement, but they did not do so and accordingly, the suit proceeded for cross
examination of official witnesses on 22.11.2016. It is stated that in a civil suit, a
party is not entitled to file his written statement at any time without an order in
writing for the same and, as such, when no order was forthcoming from the
learned Trial Court to enable the petitioners to file written statement, they were
compelled to file petition No. 3425 dated 03.12.2016 to allow them to file their
written statement.
7)         The learned counsel for the petitioners further submit that when the
predecessor-in- interest of the petitioners was alive, then the petitioner No.3
[defendant No.1(c)] had filed his evidence- on – affidavit, which was not in his
status as one of the defendant in the suit, but as one of the listed witness in the
case, for which he was only a witness supporting the original defendant. It is
further submitted that the original defendant had proved all the exhibits, but as
the learned trial court had expunged the said evidence owing to the death of the
original defendants. Hence, unless the petitioners are allowed to file their fresh
CRP 89/2017                                                                   Page 3 of 15

evidence- on- affidavit, they will suffer absolute injustice and they would be non-
suited merely on the ground that the defendant’s witnesses did not prove any
document. Hence, the present case was a fit case to set aside the impugned
order and to allow the prayers made by the petitioners before the learned trial
court to submit their written statement and to submit fresh evidence.
8)          In support of his argument, the learned counsel for the petitioners has
relied on the case of Sumtibai & Ors. V. Paras Finance Co. & Ors., reported in
(2007) 10 SCC 82.
9)          Per contra, the learned Senior Counsel for the respondent has
submitted that in the present case in hand, the petitioners had got themselves
substituted in the suit as a legal representative and, as such, they were required
to proceed with the case from the stage where the case was a the time the
defendant died. It is submitted that if the petitioners had to raise any individual
point which the deceased defendant could not have raised, he must get himself
impleaded as defendant in his personal capacity or he must challenge the decree
in a separate suit. Thus, if the petitioners wanted to assert their own right, they
ought to have impleaded themselves as the defendants under Order 1 Rule 10(2)
of the Code. In support of his contentions, the learned Senior Counsel for the
respondents has placed reliance on the case of Vidywati V. Man Mohan & Ors.,
reported in (1995) 5 SCC 431.
10)         I have gone through the material available on record as well as
perused the impugned order. From the statements made in the revision petition,
it is the specific case of the petitioners that on 02.02.2015, the original defendant
had submitted his evidence-on- affidavit and exhibited the documents. The
petitioner No.3 also submitted his evidence-on- affidavit as DW-2 to support the
original defendant. The petitioner No.3 was not a listed witness and, as such,
petition No. 260/15 was also filed to accept his evidence, which was allowed by
order dated 22.06.2015. Although the original defendant (since dead) and the
CRP 89/2017                                                                     Page 4 of 15

petitioner No.3 had filed their evidence-on- affidavit on 02.02.2015, the learned
trial court had fixed the case for examination of official witness. After 6 official
witnesses were examined and one more remained to be examined, the original
defendant had died on 03.02.2016, leaving behind 5 legal heirs/ representatives.
On his death, the counsel for the predecessor- in- interest of the petitioners
informed the learned trial court about his death and disclosed the names of all 5
legal representatives/ heirs. On the next date, i.e. on 28.03.2016, the petitioners
appeared and prayed for substitution and the case was fixed on 06.04.2016 for
objection by the plainitff and as no objection was submitted, the substitution was
allowed. However, on 06.04.2016, the plaintiff also submitted another petition for
substitution, which was fixed for objection hearing on 20.04.2016.
11)         The events on and from 20.04.2016 is on 20.04.2016, petition No.
998/16 filed by the plaintiff was taken up for hearing and the petitioner’s side
had not submitted any objection against the said petition and accordingly, the
following date was fixed on 26.04.2016 for order on the said petition. By order
dated 26.04.2016, the said petition No. 998/16 was allowed. The petitioner No. 1
[i.e. Defendant No. 1(a)] appeared on that day. Thereafter, the plaintiff was
directed to take steps to serve notice upon Defendant No. 1(d) & 1(e) and the
case was fixed on 03.06.2016 for appearance of the said defendants. On
03.06.2016, notice was issued on the Defendants No. 1(d) and 1(e). As plaintiff
had taken steps, the suit was then fixed on 11.07.2016 for appearance of
Defendant No. 1(d) and 1(e). By order dated 11.07.2016, the plaintiff was again
directed to take steps for service of notice on the Defendant No. 1(d) and 1(e),
fixing the suit for their appearance on 30.07.2016. By order dated 30.07.2016,
steps taken for service of notice were found lying in the record and a direction
was passed to issue the same to the Defendants No. 1(d) and 1(e) and the suit
was fixed on 30.08.2016 for the appearance of the said defendants. Ultimately,
by order dated 04.10.2016, the suit was ordered to proceed ex parte against the
defendant No. 1(d) and 1(e) as the said defendants had failed to appear despite
service of notice upon them. By the same order dated 04.10.2016, it was also
CRP 89/2017                                                                  Page 5 of 15

directed that steps be taken in respect of the official witness i.e. Additional
Deputy Commissioner, Kamrup (Metropolitan). However, on the date fixed i.e. on
22.11.2011 the said official witness did not appear in spite of service of notice
and accordingly, the petitioners was directed to issue reminder on the said
official witness for appearing on 03.12.2016. On 03.12.2016, the said official
witness made an application with a prayer for adjournment seeking some more
time to produce the required document and such prayer was allowed.
12)          Thereafter, the petitioners had filed petition No. 3425/2016 on
03.12.2016 with a prayer to allow them to file their written statement and
thereafter to adduce evidence on affidavit afresh and further allow to withdraw
the evidence on affidavit of the petitioner No.3 (Defendant No.1-C therein) with
liberty to file the same afresh along with the exhibits.
13)          Thereafter, the suit was fixed on 22.12.2016 for objection hearing on
petition No. 3425/2016 dated 03.12.2016 and for examination of official witness.
The    official   witness  i.e. the   Additional Deputy    Commissioner,    Kamrup
(Metropolitan) was examined, cross-examined and discharged on the said date.
Thereafter, the plaintiff in the suit sought time to file objection against the said
petition. The said prayer was allowed fixing the next date on 25.01.2017 for filing
objection against the said petition. The suit was then fixed on 09.02.2017 for
hearing on the said petition No. 3426/16. The matter was heard on 09.02.2017.
After hearing both the sides, the suit was fixed on 14.02.2017 for orders on the
said petition.
14)          Thus, from the date-wise progress of the suit as narrated above, it
leaves no room for doubt that although the petitioners were negligent in not
making any prayer to file their written statement, but the undeniable reality is
that the learned trial court did not pass any order, directing the petitioners to
submit their written statement.
CRP 89/2017                                                                   Page 6 of 15

15)          On the perusal of the case of Vidyawati (supra), in paragraph 1 of the
said case it is mentioned that one Man Mohan was impleaded to represent the
estate of Brij Mohan Kapoor. It is further stated that “When they sought to file
additional written statement claiming title to and interest in the property under
the a will said to have been executed by Smt. Champawati, the petition was
dismissed by trial court in Suit No. 418 of 1984 by order dated 6-8-1994 holding
that “it is not open to the present applicant to assert her own individual or hostile
title to the suit”. It was held that if a legal representative wants to raise any
individual point which the deceased party could not have raised, he must get
himself impleaded in his personal capacity or he must challenge the decree in a
separate suit. In that view, she was not permitted to file the additional written
statement.” The said finding was upheld by the Hon’ble Apex Court on the basis
of finding recorded in paragraph 3 thereof, wherein it was observed by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court that “the petitioner’s claim of right, title and interest
entirely rests on the will said to have been executed by Champawati in favour of
the first defendant and herself. It is now admitted across the Bar that the first
defendant had life interest created under the will executed by Champawati.
Therefore, the said interest is coterminous with his demise.” These passages are
indicative of the fact that the written statement must have come into record and
only then it was possible for the courts including the Hon’ble Supreme Court to
arrive at a finding as to what plea was contained in the written statement of the
substituted legal representative.
16)          In view of the ratio laid down in the case of Vidyawati (supra), which
has been relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel for the respondent, I have
no hesitation to hold that in the present case in hand, unless any written
statement of the petitioners is allowed to come on record, it is not possible for
anyone to guess what defence would be taken or to arrive at a finding that the
defence, which is not even raised, was not appropriate to their character as legal
representative of the deceased defendant.
CRP 89/2017                                                                   Page 7 of 15

17)      In respect of my the above finding, I find support from the same
judgment of Vidyawati (supra), the relevant extract thereof is as under:-
         “3.         It is seen that the petitioner’s claim of right, title and interest
         entirely rests on the will said to have been executed by Champawati in
         favour of the first defendant and herself. It is now admitted across the
         Bar that the first defendant had life interest created under the will
         executed by Champawati. Therefore, the said interest is coterminous
         with his demise. Whether the petitioner has independent right, title
         and interest dehors the claim of the first defendant is a matter to be
         gone into at a later proceedings. It is true that when the petitioner
         was impleaded as a party-defendant, all right under Order 22, Rule
         4(2) and defences available to the deceased defendant become
         available to her. In addition, if the petitioner had any independent
         right, title or interest in the property then she had to get herself
         impleaded in the suit as a party defendant in which event she could
         set up her own independent right, title and interest, to resist the claim
         made by the plaintiff or challenge the decree that may be passed in
         the suit. This is the view the Court below has taken rightly.
         4.          This Court in Bal Kishan v. Om Parkash, [(1986) 4 SCC 155:
         AIR 1986 SC 1952] has said thus:
                    "The sub-rule (2) of Rule 4 of Order 22 authorizes the legal
                    representative of a deceased defendant to file an additional
                    written statement or statement of objections raising all pleas
                    which the deceased defendant had or could have raised
                    except those which were personal to the deceased-defendant
                    or respondent."
         5. The same view was expressed in Jagdish Chander Chatterjee v. Sri
         Kishan [(1972) 2 SCC 461: (1973) I SCR 850], wherein this Court said:
CRP 89/2017                                                                       Page 8 of 15

                      "The legal representative of the deceased respondent was
                      entitled to make any defence appropriate to his character
                      as legal representative of the deceased respondent. In
                      other words, the heirs and the legal representatives could
                      urge all contentions which the deceased could have urged
                      except only those which were personal to the deceased.
                      Indeed this does not prevent the legal representative from
                      setting up also their own independent title, in which case
                      there could be no objection to the Court impleading them
                      not merely as the LRs. of the deceased but also in their
                      personal capacity avoiding thereby a separate suit for a
                      decision on the title."
18)       In this connection, I also find support from the case of Sumtibai &
Ors. (supra). The relevant passages of the said judgment are extracted as
under:-
          “7.        Before adverting to the question involved in this case, it may
          be noted that in the registered sale deed dated 12.8.1960 the shop in
          dispute has been mentioned and the sale was shown in favour of
          Kapoor Chand and his sons, Narainlal, Devilal and Pukhraj. Hence, the
          registered sale deed itself shows that the purchaser was not Kapoor
          Chand alone, but also his sons as co-owners. Hence, prima facie, it
          seems that the sons of Kapoor Chand are also co-owners of the
          property in dispute. However, we are not expressing any final opinion
          on the question whether they are co-owners as that would be decided
          in the suit. But we are certainly of the opinion that the legal
          representatives of late Kapoor Chand have a right to take this defence
          by way of filing an additional written statement and adduce evidence
          in the suit. Whether this defence is accepted or not, of course, is for
          the trial court to decide. Hence, in our opinion, the courts below erred
CRP 89/2017                                                                  Page 9 of 15

           in law in rejecting the applications of the heirs of Kapoor Chand to file
           an additional written statement.
           8.         Every party in a case has a right to file a written statement.
           This is in accordance with natural justice. The Civil Procedure Code is
           really the rules of natural justice which are set out in great and
           elaborate detail. Its purpose is to enable both parties to get a hearing.
           The appellants in the present case have already been made parties in
           the suit, but it would be strange if they are not allowed to take a
           defence. In our opinion, Order 22 Rule 4(2) CPC cannot be construed
           in the manner suggested by learned counsel for the respondent.
           14.        In view of the aforesaid decisions we are of the opinion that
           Kasturi case [(2005) 6 SCC 733] is clearly distinguishable. In our
           opinion it cannot be laid down as an absolute proposition that
           whenever a suit for specific performance is filed by A against B, a third
           party C can never be impleaded in that suit. In our opinion, if C can
           show a fair semblance of title or interest he can certainly file an
           application for impleadment. To take a contrary view would lead to
           multiplicity of proceedings because then C will have to wait until a
           decree is passed against B, and then file a suit for cancellation of the
           decree on the ground that A had no title in the property in dispute.
           Clearly, such a view cannot be countenanced.
           15.        Also, merely because some applications have been rejected
           earlier it does not mean that the legal representatives of late Kapoor
           Chand should not be allowed to file an additional written statement. In
           fact, no useful purpose would be served by merely allowing these legal
           representatives to be impleaded but not allowing them to file an
           additional written statement. In our opinion, this will clearly violate
           natural justice.”
19)        Thus, in terms of the ratio of the above two cited cases, while the
petitioners as substituted legal representatives have a right to file written
CRP 89/2017                                                                  Page 10 of 15

statement, it would, however, be open for the learned Trial Court to decide
whether the defence so taken by the petitioners is acceptable or not in terms of
the provisions of Order XXII Rule 4(2) of the Code, or in order words to decide
whether the defence so taken is appropriate to their legal character as legal
representatives.
20)         Coming to the next question as to whether the petitioner No.3 i.e.
defendant No.1(c) was entitled to file evidence, it is seen that it is not disputed
that during the life time of the original defendant, the said original defendant
was the principal witness as one of the party and had exhibited all documents.
Therefore, the defendant No.1(c) necessarily had to be the supporting witness.
Now, it is also an accepted position from the discussion made herein before that
the plaintiff’s side did not get any opportunity to cross examine the said DW-1,
as such, the evidence tendered by the DW-1 (since died) cannot be sustained
and the evidence of the DW-1, who had died before the plaintiff’s side got any
opportunity to cross examine him, has been rightly expunged by the learned trial
court by the impugned order dated 14.02.2017. The said part of the impugned
judgment is upheld.
21)         In my opinion, in view of the provisions of second proviso to section
33 of the Evidence Act, 1872, an evidence of a dead witness, in respect of whom
the adverse party did not get any opportunity to cross examine, cannot be held
to be relevant. Thus, a substituted legal representative, who has stepped into the
shoes of the dead defendant must be given the right to prove his/their
documents and mark those documents as exhibits, otherwise, there will be an
inevitable failure of justice to such substituted legal representative, because the
defence will get wiped-out by lack of any evidence on expunging of the evidence
of the deceased party, i.e. evidence of DW-1 in the present case in hand.
22)         It would be relevant to quote the provisions of section 33 of the
Evidence Act, 19872 for ready reference:-
CRP 89/2017                                                                 Page 11 of 15

           “Section 33.- R elevancy of certain evidence for proving, in
           subsequent proceeding, the truth of facts therein stated
                Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before
           any person authorized by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of
           proving, in a subsequent judicial proceeding, or in a later stage of the
           same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which it states, when
           the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving
           evidence, or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his
           presence cannot be obtained without an amount of delay or expense
           which, under the circumstances of the case, the Court considers
           unreasonable:
                Provided—
                that the proceeding was between the same parties or their
           representatives in interest;
                that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and
           opportunity to cross-examine;
                that the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first
           as in the second proceeding.
                Explanation.—A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a
           proceeding between the prosecutor and the accused within the
           meaning of this section.”
23)        Now coming to the connected issue as to whether the evidence can be
withdrawn. In this connection, it is seen that a defendant is not in the same
footing as the plaintiff in a suit. A defendant is permitted to take up inconsistent
pleadings, which is not available to a plaintiff. Moreover, it is no longer res-
integra that an admission made by a party may be withdrawn or may be
explained away. If anyone requires an authority on the same, the case of
Panchdeo Narain Srivastava V. K. Jyoti Sahay, reported in AIR 1983 SC 462 may
be referred to. In paragraph 3 thereof, it is stated as “….. An admission made by
a party may be withdrawn or may be explained away. Therefore, it cannot be
CRP 89/2017                                                                 Page 12 of 15

said that by amendment an admission of fact cannot be withdrawn.” Thus, if an
admission made by a party can be permitted to be withdrawn, there is no reason
for refusing admissions or statements made in evidence cannot be withdrawn.
24)        In this connection, I find support from the judgment of the Hon’ble
Apex Court in the case of Baldev Singh V. Manohar, reported in (2006) 6 SCC
498, it was held in paragraph 14 as follows –
           “14.      …. It is true in the original written statement, a statement
           has been made that it is the defendant No.1/appellant No.1 is the
           owner and in continuous possession of the suit property but in our
           view, the powers of the Court are wide enough to permit amendment
           of the written statement by incorporating an alternative plea of
           ownership in the application for amendment of the written statement.
           That apart, in our view, the facts stated in the application for
           amendment were in fact an elaboration of the defence case.
           Accordingly, we are of the view that the High Court as well as the Trial
           Court had erred in rejecting the application for amendment of the
           written statement on the ground that in the event such amendment
           was allowed, it would take away some admissions made by the
           defendants/appellants in their written statement. That apart, in the
           case of Estralla Rubber vs. Dass Estate (P) Ltd. [(2001) 8 SCC 97], this
           Court held that even there was some admissions in the evidence as
           well as in the written statement, it was still open to the parties to
           explain the same by way of filing an application for amendment of the
           written statement. That apart, mere delay of three years in filing the
           application for amendment of the written statement could not be a
           ground for rejection of the same when no serious prejudice is shown
           to have been caused to the plaintiff/respondent No.1 so as to take
           away any accrued right.”
CRP 89/2017                                                                Page 13 of 15

25)        In the present case in hand, the evidence tendered by the present
Defendant No. 1(c) on 02.02.2015 was in his status of a mere witness. But on
and from 06.04.2016, before he was cross examined, his status got changed
from a mere witness to the status of a defendant in his character as a
substituted legal representative of the deceased original defendant, whose
evidence stood expunged. Thus, in my opinion, this is an exceptional case, where
by invoking the inherent powers under section 151 of the Code, the defendant
No.1(c) could have been permitted to (i) either withdraw his evidence and tender
afresh evidence, or (ii) permit the said defendant No.1(c) to file additional
evidence. In my opinion, procedural law is a handmaid of justice. A civil court
always retain inherent power to ensure that no injustice is suffered by any party,
like the present case in hand, where the evidence of original defendant as DW-1
stands expunged on his death and his supporting witness, i.e. DW-2 steps into
the shoes of original defendant as his legal representative is not permitted to
prove the documents, which were not proved by him, but by DW-1. The evidence
of DW-1, as it was expunged, has lost its relevancy and cannot be saved by
operation of section 33 of the Evidence Act. This situation will surely lead to
denial of justice to the defendant No.1(c), as his defence would surely and
without any doubt fail. Under the circumstances, by not allowing the defendant
No.1(c) to tender his evidence, the impugned order is vitiated by failure to
exercise jurisdiction vested in the court by law and, as such, is liable to be
interfered with for the purpose of ends of justice.
26)        Nonetheless, this is not the only reason why I have formed an opinion
to interfere in this issue. In the present case, by virtue of this order, the
defendant No.1(c) has become entitled to file his written statement. Hence, right
will be vested on him to lead evidence to prove his defence. Hence, the
impugned order, so far it relates to refusing him to withdraw his evidence and
refusing to allow him to file a fresh evidence, has been rendered otiose or
infructuous, which requires no interference but only a clarification, as indicated
above, in my opinion, will meet the ends of justice. Hence, it is clarified that if
CRP 89/2017                                                                Page 14 of 15

the defendant No.1(c) files his written statement, it is needless to say that he
would also have a right to adduce evidence in support of his pleadings.
27)        In view of above, in my opinion, the impugned order dated
14.02.2017, passed by the learned trial court is contrary to the principles of law
well settled by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the two cases cited above. Hence, the
said order in so far as it relates to (i) rejection of the prayer of the petitioners
[i.e. defendants No. 1(a), 1(b) and 1(c)], and (ii) rejection of the prayer of the
petitioners to allow the defendant No.1(c) to withdraw his evidence and file it
afresh with exhibits, is held to be vitiated by jurisdictional error, which is required
to be corrected by this Court in exercise of superintending jurisdiction of this
Court. The order expunging the evidence of DW-1 (since dead) is not interfered
with. Accordingly, the said impugned order dated 14.02.2017 passed by the
learned Civil Judge Munsiff No.2, Kamrup (Metropolitan), Guwahati, in Title Suit
No. 123/2008 is set aside. The said learned Court may now allow the petitioners
herein i.e. defendants No.1(a), 1(b) and 1(c) to submit their written statement.
Needless to add that if any written statement is filed by any of the substituted
legal representative of the original defendant including the defendant No.1(c),
they would be entitled to adduce evidence.
28)        As a result, the present application stands allowed in terms as
indicated above. The parties are left to bear their own cost.
29)        The parties are directed to appear before the learned Court of Munsiff
No.2, Kamrup (Metropolitan), Guwahati, on 03.07.2017 to seek further
instructions from the said learned Court, for which no other formal notice for
appearance is required to be issued.
                                                                                JUDGE
Mkumar.
CRP 89/2017                                                                     Page 15 of 15


