                           THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                               ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                    CRP 89 of 2016
        MD. MAFIZUL HAQUE & 4 ORS.                                  …..Petitioners
                                        -Versus-
        MD. ISTIAQUE KHAN & 3 ORS.                                 …..Respondents
                                       BEFORE
                  HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
        Advocates for the Petitioners      : Mr. B.K. Singh, Mr. A. Ikbal,
                                           : Ms. A. Begum.
        Advocates for the Respondents      : Mr. A. Sattar, Mr. Z. Mukit,
                                           : Mr. H.K. Baruah, Ms. R. Hussain.
        Date of hearing                    : 16.06.2017.
        Date of judgment and order         : 19.06.2017.
                           JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
            Heard Mr. B.K. Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr.
A. Sattar, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
2)          The challenge in this application under Article 227 of the Constitution
of India is the common order dated 04.09.2015 passed by the learned Munsiff
No.2, Tinsukia, in Title Suit No. 18/2004, thereby rejecting petition No. 316/15
filed by the petitioners/defendants to allow them to file additional documents and
further rejecting petition No. 776/15 for filing additional written statement.
3)          At the outset, the learned counsel for the petitioners has, upon
instructions, submitted that he does not press for relief in the matter of rejection
of petition No. 776/15, which contained prayer for allowing the petitioners to file
CRP 89/2016                                                                        Page 1 of 8

additional written statement. Therefore, the challenge now remains in respect of
rejection of petition No. 316/15 filed allow for allowing the petitioners/defendants
to file (i) the jamabandi of periodic patta No. 379 and Dag No. 512 and 513,
containing entry dated 05.01.1950 of mutation of name of Dil Mohammad by
way o purchase, (ii) construction permission issued on 13.09.1968 and
02.04.1969 for construction of house on land covered by Dag No. 512 and 513 as
additional documents. In the said petition No. 316/15, the petitioners/defendants
had projected that they had recently been able to trace out an old file containing
the said documents, which was not earlier available in their hands. The
respondents/ plaintiffs contested the said petition by filing their written
statement and upon hearing the learned counsels for the parties, the learned
court below was pleased to reject the said prayer on the ground that if the
documents which was proposed to be filed are much prior to the institution of
the suit, hence, it is presumed that the petitioners/ defendants were aware about
its existence at the time of filing of the written statement, but they failed to state
about the same in their written statement. The learned court below arrived at a
conclusion that the petition has been filed merely to add to their defense, which
should have been taken much earlier or that they have slept over their right, if
any, for so long as to defeat their right and the said petition was rejected.
4)          The learned counsel for the petitioners, by referring to various
paragraphs of the written statement filed by the petitioners, has submitted that
the reference to the contents of the above referred documents are available in
their written statement. Those documents, which are more than 30 years old,
was not known to them and only when they retrieved an old file, they could
know about the said documents. Hence, the question of making a statement as
to in whose custody the document was could not have arisen without any prior
knowledge about their existence. He has submitted that the court not only have
ample powers under the provisions of Order VIII Rule 1(A)(3) of the Civil
Procedure Code (hereinafter referred to as ‘CPC’) to accept documents at a
belated stage on being satisfied as to the causes shown, but also retains power
CRP 89/2016                                                                       Page 2 of 8

under section 151 CPC to accept the documents at any stage. It is submitted that
on refusal of the trial court to admit documents, even at the appellate stage,
prayer can still be made for allowing the affected party to be allowed to
introduce additional documents at the appellate stage and prove the same under
the provisions of Order XLI Rule 27 CPC. Hence, there was no impediment to
permit the petitioners/ defendants to introduce such documents at the trial stage
as it would not require any amendment of pleadings. In support of his
contentions, the learned counsel for the petitioners has placed reliance on the
judgment of this Court, rendered in the case of Raifuddin Ahmed V. Om Prakash
Khakolia & Ors., reported in 2011 (2) GLT 289.
5)           Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents has
supported the impugned order and submitted that the petitioners have not been
able to make out a satisfactory explanation about the belated production of the
document. The admitted case projected by the petitioners is that they had the
old file in their custody but found it recently, which is not any explanation, and is
far from being a satisfactory explanation for not being able to produce the said
documents at the appropriate stage. It is also submitted that if the documents
are allowed to be introduced at this stage of the suit. It is also submitted that the
learned court below had passed a speaking order and there is no palpable error
in the said well considered order and, as such, the learned counsel appearing for
the respondents has prayed for dismissal of the present revision.
6)           Owing to the short issue involved in this application, it is deemed fit to
dispose of this application at the admission stage itself.
7)           This court has considered the arguments advanced by the learned
counsels for both the sides and has also perused the materials available on
record. It appears that in the pleadings, the basic foundation are available
relating to the said documents, viz., (i) the jamabandi of periodic patta No. 379
and Dag No. 512 and 513, containing entry dated 05.01.1950 of mutation of
CRP 89/2016                                                                      Page 3 of 8

name of Dil Mohammad by way of purchase, (ii) construction permission issued
on 13.09.1968 and 02.04.1969 for construction of house on land covered by Dag
No. 512 and 513.
8)         This Court, in the case of Raifuddin Ahmed (supra), has held as
extracted below:-
              (17) Having heard the learned counsel of the parties and on
              perusal of the provisions of Order 8, Rule 1 (A) 3, this Court is of
              considered opinion that the Court is not prevented by Legislature
              from allowing the prayer for accepting the document, even when
              the document is produced in a belated stage, however subject to
              the condition that delay in filing is properly explained to the Court
              and if explained, the Court may have to lean in favour of receiving
              the documents since it is the fundamental principle that the parties
              should be permitted to let in all possible evidence which are
              relevant for the purpose of adjudicating the matters in controversy
              before the Court. Rejection of prayer for accepting documentary
              evidence on a technical ground or to prevent the party from
              producing the evidence should be only when the delay caused in
              filing such document is deliberate and that too, the delay is caused
              to prolong the suit.
              (18) It also appears from the Order 8, Rule 1 (A)(3) that the
              Legislature does not create any bar to accept a document in the
              belated stage, if the same is necessary for proper adjudication of
              the matter in controversy before the Court. This Court is of further
              opinion that the provisions of Rule 1 (A)(3) not only confer power
              to the trial Court to receive the document, rather the same is also
              akin to the power vested with the appellate Court to receive
              documents under Order 41, Rule 27 of the Code wherein it is
              mentioned that the parties to an appeal shall not be entitled to
              produce additional evidence, whether oral or documentary, in the
              Appellate Court, but if the Court from whose decree the appeal is
              preferred has refused to admit evidence which ought to have been
              admitted, or the party seeking to produce additional evidence
              establishes that notwithstanding the exercise of due diligence, such
              evidence was not within his knowledge or could not, after the
              exercise of due diligence, be produced by him at the time when the
              decree appealed against was passed, or the Appellate Court
CRP 89/2016                                                                    Page 4 of 8

            requires any document to be produced or any witness to be
            examined to enable it to pronounce judgment, or for any other
            substantial cause, the Appellate Court may allow such evidence or
            document to be produced or witness to be examined.
            (19) The aforesaid provisions of Order 41, Rule 27 clearly
            emphasize that not only the trial Court has the power to accept the
            relevant document in a belated stage for proper adjudication of the
            matter before it, but the Appellate Court also has the power to
            accept such a document and the Court can not only accept
            document, but also can examine the witnesses, if such examination
            is necessary to enable it to pronounce judgment or for any other
            substantial cause.
            (20) In Pandurang G. Dodke Vs. Lanka P. Kshirsagar and Anr. ,
            AIR 2005 Bombay 427, the High Court of Bombay permitted to
            produce the documents in an appellate stage. In Assam Hindu
            Mission Vs. Elaboris Tron, 1999 (1) GLT 198: (1999) 1 GLR 380,
            while examining the order dated 2.7.97 passed by the learned
            District Judge/Additional Deputy Commissioner, Shillong in Title
            Civil Appeal No. 2 (T) of 1992 whereby the learned Appellate Court
            rejected the petition of the petitioner of that case for adducing the
            additional documentary evidence, this Court ultimately allowed the
            prayer of the petitioner stating inter alia, "the present appellant
            herein did/does not take up any new case with the new plea as
            there is a pleading of the parties with regard to their title and
            ownership over the suit land for which the related Issue No. 4
            namely, 'who has got the valid right, title and interest over the suit
            land?' was framed by the learned Trial Court. It is also well settled
            that when additional evidence is admitted, the other side should be
            given an opportunity to review it. It is also true that the first
            Appellate Court should exercise the power conferred upon it under
            Order 41, Rule 27 of the C.P.C cautiously and sparingly and proper
            reason should be recorded and minuted, and when additional
            evidence came into existence some time after the disposal of the
            suit, the Appellate Court would be justified in admitting even at the
            appellate stage if the Court thinks that, but for it there would
            remain some inherent lacuna before the Court. In my considered
            view, there is substantial cause and the first Appellate Court require
            those documents to be produced and those two witnesses to be
            examined so as to enable the first Appellate Court to determine the
CRP 89/2016                                                                   Page 5 of 8

              real points in controversy between the parties and to pronounce its
              judgment to meet the ends of justice. As discussed above, those
              documents so far the appellant-plaintiff sought for producing the
              same as additional evidence before the Appellate Court are very
              important and essential for determination of the real points in
              controversy between the parties, particularly in determining the
              related Issue No. 4 as mentioned above.
              (21) xxxx.
              (22) From the aforesaid contention of the opposite parties
              defendants, it appears that the alleged executor of the sale deed
              No. 1834/97 was died in the year 1995 whereas the alleged sale
              deed on which the petitioner plaintiff sought for declaration of their
              title was executed about two years later than the death of the
              alleged executor Gour Mohan Das. Therefore, according to this
              Court, the learned trial Court rightly allowed the prayer for
              accepting the document. In his order, the learned Civil Judge also
              stated that in his view, 'there is no possibility of the plaintiff being
              prejudiced.' Even for the argument sake, the submission of Mr. Ali
              that the trial Court had no power to accept such an application
              under Order 8, Rule 1 (A)(3), then also the trial Court has the
              power to accept such documents in exercise of its power under 151
              of the CPC as the Court is established not to do injustice on the
              ground of hyper-technicality when the procedural law is a hand-
              made law, but to do substantial justice to a justice seeker.
              Therefore, according to this Court, by way of passing the impugned
              order, the Court below did not commit any error, rather done
              substantial justice as the said document would go to the root of the
              claim of the petitioner plaintiff so far as the opposite parties
              defendants are concerned. The universally accepted maxim, rather,
              principle of law is that, "justice must not only done but must also
              appear to the done". The aforesaid principle has also been
              accepted and approved in several decisions of the Apex Court and
              one of those decision of the Apex Court is in the case of Ashok
              Kumar Yadav Vs. State of Haryana, AIR 1987 SC 454.”
9)            In view of above, this court finds that the issue relating to
additional documents is now no longer res-integra. In the present case in hand,
the documents are of such nature that it would assist the learned trial court to
CRP 89/2016                                                                       Page 6 of 8

arrive at a just and proper decision. Moreover, the petitioners/ defendants have
explained the ‘good or sufficient cause’ which prevented them from filing the
documents at an appropriate stage. Going by the submissions made by the
learned counsels for the parties, there is no doubt that the documents sought to
be introduced are all more than 30 years old. The documents did not belong to
the petitioners but were of their predecessor-in- interest and, as such, it cannot
be presumed that the petitioners/ defendants had full knowledge of those
documents and there was kept out of the scrutiny of the Court deliberately
and/or intentionally. Therefore, in the considered opinion of this Court, the
learned Court below ought to have allowed the petitioners/ defendants to file
those documents, though belatedly.
10)            Thus, in view of the ratio laid down by this Court in Raifuddin
Ahmed (supra), the impugned order is found to suffer from jurisdictional error
and, as such, this is found to be a fit case for exercising extra-ordinary
supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India to set at
right the jurisdictional error which has crept in the impugned order by rejecting
petition No. 316/15 filed by the petitioners/defendants to allow them to file
additional documents. However, this court declines relief to the petitioners in the
matter of rejection of petition No. 776/15 for filing additional written statement,
as relief in respect of the same has been abandoned by the learned counsel for
the petitioners.
11)            Therefore, the present revision petition is allowed to the extent as
indicated above. The learned Court of Munsiff No.2, Tinsukia, shall now allow the
defendants to file additional documents, viz., (i) the jamabandi of periodic patta
No. 379 and Dag No. 512 and 513, containing entry dated 05.01.1950 of
mutation of name of Dil Mohammad by way o purchase, and (ii) two construction
permissions issued on 13.09.1968 and 02.04.1969 for construction of house on
land covered by Dag No. 512 and 513 as additional documents in Title Suit No.
18/2004.
CRP 89/2016                                                                    Page 7 of 8

12)           The parties are left to bear their own cost. The parties are at liberty
directed to appear before the learned trial Court on 05.07.2017 without any
notice for appearance, and seek further instructions from the said learned Court.
                                                                             JUDGE
Mkumar.
CRP 89/2016                                                                      Page 8 of 8


