                              THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
            (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                                ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                      CRP 94 of 2017
         ATOWAR RAHMAN                                          …..Petitioner
                                           -Versus-
         KALACHAN SHEIKH & 2 ORS.                             …..Respondents
                                          BEFORE
                   HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
         Advocates for the Petitioners        : Mr. J. Ahmed, Mr. A. Razzaque,
                                              : Ms. M. Ahmed. Mr. A. Hoque.
         Advocates for the Respondents        : Mr. A. Ali, Mr. H.N. Islam,
                                              : Ms. F.Y. Hussain.
         Date of hearing                      : 10.07.2017
         Date of judgment and order           : 14.07.2017.
                              JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
                 Heard Mr. J. Ahmed, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner-
plaintiff and Mr. R. Ali, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents- Principal
Defendants.
2)           By filing this application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, the
petitioner has assailed the order dated 09.02.2017 passed by the learned Munsiff No.2,
Barpeta, in Title Suit No. 180/2013, by which the prayer for amendment of the plaint
was rejected. Owing to the nature of dispute raised herein, it is deemed fit to dispose of
this application at the admission stage.
3)           It is not deemed necessary to burden this order with the pleadings of the
parties. It would suffice to mention that in the suit, the hearing had commenced and the
petitioner- plaintiff had filed the evidence- on- affidavit of his witnesses and the case
CRP 94/2017                                                                            Page 1 of 5

was fixed for cross examination of those witnesses. At that stage, the petitioner- plaintiff
filed a petition under the provisions of Order VI Rule 17 of the Civil Procedure Code (CPC
for short), to amend the plaint, which if allowed, would have the effect of altering the
area of land falling in the share of 5 (five) proforma defendants in the suit.
4)            It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that in paragraph 3
of the petition for amendment, which was numbered as petition No. 938/16, it was
projected that at the time of filing of the plaint, the petitioner- plaintiff had no
knowledge about the existence of registered sale deed No. 5108 dated 26.08.1972, by
virtue of which Jayghan Nessa, the mother of the proforma defendants No. 1 to 4 had
purchased land measuring 1 bigha- 3 katha- 15 lessas from one of the two co-pattadars,
namely, Kashem Ali and took over possession of the same. The said land was mutated in
the name of the said purchaser by order dated 25.02.2000, passed by the Sub- Deputy
Commissioner. It is submitted that in view of the said purchase of land, after the death
of Jayghan Nessa, instead of the area of land mentioned in the plaint, the proforma
defendants No.1 would, on adding the area of land purchased by Registered Sale Deed
No. 5108, become entitled to 2 bigha- 1 katha 13.3 lessas land and the proforma
defendants No. 2, 3 and 4 would become entitled to 2 katha- 18.28 lessas land each.
5)            It is submitted that apart from correcting the measurement of land to which
the Proforma Defendants No.1 to 4 would be entitled to, no other amendment was
sought for. It is also submitted that the amendment, if allowed, would neither alter the
relief prayed for in the plaint, nor it would affect any change in the cause of action for
the suit, rather it would enable the court to arrive at a just and fair decision. The learned
counsel for the petitioner has relied on the following case citations – (i) State of Madhya
Pradesh V. Union of India & Another, (2011) 12 SCC 268; (ii) Mahila Ramkali Devi &Ors.
V. Nandram (Dead) through LRs, &Ors., (2015) 13 SCC 132; (iii) Pawan Kumar Pathak
V. Mohan Prasad, (2016) 12 SCC 672.
6)            Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents has submitted
that the present revision was not maintainable for non- joinder of the necessary parties,
who were arrayed as proforma defendants in the suit, and whose share in land would be
affected if the prayer made herein is allowed.
CRP 94/2017                                                                              Page 2 of 5

7)           The learned counsel argued in support of the impugned order. It is
submitted that the petition for amendment did not contain even the elementary pleading
about the date on which the petitioner- plaintiff got knowledge of the said sale deed No.
5108. It is also submitted that the petitioner had projected a false case because the
petitioner- plaintiff had purchased his land from the proforma defendants vide
Registered Sale Deed No. 5/11 dated 04.01.2011. However, prior to that on 25.02.2000,
the land purchased by Jayghan Nessa was duly mutated in her name. Hence, it is
impossible to believe that the petitioner- plaintiff had purchased the land without
knowing about the various pattadars of the land. It is submitted that the averment about
the current knowledge of the sale deed No. 5108 is a false story made up by the
petitioner- plaintiff to fill up the lacuna. It is submitted that the petitioner- plaintiff has
not prayed for any relief against the proforma defendants and, as such, the amendment,
as prayed for and if allowed would alter only the measurement of land to which the
proforma defendants No. 1 to 4 are entitled to, but it would not help to prove the case
of the petitioner- plaintiff.
8)           Having perused the materials on record, the argument advanced by the
learned counsel for the respondents in respect of non- joinder of proforma defendants in
this revision appears to be correct. It is seen that notwithstanding that the said proforma
defendants did not contest the suit, but nonetheless, they were parties in the suit. But if
this court allows the present application, then it would have the effect of amending the
area of land to which the individual proforma defendants are entitled to in their absence.
9)           It also appears that if no relief is sought for in respect of the area of land
which would fall in the share of each proforma defendant, there is no way that the share
of land which the proforma defendants are entitled to hold can be the issue framed in
the suit. In this regard, it would be appropriate to quote the provisions of Order XVIII
Rule 2(1) CPC, which reads as follows:-
             "Order XVIII Rule 2. Statem ent and production of evidence. - (1) On
             the day fixed for hearing of the suit or on any other day to which the hearing
             is adjourned, the party having the right to begin shall state his case and
             produce his evidence in support of the issues which he is bound to prove.”
CRP 94/2017                                                                               Page 3 of 5

10)         Therefore, in the opinion of this court, the trial court is not concerned about
the area of land falling in the share of the proforma defendants. It is not the projected
case of the petitioner that the area of land falling in the share of the proforma
defendants would have any bearing on the land sold by them to the petitioner- plaintiff.
Had that been the plea, then perhaps a arguable case for allowing amendment could
have been set up.
11)         In the present case in hand, any alteration to the area of land to which the
proforma defendants are entitled to would be a cause of concern for the said proforma
defendants, who have not been impleaded in the present application. Moreover, the
area of land held by the proforma defendant, being not a matter in issue or in
controversy, in the opinion of this court, no prima facie case for allowing the amendment
as prayed for is made out because even if the proposed amendment is allowed, it would
not help the learned trial court to arrive at a just and fair decision. Hence, the present
case has facts which are totally dissimilar to the facts involved in the cited cases of (i)
State of Madhya Pradesh V. Union of India & Another, (2011) 12 SCC 268; (ii) Mahila
Ramkali Devi &Ors. V. Nandram (Dead) through LRs, &Ors., (2015) 13 SCC 132; (iii)
Pawan Kumar Pathak V. Mohan Prasad, (2016) 12 SCC 672.On the perusal of these
three cases, it does not appear that in any of the case, an amendment was allowed on
matters that do not involve the real issues in controversy. Hence, it is not deemed fit to
burden this order with excerpts from the said three case citations.
12)         However, the learned counsel for the petitioner had strongly relied on the
case of Mahila Ramkali Devi &Ors. (supra) and, as such, this court proposes to address
the said case to be fair to the learned counsel for the petitioner, who has painstakingly
taken this court to the various paragraphs of the said case. BY relying on the said case,
it was strenuously submitted that in the said case, an amendment was allowed after 40
years from the date of institution of the suit. Having perused the said case, it appears
that the issue involved in the said case was that as per the law prevailing at the time
when the suit was instituted, the right of a land-owner (bhumiswami) to transfer his land
by way of a will was not recognized by law when the land was transferred by way of will
dated 21.01.1961 and under the said background, the plaintiff had prayed for
amendment to add the name of minor sons and for alternative relief of succession de-
hors the will, which was ultimately allowed by the Hon’ble Apex Court. Thus, the
CRP 94/2017                                                                            Page 4 of 5

amendment was allowed in respect of the issue in controversy, which is not the present
case in hand, where by way of amendment, the area of land which the proforma
defendant is entitled to hold is sought to be amended, which is not the issue in
controversy.
13)         To sum up, this court is not inclined to interfere with the impugned order on
two counts, viz., (i) the present application is hit by the principles of non- joinder of
proforma defendants in this application; and (ii) the amendment, sought for, are not the
real issues in controversy and, as such, it would not assist the learned trial court to
arrive at a just and proper decision. Hence, on the basis of discussion above, this court
does not find any ground to interfere with the trial court order impugned herein.
Resultantly, this application is dismissed. The parties are left to bear their own cost.
14)         The parties are directed to appear before the learned Court of Munsiff No.2,
Barpeta, on 24.07.2017 without any further notice for appearance and seek further
instructions from the said learned court.
                                                                                     JUDGE
Mkumar.
CRP 94/2017                                                                              Page 5 of 5


