                            THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                               ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                CRP (I/O) 129 of 2015
        RAJIB BAROOAH                                       …..Petitioners
                                         -Versus-
        PURNIMATI PLANTATION PVT. LTD.                     …..Respondents
                                        BEFORE
                  HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
        Advocates for the Petitioners       : Mr. K.N. Choudhury, Senior Advocate,
                                              Mr. B.J. Ghosh, Ms. M. Goswami,
        Advocates for the Respondents       : Mr. D. Banerjee, Mr. K. Bhattacharjee,
                                            : Ms. M. Bhattacharjee, Mr. D. Banerjee.
        Date of hearing                     : 16.06.2017.
        Date of judgment and order          : 12.07.2017.
                            JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
            Heard Mr. K.N. Choudhury, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Mr. B.J.
Ghosh, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. K. Bhattacharjee, the
learned counsel appearing for the respondent. Taking note of the nature of case, with
the consent of the parties, the matte was heard at ‘admission stage’.
2)          The petitioner herein had filed a suit against the respondent for eviction,
recovery of possession, recovery of arrear rent and compensation and for permanent
injunction, which was registered as Title Suit No. 76/2009 and being tried before the
learned Munsiff No.1, Jorhat. Briefly stated the suit was, inter-alia, structured on the
ground that vide Deed of Lease dated 12.04.2004, which was effective from 02.12.2003,
the land described in Schedule-A was leased out for a period of 99 years at a yearly rent
of Rs.10,000/- per year, payable within 30 days in each year from the date of
commencement of the lease. The eviction of the respondent was sought on the ground
CRP (I/O) 129/2015                                                                   Page 1 of 7

that they had violated various clauses of the lease deed, there was no development of
the tea estate, suit land was being used for other purposes not covered by the deed,
sub-letting, non-payment of lease rent, creation of mortgage, etc. The respondent/
defendant denied the same. Owing to the nature of the issue raised in the present
application, it is not deemed necessary to burden this order with pleadings of the
parties.
3)           In course of proceeding of the suit, the petitioner/ plaintiff had filed a petition
under the provisions of Order XXVI Rule 9 and 10-A of the Civil Procedure Code, which
was numbered as Petition No. 1653/15 dated 01.07.2015. It was stated therein that the
respondent/ defendant had caused large scale damage to the Tea plantation and no
steps were taken for development of Tea and that quite a number of measures not
connected to Tea had been undertaken. Hence, it was urged and prayed that a Survey
Commission be appointed to survey the area of Purnimati Tea Estate of Purnimati
Plantations Pvt. Ltd. in presence of both parties and submit a report. The name of a
surveyor was also suggested in the said petition.
4)           The learned court of Munsiff No.1, Jorhat, by an order dated 29.07.2015,
inter-alia, opined that the lessee/ defendant had every right to enjoy the leased property
in accordance with the terms and conditions agreed between the parties to the lease
deed until land unless the deed is cancelled and further opined that the main relief in the
suit is for eviction and the suit has attained its final stage and the plaintiff and his
witnesses, except the official witness had already been examined and cross-examined.
However, on forming a further pinion that the survey commission was not relevant for
proper adjudication of the matter and it would also cause delay in disposal of the matter,
which was more than 5 years old. It was also opined that the facts and circumstances of
the case also does not suggest that the information sought by the plaintiff can only be
elucidated by way of survey commission, or scientific investigation is must for
adjudication of the matter. Hence, the said petition was rejected. The said order is
impugned in the present application under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
5)           The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the
impugned order is not tenable because the purpose of the survey was to ascertain the
changes in topography, which could only be done by scientific study being carried out by
CRP (I/O) 129/2015                                                                         Page 2 of 7

a qualified Surveyor. For the said purpose, the pleadings made in paragraph 10 of the
plaint was relied upon, wherein it was specifically stated that if survey was conducted
now, the changes made in the topography in violation of the conditions of the lease
would be revealed. It was further submitted that immense damages to the Tea
plantation and Tea Estate was done in violation of the clauses of the lease deed.
Moreover, it was submitted that a sketch map prepared at the time of execution of the
lease was filed with the plaint and, as such, the opinion of the learned trial court that
the respondent/ defendant had every right to enjoy the suit property in terms of the
lease, if allowed to stand, would cause severe prejudice to the petitioner/ plaintiff. It
was further submitted that amongst the 10 issues framed by the learned trial court, the
Issue No. 7 was – whether the defendant had changed the user of land and also
topography of the land and, as such, the Survey Commission would be come to the aid
of the court to decide the said issue.
6)           It was also submitted that the purpose of appointing a Commission was to
enable the Court to correctly and properly appreciate the real issues in controversy and
to understand and assess the evidence on record. Therefore, if the Survey Commission
is allowed, it would assist the Court to clear any doubts that may exist in the mind of the
Court and that a writ for Commission should normally be allowed if there is already some
evidence on record. In support of his argument, the learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioner has placed reliance on the case of K. Raghunath Rao V. Smt. Tumula Jailaxmi,
AIR 1988 Orissa 30.
7)           Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent/ defendant by referring to
the statements made in paragraph 4 of the affidavit- in- opposition filed on 25.11.2016
has submitted that the petitioner/ plaintiff had prior to filing of the suit, got the Tea
Estate surveyed by the same Surveyor, named in the petition, and his report dated
23.01.2008 was the basis of filing the suit. By referring to the statements made in
paragraph 10 of the Evidence- on- affidavit filed by the plaintiff on 28.01.2011, it was
pointed out that one Survey Report dated 31.12.2001 was exhibited and marked as
Ext.20.
8)           It is also submitted that in the said paragraph 10 of the Evidence- on-
affidavit, it was stated that the plaintiff was filing a separate petition for fresh survey,
CRP (I/O) 129/2015                                                                      Page 3 of 7

seeking leave of the court to adduce further evidence with regard to the same. In this
regard, it is submitted that instead of leading further evidence, the petitioner/ plaintiff
was seeking appointment of Commission, which if allowed would become a part of
evidence by virtue of the provisions of Order XXVI Rule 10(2) of the Civil Procedure
Code. Therefore, the real intention of the petitioner is to fish-out evidence, which is not
permissible in law. In support of his submissions, the learned Counsel for the
respondent/ defendant had relief on the following cases – (i) Thakur Singh Chettri &
Ors. V. Dharma Samsher Basnert & Anr., AIR 2015 Sikkim 37 (print-out from 2015 STPL
9844 Sikkim), Rathnamma & Ors. V. Ademma, AIR 2010 Kar 740 [print-out from 2010 0
Supreme(Kar) 251], Manickam & Ors. V. Ayyavoo @ Sittan, 2008 0 Supreme(Mad) 4221.
9)            Having heard the learned counsels for both sides and on perusal of the
materials available on record. It is observed that the admitted case of the petitioner/
plaintiff in paragraph 11 of the plaint is that around the time of execution of the deed of
lease, a survey was conducted by duly authorized and competent surveyor. The
statements made in the Evidence- on- affidavit by the plaintiff shows that the said report
(Ext.20), was by the same surveyor whose name was proposed in the application filed
under the provisions of Order XXVI Rules 9 and 10-A of the Code.
10)           In paragraph 10 of the said Evidence- on- affidavit filed by the petitioner/
plaintiff, it is specifically stated that if the fresh survey is done, then it would reveal the
difference in the topography and large scale of damage to the Tea Estate and Tea
plantation, which was in violation of the lease deed. Therefore, in the opinion of this
court, it is noticeable that the real intention of the petitioner/ plaintiff is to fish-out
evidence. In this regard, the case of K. Raghunath Rao (supra), cited by the petitioner,
is of no help to the petitioner. The survey is not necessitated for explaining any fact, but
to find out the evidence. But, as per the ratio of the cited case, a Commission may be
allowed if it explains the evidence, which is already on record, which is not the case in
hand. In the present case, the petitioner/ plaintiff did exhibit the Survey Commission
Report as Ext.20, but it was of a period prior to the institution of the suit. It is not the
projected case of the petitioner that he did not have the access to the Tea Estate or was
prevented from carrying out such a survey and, as such, no evidence could be produced
to portray true picture of the suit property before the Court, rather, it is the pleaded
case of the petitioner/ plaintiff that the respondent/ defendant had changed the
CRP (I/O) 129/2015                                                                         Page 4 of 7

topography and, as such, it would be the initial burden of the plaintiff to prove the said
statement. There is total absence of reason why the petitioner/ plaintiff could not carry
out the exercise of survey of his own, when he had relied on the report of a previous
survey (Ext.20), which was done by the same surveyor, named in his petition. At this
stage, it is deemed fit to quote the relevant paragraph 9 of the said case of K.
Raghunath Rao (supra):
                      “9.     "..... The object of local investigation under the above
                      provision is to obtain evidence which from its peculiar nature can
                      best be had from the spot itself. Such evidence enables the Court
                      to properly and correctly understand and assess the evidence on
                      record already recorded. It clarifies or explains any point which is
                      left doubtful on the evidence on record The trial Court's decision in
                      the present case to depute a Commissioner for the above purpose
                      is indicative of the fact that in view of the evidence before the
                      Court it considered it necessary to obtain a report from the
                      Commissioner about the correct and actual position of the
                      disputed property. In view of the rival averments made by the
                      parties and in view, of the evidence on record, a Commissioner's
                      report of local investigation was absolutely necessary in this
                      case....."
                              The    aforesaid  passage    makes    it  clear  that   local
                      investigation by a Commissioner can be made in exercise of the
                      power under Order 26, Rule 9, C.P.C. where visit to the spot is
                      necessary. That would be a local investigation requisite or proper.
                      When the report would be necessary to appreciate the evidence
                      on record, a commission can be issued in proper case. Therefore,
                      normally writ is to be issued to a Commissioner for local
                      investigation to appreciate the evidence already recorded. There
                      may be departures from the normal rule for issue a commission
                      also. For illustration : Where evidence is necessary to know the
                      depth of water in a particular season a Commissioner can be
                      deputed even though evidence has not been recorded. Where it is
                      to be found as to on which plot the disputed land lies, a writ can
CRP (I/O) 129/2015                                                                     Page 5 of 7

                        be issued to any person to relay the same even though no
                        evidence is required if the Court finds that the parties themselves
                        cannot produce evidence to that effect. Since issue a writ to a
                        person for local investigation would depend upon the facts and
                        circumstances of each case, no hard and fast rule can be laid
                        down. This much can be said that the basic pre-requisite for issue
                        of such a writ is the satisfaction of the Court that a local
                        investigation is requisite or proper. This satisfaction is to be
                        judicial satisfaction based on reason.”
11)         This court is of the view that there can be no dispute with regard to the
general principle that a local inspection under Order XXVI Rule 9 of the Code cannot be
directed to gather evidence. Moreover, it is not a case where there is any ambiguity in
the description of the suit property and, as such, in the opinion of this Court, when the
plaintiff has already examined himself and his witnesses, except the official witness, and
such witnesses were cross examined, if a Commission is allowed at this stage, it would
be to allow the plaintiff to fill up the lacunae, if there by any, as the purpose of the
provision of Order XXVI Rule 9 and 10-A of the Code is not to find out or create
evidence. In this regard, one has to bear in mind that as per the provisions of Order
XXVI Rule 10(2) of the Code, a report of the Commission becomes evidence in the suit.
12)         This Court finds that the learned trial Court below has appropriately and
appositely considered the factual circumstances and rejected the petition No. 1653/15
filed by the petitioner/ plaintiff under Order XXVI Rule 9 and 10-A of the Civil Procedure
Code. It was the onus upon the petitioner/ plaintiff to place whatever facts he wanted to
prove his case by adducing oral and/or documentary evidence during trial and the same
cannot be permitted by way of getting the Commission appointed. As mentioned above,
the issue No. 7 is – whether the defendant had changed the user of land and also
topography of the land. The petitioner/ plaintiff cannot be allowed to not lead any
evidence in this regard and depend on evidence collected by the Commission for the
decision on the said issue.
CRP (I/O) 129/2015                                                                     Page 6 of 7

13)         This Court finds that the examples set out in the case of K. Raghunath Rao,
aptly describes the circumstances under which a Commission for survey of disputed land
can be ordered and in the opinion of this Court, the said circumstances does not exist in
the present case in hand. It would be also relevant to refer to the case of Manickam &
Ors. (supra), where the Hon'ble Madras High Court has also held that “It is an axiomatic
fact that the appointment of a Commission under Order 26 Rule 9 is a discretionary
power of the Court. The aim of Order 26 Rule 9 of Civil Procedure Code is not to assist a
party to gather evidence, where he can procure or produce the evidence himself. …”
14)         In view of the foregoing discussions, this Court is not inclined to interfere
with the impugned order as no jurisdictional error has been found.
15)         As regards the anxiety expressed by the learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioner that the observation made by the learned court below would cause prejudice
to the petitioner, this court is of the view that the observations of the learned court
below was merely for the purpose of giving a decision on the petition and, it is a well
settled principle that interlocutory orders cannot influence a decision on merit in a suit,
which is liable to be decided on the basis of evidence on record and the applicable law,
as such, it is needless to mention that the said principle would be noted.
16)         This revision, thus, stands dismissed. The parties are left to bear their own
cost.
                                                                                   JUDGE
Mkumar.
CRP (I/O) 129/2015                                                                    Page 7 of 7


