 IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                  SECOND APPEAL NO. 167 OF 1998
(From the judgment and decree dated 21.03.1998 and 30.03.1998
dated passed by the learned Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Aska in Title
Appeal No. 13 of 1994.)
                                             ……
Purandhara Bhola                                                   ::::    Appellant
                                          VERSUS
Orissa Forest Development
Corporation & others                                       ::::    Respondents.
                 For Appellant                    ::::     M/s. Mira Ghose,
                                                           P.K.Tripathy, N.S.Ghose,
                                                           Md. Azad, advocates.
                 For Respondents                  ::::     M/s. S.K.Pattnaik,
                                                           U.C.Mohanty,
                                                           P.K.Pattnaik, D.Pattnaik,
                                                           S.Pattnaik,advocates.
                                          ………
PRESENT:
                     THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Date of hearing : 01.08.2016 : Date of judgment: 01.11.2016
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                 This appeal has been filed challenging the judgment and
   decree passed by the learned Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Aska in
   Title Appeal No. 13 of 1994 reversing the judgment and decree
   passed by the learned Civil Judge (Jr. Division), Aska in Title Suit
   No. 53 of 1992 filed by the appellant as the plaintiff.

                              // 2 //
     2.   For the sake of convenience, in order to avoid confusion
and bring in clarity, the parties hereinafter have been referred to
as they have been arraigned in the court below.
     3.   The suit is for declaration that a order passed by the
Enquiry Officer on 19.08.1992 for deduction of a sum of `250/- per
month from the salary of the plaintiff as void and inoperative as
also for permanent and mandatory injunction not to deduct the
same anymore and repay the amount so recovered.
          Plaintiff was working as Field Assistant under the Orissa
Forest Development Corporation Limited arraigned in the suit as
defendant no. 1. It is stated that during his tenure of service as
such some allegations were leveled regarding shortage of bamboo
bundles worth of `1,36,759/- from Gajalabadi depot under his
charge. So, in January, 1991, the defendant no. 2, issued the
letter mentioning those charges as regards causing loss to the
defendant no. 1 stating that defendant no. 1 has suffered a loss on
account of the negligence of the duty of the plaintiff. Explanation
was called for. The plaintiff partially admitted the shortage but
attributed  that    it had  so    happened   on  account   of some
circumstances beyond his care and control and accordingly prayed
to exonerate him from any such liabilities. A departmental
proceeding was initiated. It is now stated that said proceeding was

                               // 3 //
conducted in gross violation of principle of natural justice and
therefore the final order passed by the defendant no. 2, Ext. 3 is
nonest in the eye of law. Hence, this suit.
     4.     The defendants first raised the objection with regard to
the entertainability of the suit by the civil court and jurisdiction as
such to try the suit. It has been asserted that the departmental
proceeding had been conducted in conformity with the principle of
natural justice. The plaintiff neither preferred an appeal nor
revision as provided under the relevant service rules and without
seeking the remedy as provided in the service rules, he has
approached the civil court claiming reliefs as above which is not
permissible.
            The defendants have pleaded the loss has been caused
for the negligence of the plaintiff in discharge of his duty and he is
liable for the same on that account. It is also stated that sufficient
opportunities have been given to the plaintiff by issuing notice
from time to time and then after recording the statements of the
witnesses in his presence affording due opportunity to him to
cross-examine, the enquiry has been concluded and finally order
has been passed.
     5.     The trial court faced with above rival pleadings framed
eight issues. The issue relating to the maintainability of the suit
and also as regards the legal force of the order passed in the

                                // 4 //
departmental proceeding, have been answered in favour of the
plaintiff and finally the suit having been decreed, the reliefs as
prayed for had been granted.
           The    lower   appellate     court  being   moved    by   the
unsuccessful defendants as is seen has taken up a question of
jurisdiction of the civil court. After finding that, the court is having
the pecuniary jurisdiction to try the suit, it has been held that the
plaintiff having already chosen the departmental forum without
immediately approaching the civil court and when there he failed
to get a favourable order, has approached the civil court, the suit
is not maintainable.
     6.    The appeal has been admitted on the substantial
questions of law as stated under ground (G) of the memorandum of
appeal which are reproduced here in below:-
     (I)   Whether civil court has the jurisdiction to try the suit to
           declare the order of the punishing authority as void
           illegal on the ground of non-compliance of the produce
           or the statute and for violation of principles of natural
           justice?
     (II)  Whether Rule 122(2) of the statute requires a proceeding
           to be conducted before imposition of penalty under Rule
           -121 of the Statute?
     (III) Whether non-compliance with the provisions of the
           Rules and contravention of principles of natural justice
           would render the proceeding void?

                                 // 5 //
       7.    Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the
finding of the lower appellate court that the suit is not maintainable
is unsustainable in the eye of law. Even if an alternative remedy is
available under the service rule, according to her, the same is not a
bar for entertainment of the suit by the civil court. Reliance in this
connection has been placed by the decision of this Court in Abhay
Kumar Nayak Vrs. Union of India; 1985(II) OLR 239. It is also
submitted that general jurisdiction of the civil court is not ousted by
the provision of special statute unless it is expressly so excluded and
it is always open to examine whether the statutory functionaries
have acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial
procedure or not. She has placed reliance again upon the decision of
this Court in case of Shri Kailash Chandra Mohanty & Others
Vrs. State of Orissa; 2007(II) CLR 879. Thus she contends that the
well discussed and well reasoned findings recorded by the trial court
ought not to have been so lightly set at naught by the lower appellate
court and that conclusion of the lower appellate court is attacked as
without the legal backing.
             Learned counsel for the respondents refuting the above
contends that the lower appellate court has rightly dismissed the suit
as not maintainable as the plaintiff had never challenged the order of
departmental proceeding in appeal or revision as provided in the
relevant service rules and therefore, those have attained finality. He

                                 // 6 //
of course fairly concedes that the jurisdiction of the civil court yet
remains to examine as to if such order has been the outcome of the
proceeding which has began and concluded in flagrant violation of
the principle of natural justice without being in conformity with the
provisions as contained in the service rules. It is his contention that
when no evidence remains that there has been violation of principle
of natural justice which can be seen from Ext. A, the entire record of
the departmental proceeding, the suit has to fail.
      9.     The position of law as culled out from those decisions
(supra) cited by the learned counsel for the appellant are that:
             (i)   exclusion of the jurisdiction of the civil court is not
                   be readily inferred. Such exclusion must either be
                   explicitly expressed or clearly implied;
             (ii)  even if jurisdiction is so excluded, Civil Courts
                   have jurisdiction to examine into the cases where
                   the provisions of the Act have not been complied
                   with or the statutory tribunal has not acted in
                   conformity with the fundamental principles of
                   judicial procedure. Civil Court would interfere if it
                   finds the order of the Special Tribunal to be unfair,
                   capricious or arbitrary.
      10.     Legal position is well settled that even if jurisdiction is
excluded, it is always open to the Civil Courts which are Courts of
general jurisdiction to consider and decide whether the statutory
Tribunal has acted within the ambit of the powers conferred upon it
by the statute to which it owes its existence or the provisions of the

                                // 7 //
Act have not been complied with or the statutory Tribunal has not
acted in conformity with the fundamental principles of judicial
procedure or it has transgressed the limits placed on its powers by
the legislature. The Civil Court would interfere if it finds that the
order of the statutory Tribunal is unfair, capricious or arbitrary.”
             Law is, therefore, fairly settled that even when the
jurisdiction of the Civil Court is excluded by a special statute, it is
still open to the Civil Court to examine whether statutory Tribunal
acted in conformity with the fundamental principle of judicial
procedure and being in compliance with the provisions of the Act as
mandatory.
       11.   Examining the case in hand, keeping the above settled
principles in mind, it is seen from Ext. A, the record of the
departmental proceeding that the plaintiff being served with the
letter has fully participated in the proceeding; the statement of
witnesses have been recorded and so also that of the plaintiff. The
witnesses have been cross-examined by the plaintiff. He was
participating in the departmental proceeding by taking necessary
permission. It has been written by the plaintiff in clear terms that the
statement of the witness had been so recorded in his presence
besides the fact that cross-examination made and also that he has
nothing more to add. It has also been prayed by him that the
proceeding be decided by ascertaining the truth and correctness of

                                // 8 //
his own statement. The Enquiring Officer then has gone through all
those   statements    and   has    finally arrived at  the    following
conclusions:-
          (1)   due to careless execution of the field work by the
                delinquent, the organization sustained heavy loss;
                and
          (2)   in proper working of the delinquent caused heavy loss
                to the Corporation finally and thereby proves his
                negligence in duty.
                In view of above he ultimately had recommended to
                debar the plaintiff from promotion in coming five
                years being declared unsuitable for the same during
                the period.
             Admittedly, the order of the Enquiring Officer has not
been challenged by carrying any appeal or revision as provided under
the relevant service rules. And thus that has attained finality and so
also the consequential order of punishment that has been ultimately
passed by the higher authority for realization of sum of `24,302/- as
against the charged amount of `1,36,759/-. The order has been
communicated to the plaintiff that in 97 installments @ `250/- per
month the sum would be deducted from his salary and there would
be stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect. The trial court
as is seen has gone to examine the matter as to if the departmental
proceeding as commenced and has been finalized as if tried like a

                                // 9 //
regular suit or not and accordingly it has pointed out the details of
the deficiencies. The line of examination made by the trial court, in
my considered view with the limited jurisdiction of the civil court is
not permissible. On carefully going through the evidence on record
as also the record of the departmental proceeding, Ext. A, it is found
that the same has been done in conformity with the principle of
natural justice and not at the back of the plaintiff so as to hit him
below the belt. The order is thus not found to be unfair capricious
and arbitrary and rather it is seen to have been passed upon due
application of mind to the facts and circumstances of the case giving
rise to the proceeding simultaneously viewing the duty that the
plaintiff was ordained to perform and accordingly even holding him
liable only to a limited extent at the ultimatum. Thus, although I
don’t agree with the view taken by the lower appellate court that the
plaintiff having chosen the departmental machinery by participating
in the said proceeding, the suit at his instance is not entertainable
and thus the court has no jurisdiction to try the same and decide yet
in view of the settled position of law as aforesaid and upon due
examination of the facts and circumstances of the case and the
available materials, this Court finds no reason and legal justification
to say that the final order passed by the departmental proceeding as
well as the consequential punishment imposed are liable to be
interfered with since in any considered view those clearly pass

                                               // 10 //
through the limited tests which the civil court has to put within its
limited scope. The aforesaid discussions thus provide the answers to
the substantial question of law which run against the appellant.
         12.        In the wake of aforesaid, the appeal stands dismissed
and in the facts and circumstances without cost throughout.
                                                        ……………………..
                                                         D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated the 01st day of November, 2016/ Narayan.


