             HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                          W.P.(C) No.9676 of 2011
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
Laxmidevi Agrawal                                  …… Appellant
                                  - Versus-
State of Orissa and others                         ……     Respondents
             For petitioner :           M/s. H.S.Mishra, A.K.Mishra,
                                        T.K.Sahu, A.S.Behera,
                                        R.Dash, advocates.
             For opposite parties :     Mr. B.Senapati,
                                        Addl. Government Advocate,
                                        Mr. T.Nanda, S.N.Mishra,
                                        K.Ch. Dash, advocates.
                            ---------
PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE D.DASH
       Date of hearing-07.11.2016 : Date of judgment- 02.01.2017
             In this writ application under Article 227 of the Constitution,
the petitioner seeks quashment of an order dated 13.12.2010 passed by
the learned Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Bolangir in C.S. No.63 of 2008
rejecting her application under Order-1, Rule-10 of the Code of Civil
Procedure to implead one Bhanumati Dash and the legal heris of Debi
Prasad Dash as parties to the suit.

                                        2
2.     Heard learned counsel for the parties. I have gone through the
order in question.
3.     The opposite party no.3 as the plaintiff has filed the above noted
suit for declaration of his right, title and interest over suit schedule ‘A’
and ‘B’ lands and for confirmation of possession with the relief of
permanent injunction. In the suit, the said opposite party o.3 as the
plaintiff had arraigned opposite party nos.1 and 2 of the present writ
application as the defendants. Later on an application under Order-1,
Rule-10 of the Code by the opposite party no.3 (plaintiff) and upon grant
of leave, this petitioner has come to be arraigned as one of the
defendants.    The suit then proceeded and when it was posted for
argument, this petitioner (defendant no.3) filed a petition under Order-1,
Rule-10 of the Code for bringing one Bhanumati Dash and legal heirs of
Debi Prasad Dash to the arena of the suit.      It is pertinent to state here
that this petitioner has been arraigned in the suit as one of the
defendants on the allegation by the plaintiff-opposite party no.3 that she
has been creating disturbance in possession of the plaintiff in so far as
the suit land is concerned. This petition was filed when the suit was
posted for argument stating that        those persons are to be added as
parties since schedule ‘A’ land has been settled in the name of Debi

                                       3
Prasad Dash and Bhanumati Dash by an order in a Mutation Case
followed by issuance of record of right. It is pertinent to state here that
this petitioner after being arraigned as one of the defendants has been
contesting the suit without pleading.
       The move faced resistance from the side of the opposite party no.3
(plaintiff) denying the allegation of settlement of schedule ‘A’ land in
favour of those persons. It was also opposed for being not supported by
any document. It is further stated that when the petitioner (defendant
no.3) claims to have purchased schedule ‘A’ land from Debi Prasad Dash
and Bhanumati Dash, there arises no need to bring those persons as
parties to the suit when this petiotner’s claim flows from them.
              The trial court as it appears from the order has gone for
elaborate discussion as regards the factual aspects placed by the
petitioner-defendant no.3 touching the subject of impletion of parties
being controverted by the opposite party no.3 (plaintiff). It has also
perused the certified copy of the order of the Mutation Case and upon
comparison of the land particulars, conclusion has been that the
schedule ‘A’ land does not appear to have been settled in favour of those
persons in the Mutation Case. Then taking a view that the move of the
petitioner (defendant no.3) is half hearted without filing any written

                                        4
statement in nor taking any specific defence to thwart the suit and even
not giving the address of that Bhanumati Dash and not stating detail
particulars as regards the legal representatives of Debi Prasad Dash with
their address, the trial court     has rejected the prayer made at such
highly belated stage of the suit.
4.           The  petitioner      (defendant   no.3) since  had   filed an
application under Order-1, Rule-10 of the Code, it was incumbent upon
her to satisfy the Court that the presence of those persons before the
Court in that suit is necessary in order to enable the Court to effectually
and completely adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in
the suit. It may be stated at the cost of repeatation that this petitioner
(defendant no.3) has been arraigned as the defendant on the allegation of
creating disturbance in the possession of the plaintiff in respect of the
suit land and has chosen to contest the suit without any pleading
stating her claim in clear terms as far as the sit land is concerned. The
opposite party no.3 (plaintiff) has not claimed any relief in particular
against those persons sought to be arraigned as defendants. If from the
evidence the Court finds that in the absence of those persons the issue
relating to declaration of right, title and interest and confirmation of
possession of opposite party no.3 (plaintiff) cannot be properly answered,

                                        5
the Court would accordingly deal that while deciding the suit. In any
event, even if the opposite party no.3 (plaintiff) succeeds in the suit and
if at all those persons are found to be having any subsisting right, title,
interest and possession over the suit land, obviously the ultimate
judgment and decree in the suit would not bind them. The petitioner
(defendant no.3) on the basis of the evidence already on record is at
liberty to place the matter accordingly in that light before the trial court
during argument seeking an answer that since those persons have the
substantive right over the suit land, grant of relief of declarationof right,
title and interest to the opposite party no.3 (plaintiff) is not permissible
in law and therefore they ought to have been made parties to the suit to
avoid multiplicity of proceedings.
              In view of the above discussion and reasons, this Court does
not find that said order has been passed in breach of the settled legal
position holding the field causing miscarriage of justice.
5.            In the wake of aforesaid, the application under article-227 of
the Constitution stands rejected. However, while parting, it may be
observed that the trial court while rendering the answers to the issues
framed in the suit would in no way be influenced by any of the

                                            6
observations made by it in the order in question as also any such
expression or observations which have been made hereinabove.
6.               The writ application is accordingly dismissed.
                 No order as to cost.
                 Viewing the age of the suit, the trial court is directed to
dispose of the suit in accordance with law with expediency, preferably,
within a period of six months from the date of communication of this
order or production of its certified copy whichever is earlier.
                                                       ………………….
                                                        D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated, the 02nd day of January,2017/Himansu

7

