   IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                             R.S.A. NO. 03 OF 2010
From the judgment and decree dated 16.09.2009 and 24.09.2009
respectively passed by the learned Ad hoc Additional District Judge
(FTC), Nayagarh in R.F.A. No. 15/15 of 2007/2004.
                                            ………
        Hara Prasad Mohapatra                                     ::::     Appellant.
                                       -:: VERSUS ::-
        State of Orissa and Others                                ::::     Respondents.
                For Appellant                     ::::    M/s. B.K. Mishra,
                                                          S. Satpathy, Advs.
                For Respondents                   ::::    Mr. S. Dash,
                                                          Addl. Standing Counsel.
                                         ………
PRESENT:
                      THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Date of hearing : 11.07.2016 : Date of judgment : 03.10.2016
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                This appeal has been directed against the judgment and
decree passed by the learned Ad hoc Additional District Judge (FTC),
Nayagarh in R.F.A. No. 15/15 of 2007/2004.
                The appellant as the plaintiff had filed Title Suit No. 17 of
1992 for declaration of his title over the suit land; confirmation of
possession as also for recovery of possession for the extent of land said
to have been encroached by respondent no. 3 by the removal of these
structures put up on it. The suit having been decreed, the defendants
had carried appeal under section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The
said appeal has been allowed in part confining the grant of relief to the

                                   // 2 //
appellant-plaintiff to the recover the possession of the portion of the
suit land encroached upon by the dispossessing the plaintiff in view of
its finding that the plaintiff had been in prior possession of the same
and the dispossession to have been made without taking recourse to
law. The appellant being the plaintiff having felt, aggrieved by the same
since the decree declaring his right, title and interest over the suit land
stood set aside has filed this appeal under section 100 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.
       2.    For the sake of convenience, in order to avoid confusion
   and bring in clarity, the parties hereinafter have been referred to as
   they have been arraigned in the trial court.
       3.    The case of the plaintiff is that his father Jagannath has
   been leased out the land corresponding hal plot no. 397 and
   225/2613 measuring Ac. 0.69 decimals and Ac. 0.35 decimals
   situated in mouza Dalaka and Odagaon respectively way back in the
   year 1943 by the then Ruling Chief of Nayagarh and as such he was
   in possession of the same. The land under plot no. 398 measuring
   Ac. O011 decimals belonging to the State-defendant no. 1 is situated
   to the east of the land under hal plot no. 397 whereas the land
   corresponding to hal plot no. 2225/2924 is situated to the north of
   the hal plot no. 2225/2613. These lands belong to the State-
   defendant no. 1.      It has been pleaded that since the time of
   possession of the leased land by Jagannath, the lands under above
   noted two plots have also been in his possession i.e., from the year

                                  // 3 //
1943 and as such it has come to be in possession of the plaintiff. It is
also stated that although encroachment cases had earlier been
initiated against the plaintiff and his father yet they have remained in
continuous possession of the same. The possession is said to be
open, peaceful and continuous and adverse to the true owner i.e.,
State-defendant no. 1. It is alleged that on a fine morning the
defendant no. 3 forcibly damaged the barbed wire fence put by the
plaintiff covering the land under plot no. 2098 and 2225/2613 and
caused damaged to some of the standing trees although the plaintiff
was in possession of the same as owner of the suit land having so
acquired by adverse possession. So, the suit came to be filed
thereafter claiming the reliefs as aforesaid.
     4.    The defendants contested the suit by filing written
statement. They denied the factum of possession of the suit land by
the plaintiff in respect of any portion covered under plot no. 395 and
2924. They have also denied the claim of the plaintiff over the same
as regards the perfection of title by adverse possession having
remained in possession since the year 1943. The allegation of
encroachment by the defendant has also been denied and so also the
removal of barbed wire fence and causing of damage to the trees. It is
their specific case that the move of the plaintiff in filing the suit is
only to grab the public property.
     5.    The trial court faced with the above rival pleadings framed
seven issues. First going to answer issue no. 3 as regards entitlement

                                  // 4 //
of the decree for a declaration of title in respect of the suit land, upon
evaluation of evidence, the answer has been recorded in favour of the
plaintiff that he has acquired title over the same having so acquired
by adverse possession. On the next issue as regards the claim of the
plaintiff for recovery of possession of the land encroached by the
defendant no. 3, the answer has also been rendered in favour of the
plaintiff. Accordingly, the answers to the other issues have followed
holding plaintiff’s entitlement to get the damage for the illegal action
of removal of the barbed wire fence and damage to the trees.
            In the first appeal the lower appellate court held the
plaintiff to have not acquired the right, title and interest over the suit
land by way of adverse possession. However, finding the plaintiff to
have been in long possession of the suit land and the dispossession
of defendant no. 3 to have been made by encroaching upon a portion
of the suit land without following the due process of law, a pure and
simple decree for restoration of possession of the suit land in favour
the plaintiff has been passed by the lower appellate court making it
clear that the defendants are at liberty to recover the possession of
the suit property following due process of law through legally
constituted proceeding and in accordance with law.
    6.      The appeal has been admitted on the following substantial
question of law:-
                        Whether the lower appellate court is right in
                  reversing the finding of the trial court which had held

                                  // 5 //
                 the plaintiff to have acquired title over the suit land
                 by adverse possession in view of the overwhelming
                 evidence on record showing his open, peaceful and
                 continuous possession althrough since the year 1943
                 with their own land adjoining the suit land on two
                 sides?
     7.   Mr. Bidyadhar Mishra, the learned Senior Counsel for the
appellant from the beginning         confines his submission only with
regard to the finding of the lower appellate court by which it has set
at naught the finding of the trial court on the question of plaintiff’s
acquisition of title over the suit land by way of adverse possession.
According to him, on the face of the overwhelming evidence as
regards open, peaceful and continuous possession of the suit land by
the plaintiff since the time of his father commencing from the year
1943, the lower appellate court ought to have presumed the hostile
animus being exhibited by the plaintiff althrough by exercising all
such rights of ownership over the same. The finding of the lower
appellate court according to him is without any justifiable reason,
when there was no scope for the said court to interfere with the
finding of the trial court on that score which is based on just and
proper appreciation of evidence, keeping in view the settled position
of law governing the field.
          Learned counsel for the State supports the finding of the
lower appellate court. According to him, since there remains the
deficiency in satisfying the legal requirements for passing the tests

                                   // 6 //
for the purpose of recording an answer on the issue of adverse
possession in favour of the plaintiff, the lower appellate court has
rightly upset the same.
    8.     It is felt pertinent to state here that the respondent-
defendants having neither challenged the decree passed by the lower
appellate court as regards restoration of possession of the suit land
in favour of the plaintiff finding the plaintiff to have been wrongfully
dispossessed by the defendant no. 3 within a period of six months
next before the institution of the suit nor having filed lany cross-
objection challenging the finding on the factum of possession of the
plaintiff in so far as the suit land is concerned as rendered by the
lower appellate court, that part of the decree as passed by the lower
appellate court in favour of the plaintiff would stand even in the
event this appellant fails in this appeal in getting the decree of
declaration of his title over the suit land as passed by the trial court
restored.
    9.     So, now in this appeal we are confined to answer the
substantial question of law that only centres round the claim of the
plaintiff as regards his declaration of title over the suit land as
asserted to have been so perfected by adverse possession.
           It is the settled position of law that when a person who sets
up the claim of acquisition of title over a piece of immovable property
by adverse possession, the burden of proof lies upon him to the plead
and prove the three classical illegal ingredients which are:- nec vi,

                                // 7 //
nec calm and nec precario. It has to be proved that the possession
was open, peaceful and continuous for upward of prescribed period
and more importantly that it was by exhibiting hostile animus and
denying title of the true owner as to the knowledge of the true owner.
The foundation of the case of the plaintiff here is that he being the
lessee in respect of the plot of land and coming to possesses the
same as such has also possessed the suit lying by its sides adjoining
the same and belonging to the State. So, from this plain and simple
pleading, we find the nature of possession of the suit land, as to have
never been by assertion of ownership over the same and claimed as
such even if for a moment the possession is said to be there. The
pleading in clear terms is not there that although the leasehold was
possessed as being the lessee, yet the suit land was possessed
asserting ownership bereft of the status as it is in respect of the
leasehold and not of that nature. So, the intention of possessing the
suit land as its owner in denial of the title of the true owner
exercising of the rights of ownership to the knowledge of the true
owner is remaining as the legal want which has gone unfed. There is
no specific pleading in light of segregating the intention as regards
possession in so far as the possession of the lease land is concerned
with the suit lands situated by its sides. Rather from the pleading, it
can be well inferred that the possession of the suit land has been as
if a part of the leasehold and the possession has accordingly
commenced as also continued. So, when the settled position of law is

                                  // 8 //
that mere possession of the land for any length of time does not
enure to the benefit of the possessor in establishing his claim of title
by adverse possession; in the absence of proof of all the above noted
illegal requirements, the present claim of title by the plaintiff in my
considered view squarely falls within the net and does not
successfully pass through all those legal tests in so far as that claim
is concerned entitling the plaintiff to decree for declaration of title
over the suit land as to have been so perfected by adverse
possession. Therefore, the answer to the substantial question of law
does not run in favour of the appellant so as to entitle him to a
decree for declaration of the title over the suit land by adverse
possession. This important fact of the case has been overlooked by
the courts below. The lower appellate court while even negating the
above claim of the plaintiff appears to have missed this point which
cuts the very root of the case of the plaintiff as regards the claim of
title over the suit land by adverse possession.
            For the aforesaid discussion and reasons, the finding of the
lower appellate court that the plaintiff has not acquired to the over
the suit land by adverse possession disentitling him for decree on
that behalf and setting aside the decree of the trial court to that effect
hereby receives the seal of approval.
     10.    Resultantly, the appeal fails. However, it may be made
clear that the judgment and decree passed by the lower appellate
court in granting the relief restoration of the possession of the suit

                                               // 9 //
   land to the plaintiff along with the observation as contained therein
   that the defendants are at liberty to evict the plaintiff from the suit
   land under due process of law through legally constituted proceeding
   and in accordance with law stands undisturbed. In the facts and
   circumstances of the case no order as to cost is passed.
                                                       ……………………..
                                                        D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated, the 03rd day of October, 2016/ Narayan.


