  IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                            R.S.A. NO. 464 OF 2009
From the judgment dated 23.10.2009 passed by the learned Civil Judge
(Sr. Division), Dharmagarh in Title Appeal No. 03 of 1996.
                                            ………
Pabitra @ Pabitra Mohan Panda & others …….                                 Appellants
                                           VERSUS
Bipin Bihari Padhi & another                              …….              Respondents.
                For Appellants                    ::::    M/s. Prafulla Kumar Kar,
                                                          D.K. Rath, S. Tripathy,
                                                          P.K. Jena,advocates.
                For Respondents                   ::::    None.
                                         ………
PRESENT:
                      THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Date of Hearing : 28.10.2015 : Date of Judgment 04.12.2015
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                This appeal has been filed challenging the judgment and
  decree passed by the learned Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Dharmagarh-
  Kalahandi in Title Appeal No. 03 of 1996. The appellants-plaintiffs
  are the legal representatives of the original plaintiff of Title Suit No.
  15 of 1994 filed for declaration that respondent no. 1 is not the
  adopted son of Badri Prasad Padhi and for further declaration that
  deed of partition dated 01.04.1960 is invalid and not binding upon
  the plaintiffs.

                                  // 2 //
          The suit having been decreed declaring the defendant no. 1-
respondent no. 1 to be not the adopted son of Badri Prasad and also
declaring the deed of partition to be invalid and not binding. The
defendant – respondent no. 1, being aggrieved by the same had filed
the appeal. The lower appellate court has allowed the appeal and
thereby dismissed the suit. Thus the defendant-respondent no. 1 has
been held to be the adopted son of Badri Prasad and partition deed
dated 01.04.1960 has also been held to be valid.
    2.     For the sake of convenience, in order to avoid confusion
and bring in clarity, the parties hereinafter have been referred to as
they have been arraigned in the trial court.
    3.     Case of the plaintiff is that Badri Prasad who is her father,
after giving her in marriage as also after the marriage of her sister,
developed instability of mind and left the village. So, as difficulty
arose on the part of the defendant no. 2 to look after the landed
properties of Badri Prasad, she took the assistance and help of
defendant no. 1 in looking after the family properties. The defendant
no. 1 then said to have taken charge of the property affairs and was
at times giving the yields from out of the properties to plaintiff and
defendant no. 3. It is stated that when defendant no. 2 became old
and senile, the defendant no. 1 started showing hostility towards the
plaintiff and defendant no. 3. So, the plaintiff suspected the conduct
of the defendant no. 1 and on verification of record, it was then

                                 // 3 //
noticed that the land of her father have been recorded separately
without their knowledge, having been shown as the subject matter of
partition said to have been effected as evidenced by a document
dated 01.04.1960 showing allotment of different portions of lands in
favour of the plaintiff and defendant no. 1 to 3. The defendant no. 1
therein had been described as the son of Badri Prasad. These
documents are said to be created documents to serve the purpose. It
is stated that neither the plaintiff nor the defendant no. 2 and 3 have
ever consented to such partition and in fact the plaintiff was a minor
then. It is the further case of the plaintiff that the defendant no. 1
having managed to take advantage of the helpless condition of
defendant no. 2, had taken her signatures on the said documents by
mis-representing the facts and in that partition, therefore the
defendant no. 1 had managed to have shown to have been given
major share. The plaintiff on 01.01.1993 having derived knowledge
about all those, on 01.02.1994 filed the suit for the reliefs as above
stated.
           The defendant no. 2, the mother of plaintiff and defendant
no. 3 supported the case of the plaintiff. She joined with the
defendant no. 1 in contesting the suit. They filed a joint written
statement. It is asserted that defendant no. 1 is the adopted son of
Badri Prasad and defendant no. 2. His adoption is said to have taken
place when he was five years old after Badri Prasad left the village

                                  // 4 //
and remained unheard of. It is stated that defendant no. 1 being the
son of defendant no. 2 was looking after family affairs as also the
landed properties and performing all such ceremonies. It is, also
their, case, that the marriage ceremony of plaintiff as well as
defendant no. 3 were performed by defendant no. 1. It is stated that
Badri at his ripen age came back and stayed with defendant no. 2
and 3 and lastly died on 18.11.1987. He also accepted the said
adoption of defendant no. 1 and treated him as their son. As regards
the said partition, it is stated that it was so effected with the consent
of the plaintiff and defendant no. 3. The defendant no. 1 claims to
have performed the funeral ceremony of Badri Prasad to the
knowledge of all as the son of Badri. The plaintiff and defendant no. 3
are said to have been fully aware of the said deed of partition.
           4.    On such rival pleadings, the trial court framed in
total seven issues and having rightly taken up issue no. 1 regarding
the challenge to the adoption of defendant no. 1. On examination of
evidence and upon their evaluation, it had rendered the finding in
favour of the plaintiff that defendant no. 1 is not the adopted son of
Badri Prasad and defendant no. 2. Next issue so far as partition is
concerned, as also the validity of the deed Ext. A, the answer had
finally been given in favour of the plaintiff. Practically, the answers to
these issues decided the fate of the suit standing decreed in favour of
the plaintiff.

                                    // 5 //
       5.    The defendant no. 1 and 2 being aggrieved by the said
  judgment and decree had carried an appeal. The lower appellate
  court first of all having gone to judge the sustainability of the finding
  of the trial court in respect of issue no. 1 i.e., adoption of defendant
  no. 1, on independent assessment of evidence and upon their
  evaluation has set aside the finding of the trial court on that score
  and has held the defendant no. 1 to be the adopted son of Badri
  Prasad and defendant no. 2. Similar suite has been followed in finally
  upsetting the finding of the trial court on the issue of partition and
  validity of the said partition deed Ext. A. Lastly, the lower appellate
  court while setting aside the judgment and decree of the trial court
  has dismissed the suit.
       6.    The learned counsel for the appellant submits that the
  following is the substantial question of law which is involved in the
  present appeal.
                      Whether the lower appellant court is right in
                     rendering a finding in favour of adoption of defendant
                     no. 1, in the absence of pleading and proof of the
                     particular year or date of adoption and due proof of
                     the factum of giving and taking ceremony by
                     evidence?
             He has placed reliance on the decisions of the Apex Court
in case of Rahasa          Pandiani     (dead)  by   LRS   and    Othrs  v.
Gokulananda Pandiani and others; AIR SC 1987 SC 82 and that of

                                   // 6 //
this Court in case of Hara Dibya Vrs. Pravakar Satpathy; 1990(II)
OLR 89.
       7.    In the case of Rahas Pandiani (supra) cited by the learned
counsel for the appellant, there was no registered document in proof of
adoption in question. On the other hand, there was evidence that
natural father of the so called adopted son had earlier given his eldest
son in an adoption by registered document to person other than the
adoptive mother of that case. This said adoptive mother had also earlier
resorted to adoption of a different person by a registered document.
These are held to be very significant circumstances creating serious
doubt about the genuineness of the claim of adoption. The father’s
name of the so called adopted son has not been changed after adoption;
evidence relating to the living of the adopted son with adoptive mother
till the dispute was found insufficient and no neighbour was also
examined to say so, when more importantly the adoptive mother stoutly
denied the adoption stating that so called adopted son had never come
to her house. Evidence with regard to the ceremony of adoption was
held to be doubtful and to have not been established by leading
required evidence. Therefore, the High Court was found to have
attached less or even no importance to all these catena of significant
circumstances in reversing the findings recorded by the trial court
against adoption by simplistic method of accepting the evidence
adduced by the plaintiff without analyzing or testing it in the

                                    // 7 //
touchstone of probabilities. So, the Hon’ble Apex Court taking an
overall and cumulative view of all the relevant circumstances set aside
the judgment and decree of the High Court favouring adoption and
restored the judgment and decree of the trial court in holding adoption
as claimed in the negative.
       8. In case of Haradibya v. Pravakara Tripathy; 1990 (II) OLR
89, in first appeal, this Court while judging the concurrent finding in
favour of the adoption, the view of the trial court in discarding the voter
list on the ground of non-examination of enumerator has been held to
be grave error of law. Next, non-consideration of the certificate issued
by the schools where the name of natural father found place has also
been held to be a serious error. But the fact there in that case, was that
the adoptive mother disputed the claim of adoption and it was not
shown that she had any special reason for doing so or that the denial
was actuated with oblique motive. Mere giving and taking without
consent of the adoptive mother has been held to be insufficient for the
purpose of a valid adoption. Similarly, the non-examination of the
natural father had been bypassed by the trial court from being brought
under consideration on the presumption that had he been examined,
his evidence might have been characterized as tainted with bias and
interestedness. Holding such conclusion as irreconcilable, the finding of
adoption having been set aside, the matter was remitted to the trial
court for allowing parties to lead the further evidence on the question of

                                    // 8 //
consent or absence thereof and for examination of natural father, if the
parties so choose with further direction to dispose of the suit afresh.
9.           It has been laid down as regards the Electoral Roll in case
of Kirtan Sahu Vrs. Thakur Sahu; (38) 1972 CLT 82:
                   “The electoral roll being a public document is
             admissible in evidence and it is not necessary to prove the
             source of information on the basis whereof the facts stated
             in the roll were recorded, nor is it necessary that the
             person who prepared the electoral roll has to be examined
             in Court to prove the roll. As a public document it is
             admissible under the provisions of the Evidence Act.”
             So far the entry in admission register is concerned relying
upon the observations of the apex Court in case of L. Dev Prasad
(dead) by LRS of Tribeni Devi and Others; AIR 1970 SC 1286, it has
been held to be an important piece of evidence more so because it is of
considerable value as in most of the cases, it is in contemporaneous to
the date on which adoption is claimed.
       In case of Raghunath Behera vrs. Balaram Behera &
another; 1995 (II) OLR 135, it has been held that:-
       “So far as voter’s list is concerned, electoral roll being a public
document is admissible evidence and it is not necessary to prove source
of information on the basis whereof facts stated in the roll were recorded,
nor is it necessary that the person who prepared electoral roll has to be
examined. Sec. 35 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short, ‘Evidence

                                    // 9 //
Act’) is relevant in this regard. To render a document admissible under
the said section, three pre-conditions must be satisfied; first of all the
entry that is relied upon must be one in any publication or other official
book, register or record. Secondly, it must be an entry stating a fact in
issue or a relevant fact; and thirdly it must be made by a public servant
in discharge of his official duty or by any other person in performance of
the duty specially enjoined by law. Such documents have been made
admissible in evidence on account of their public nature, though their
authenticity be not confirmed by usual tests of truth, namely, the
swearing and the cross-examination of the persons who prepared them.
They are entitled to the extraordinary degree of confidence partly because
they are required by law to be kept, and partly because their contents are
of public interest and notoriety; but principally because they are made
under the sanction of oath of office, or at least under that of official duty
by accredited agents appointed for that purpose.”
       10.    Adverting to our case, here the adoptive mother being alive
had been arraigned as defendant no. 2 who was 78 years at the time of
institution of the suit. The defendant’s case is that the defendant no. 1
was aged about 5 years when he was given and taken in adoption. He is
not a total stranger to the family but nephew defendant no. 2
(husband’s brother’s son). The defendant no. 2 being the so called
adoptive mother has not only pleaded in the written statement in
support of adoption but has also come to the witness box to depose

                                  // 10 //
about the said fact being examined as D.W. 2 at her age of 84 years. No
such special reason is shown as to why at that age even, she would
resort to falsehood that too against her proprietary interest as also in
adverse to the interest of her own daughters. She has stated in clear
and categorical terms that on the 11th day of death of Yudhisthir, the
natural father of defendant no. 1 who is none other than the brother of
her husband Badri Prasad, the natural mother of defendant no. 1 has
given him in adoption on her lap and that since then he stayed with her
as the son, looked after her and their properties. It has also been
deposed that it is he who got the marriage of the plaintiff as well as the
defendant no. 3 performed. She has further stated about her living with
the defendant no. 1 under one roof all along since then even at that
point of time. She has deposed on oath that she took her as adopted
son in presence of relatives, when her husband was not having the
balance of mind and this defendant no. 1 being the son performed all
the ceremonies after the death of her husband. She has stated to be
staying with defendant no. 1 being dependent on him. Her further
shown testimony is that since the age of 5 years, the defendant no. 1 is
staying with her as son. During cross-examination, rather she has gone
to describe more details as regards the giving and taking ceremony and
on such other aspects related thereto.
             D.W. 4 is none other than the bother of D.W. 2. She has
stated that her sister was having two daughters and one adopted son.

                                   // 11 //
One more feature appears here that all the lands of Badri were put to
partition between the parties. It is said to have taken place in the year
1960 as evidenced by a registered deed of partition. Share has been
allotted to the defendant no. 1. Such evidence further get corroboration
from the voter lists admitted in evidence marked as Ext. F, G, G/1 and
G/2 ranging from the year 1973 till the 1993. It further derives support
from none other than the plaintiff herself who has stated that her
marriage was performed in the year 1958 and then defendant no. 1 was
looking after the household affairs. This is a significant circumstance
no doubt; the maternal uncle of the plaintiff has also supported the
said fact being examined as D.W. 4. One more important evidence
stands which cannot be lost sight of is that the landed properties in the
year 1960 were sold by the plaintiff, their mother defendant no. 2 as
also defendant no. 1. This provides the clinching evidence that
defendant no. 1’s right over the property was duly recognized and his
position was so accepted as otherwise he would not have been one of
the executants of that sale-deed. In the instant case, the adoption of
defendant no. 1 having been challenged during the lifetime of adoptive
mother, the defendant no. 2, she has deposed fully in support of the
adoption of defendant no. 1 running against her proprietary interest as
also adversely affecting her own daughters when no such acceptable
reason or explanation surfaces or is shown as to why the old lady
hailing from rural background would resort to falsehood and why she

                                   // 12 //
would be choosing to unnecessarily and for no reason whatsoever
benefit to sacrificing her own interest as well as of her own daughters.
Furthermore, there remains overwhelming evidence on record that
defendant no. 1 had performed obsequies of Badri Prasad in the year
1987. The role of adoptive mother is undoubtedly vital in the process of
adoption. As indicated above here she favours adoption. So, unless it is
shown that she had special reasons for doing so and / or that the
acceptance is actuated with oblique motive, her evidence receiving
corroboration from other evidence in the case are found sufficient to
discharge the burden of proof of factum of adoption resting upon the
defendant no. 1. With such state of affair in the evidence, this Court
finds that the lower appellate court by holding the defendant no. 1 to be
adopted son of Badri Prasad has rather rectified the grave error
committed by the trial court in answering the said issue in favour of the
plaintiff. This Court thus finds absolutely no perversity with such
finding of the lower appellate court.
       11.    Coming to the other issues relating to the partition as
evidenced by the registered deed of partition dated 01.04.1960, the
lower appellate court’s finding is that all necessary persons are parties
to the said partition and that they had knowledge about the same is
based on proper analysis of evidence on record.        The said deed of
partition having not been challenged within a period of three years by
the plaintiff on her attaining majority, even accepting her case that she

                                           // 13 //
was a minor, the said prayer has been found to be barred by limitation
by the lower appellate court. This Court finds no such fault with the
same.
                   For the aforesaid discussion and reasons, this Court is
unable to accept the submission of the learned counsel for the
appellant that there surfaces any substantial question of law in this
appeal so as to be certified for its admission.
               12.         In the result, the appeal stands dismissed and in the
facts and circumstances without cost throughout.
                                                          ……………………..
                                                           D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated, the 4th December, 2015/ Narayan.


