    IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                              R.S.A. NO. 176 OF 2015
From the judgment dated 26.03.2015 passed by the learned District
Judge, Gajapati in R.F.A. No. 23 of 2013.
                                              ………
Sri Khirod Chandra Naik & others                                   …….        Appellants
                                             VERSUS
The Grama Sabha (Village Committee)
of village Nisangapur & others                                     …….        Respondents.
                For Appellants                    :       M/s. Prasanna Ku. Mishra,
                                                           S.K.Dash, Chandana Das,
                                                           advocates.
                For Respondents                   :       xx      xxx       xxx
PRESENT :
                        THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Date of hearing : 13.07.2016                   : Date of judgment : 04.10.2016
     -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                This appeal has been directed against the judgment and decree
    passed by the learned District Judge, Gajapati in R.F.A. No. 23 of 2013
    confirming the judgment and decree passed by the learned Civil Judge
    (Senior Division), Parlakhemundi in C.S. No. 49 of 2010.
                The above noted six appellants, being the legal representatives
    of one Nilambar Naik had filed the suit for declaration of their title by
    virtue of open, peaceful and uninterrupted possession of the suit land
    for upward of the prescribed period with the prayer for mandatory
    injunction directing the respondents (defendant nos. 1 to 4) to so

                                  // 2 //
prepare the land records in their name and for permanently restraining
all the respondents from disturbing in the peaceful possession and
enjoyment of the suit property by them.
2.       For the sake of convenience, in order to bring in clarity and
avoid confusion, the parties hereinafter have been referred to as they
have been arraigned in the trial court.
3.       Plaintiffs case is that their predecessor-in-interest Nilambar
Naik had made the suit land fit for agriculture by clearing the bushes
and as such he continued remain in possession of the suit land for
more    than  thirty   years.  Whereafter   plaintiffs being    his   legal
representatives are in cultivating possession of the same. It is stated
that the question of recognition of the forest dwellers as to their rights
as such arose in view of coming into force of the Scheduled Tribe and
Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Right) Act. So
in the year 2010 as provided in the said Act, Grama Sabha being
constituted, the resolution had been passed therein over the rights of
defendant nos. 5 to 19 as above so as to be recognized and accordingly
for preparation of the record in respect of the suit land.       Plaintiffs
being aggrieved by the same and apprehending further action in that
direction detrimental to their rights and interest as above, filed the
suit.
4.       Defendant nos. 1 to 4 in the written statement denied the
factum of possession of the suit land by Nilambar as also the plaintiffs

                                   // 3 //
at any point of time. It is also stated that the defendant nos. 5 to 19
have been in possession of the suit land which is of forest kisam, and
they being tribal forest dwellers, their rights as such over the said land
have been rightly recognized in consonance with the provision of the
Act governing the field. It is also stated that the defendants are in
possession of the said land having their houses and have also grown
the trees over there. The recommendation of the Gram Sabha is
asserted to be correct and that is said to be based on proper field
enquiry. Correctness of which has further been ascertained through
Government officials.
5.       Defendant nos. 5 to 14 in their written statement have denied
the factum of possession of the suit land at any point of time by
Nilambar. They stated that Nilamber had never cleared the bushes
over the suit land and made it fit for cultivation. The claim of
possession of the suit land by the plaintiffs had also been denied. The
action of the body constituted under the Act are thus said to be just
and proper. They claim that they have in possession of the suit land
not as trespassers having made forcible entry over the suit land but as
the traditional forest dwellers satisfying all the legal requirements as
per the provisions of the Act and as such to have been rightly so
recognized.
6.       Faced with rival pleadings, the trial court framed six issues.
Rightly taking up the important issues i.e. issue nos. 4, 5 and 6 for
decision at first, upon analysis of evidence and on their assessment in

                                  // 4 //
the back drop of the rival pleadings, the claim of right, title, interest
and possession of the plaintiffs over the suit land has been rejected. It
has been said that neither Nilambar nor these plaintiffs have perfected
their title over the suit land by adverse possession and they are also
not in possession. This finding has resulted in dismissal of the suit.
7.        The plaintiffs being aggrieved by such dismissal of the suit
had filed the first appeal under section 96 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. The first appellate court sitting over to examine the
sustainability of the findings of the trial court on the crucial issues
together, as it appears has taken up the exercise of appreciation of
evidence afresh at its level being the duty bound and as ordained by
law.
8.        Scrutinizing   the  evidence    on  record  and   upon    their
assessment and considering the same along with the pleadings,
ultimate conclusion has remained the same as that of the trial court.
Thus the plaintiffs having failed in their attempt to get the order of
dismissal of the suit set aside, have filed this second appeal under
section 100 of the Code.
9.        Learned counsel for the appellants submits that here the
courts below have committed grave error both in law and fact by not
recording the findings in favour of the plaintiffs that they have
perfected the title over the suit land by way of adverse possession
having remained in open, peaceful and continuous possession in so far
as the suit land is concerned since the time of their predecessor-in-

                                   // 5 //
interest for much more than the prescribed period. Therefore
according to him, the courts below ought to have also held that as the
appellants have the rightful claim in terms of the section 2(d) and
section 3 of the Scheduled Tribe and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers
(Recognition of Forest Right) Act, the action of the defendant nos. 1 to
4 to be illegal. It is also submitted that the overwhelming evidence
being on record as regards the open, long and continuous possession
of the suit land by the plaintiffs, the courts below ought to have
accepted the same that it was by exhibiting the hostile animus denying
the title of the true owner, and claiming that to the knowledge of the
true owner they have been in possession as such. These according to
him, are the substantial questions of law which arise in the case for
certification for the purpose of admission of this appeal.
10.              The suit for declaration of title is founded upon the
plaintiffs case of open, peaceful and continuous possession of the suit
land for more than the prescribed period. The courts below have
recorded the concurrent findings that the plaintiffs have not been able
to establish their case of acquisition of title over the suit land by
adverse possession specifically pleading and proving all those facts or
showing any such circumstance in the direction for fulfillment of the
legal requirements.
11.              The settled position of law in relation to the doctrine of
adverse possession is that a person who claims title over the
immovable property by virtue of adverse possession has to plead and

                                  // 6 //
prove all those legal requirements that the possession has been open,
peaceful and continuous exhibiting hostile animus and in denial the
title of the true owner claiming the same unto himself and to the
knowledge of the true owner. The classical requirements are ‘nec vi’,
‘nec calm’ and ‘nec precario’. The settled position of law is clear that
mere possession of the land by the possessor for any length of time
whatever it may be, does not enure to the benefit of the possessor in
establishing the claim of acquisition of title by adverse possession and
that itself is not enough. The burden of proof as above thus lies upon
the person who claims title as such.
12.             Having read the judgment of the courts below carefully,
very important aspect strikes to the mind of this Court which seems to
have been completely lost the sight of the courts below and that itself if
taken into account in its proper prospective and put to pass through
the legal prism, the foundation of the plaintiffs’ case may not remain
visible in the eye of law. Admittedly, an encroachment proceeding has
been initiated against the father of the plaintiffs in the year 1993. The
document on that score has been proved by the plaintiffs. In that very
proceeding, the plaintiffs themselves admitted that their father
Nilamber     had   paid  the  penalty     and   thus   have  remained   in
unauthorized     possession,  accepting     his   status  as  that of  an
unauthorized occupant. This document is Ext.7. The pleadings merely
remain that the possession in spite of that continued as before with
Nilambar and then came to the hands of the plaintiffs. Undoubtedly,

                                   // 7 //
just initiation of an encroachment proceeding has nothing to do either
in arresting the period of continuity in possession or giving any
different colour to its nature and         manner. Unless, it is specifically
proved that the possessor has been physically driven out from the
possession on the strength of an order passed in the encroachment
proceeding in accordance with law mere initiation of the encroachment
proceeding is of no fatal consequence in any way in so far as the claim
of acquisition of title by the possessor is concerned. But once the
penalty has been paid, there comes the clear acceptance of the title of
the true owner relegating and placing the possessor in the position as
that of an unauthorized occupant. In that situation prior possession
for any length of time even for a moment if we assume to be with the
fulfillment of the legal requirements loses all its significance in the eye
of law and the same places the possessor in no better footing than
that of a mere trespasser.      In such a case, the possessor’s claim of
title by adverse possession would again arise if he pleads and proves
that after payment of fine in the encroachment case from a particular
date he began to possess as its owner denying the title of the true
owner and asserting the same unto to himself and that too it must
again cover the prescribed period running afresh from that very date of
possession exhibiting hostile animus. The possessor for the purpose
must show all such circumstances which would lead to conclude all
those aforesaid. But here what is found that there remains neither
such pleadings nor evidence on those scores when it is also not said

                                  // 8 //
and proved that the fine had been paid under threat or being coerced
and thus not voluntarily.
          For the above discussion and reasons, even without taking
any view over the discussion of the evidence and the reason assigned
by the courts below in recording the concurrent findings, on this above
particular score, this Court is left with no option but to say that there
remains no flaw with the said ultimate findings either in the matter of
appreciation of evidence or construction of pleading or application of
the settled legal principles.
13.             The provision of section 2(o) of the Act defines “Other
Traditional Forest Dwellers” means any member of the community who
has at least for last three generation prior to the 13th December, 2005
primarily resided in and who depends upon the forest or forest land for
bona fide livelihood needs. The emphasis, besides the member of the
community residing in forest and depending on the forest is that the
forest land must be in his use for last three generation prior to the
cutoff date i.e. 13.12.2005 having bona fide livelihood needs. The
plaintiffs in the suit have made a claim of their rights over the suit
land as such and that it ought to have been recognized under the
provisions of the Act. The lower appellate court as is seen has made
necessary discussion on this aspect at page-8 of the judgment. Leaving
aside the same, the above claim of the plaintiffs as laid clearly appears
to be misconceived in view of the findings that they have failed to
establish their claim of title by adverse possession standing with the

                                               // 9 //
     reasons in support of such finding as discussed above. In the suit, the
     court is not required to examine the legality or propriety of the action
     of the bodies and the authorities under the Act in the matter of
     recognition of rights of those defendants, if any, and the subject
     matter being confined only to the non-recognition of such rights, if
     any, of the plaintiffs, there remains no scope to delve into that fact
     here.
                   In view of the aforesaid discussion and reasons, the
     submissions of the learned counsel for the appellants fail..
     14.           Resultantly the appeal stands dismissed. No order as to cost.
                                                       ……………………..
                                                        D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated, the 04th day of October, 2016/ Routray.


