                   HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 324 OF 1991
From the judgment dated 19.11.1991 passed by Shri P.B.Patnaik, 2nd Additional
Sessions Judge, Ganjam-Berhampur in Sessions Trial No.19/91 (S.C.18/91).
                                                      …….
Ganapati Pradhan                                                          ….                     Appellant.
                                                    Versus
State of Orissa                                                              ….                  Respondent
                  For the Appellant                      …         M/s. S.D.Das, B.N.Udgata,
                                                                   L.Samantaray
                  For the Respondent                     …         Mr.K.K.Nayak,
                                                                   Additional Standing Counsel.
                                                    ………
PRESENT:
                            THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D. DASH
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Date of hearing : 27.06.2014                     :         Date of judgment:              06 .08.2014
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  This appeal has been directed against the judgment of
conviction and order of sentence passed by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Ganjam-Berhampur in S.T. No. 19 of 1991 (S.C. No. 18 of 1991
GDC) convicting the appellant for commission of offence under Section
20(b)(i) of the N.D.P.S. Act, 1985 and sentencing him to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for two years and to pay of fine of Rs.2,000/- in default to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months.
2.                The case of the prosecution is that on 02.05.1990, the Sub-
Inspector of Excise, E.I.B., Berhampur (P.W.3) and his constable (P.W.2)

                                       // 2 //
were on patrolling duty at Goilundi bus stand of Berhampur town. When it
was around 10.00 A.M., it is alleged that the appellant carrying gunny bag
over his head arrived there. P.W.3 raised suspicion that it contained ganja.
Then he called some persons present there. It is stated that P.W.3 disclosed
before the appellant his intention to search his bag as he suspected the bag
to be containing ganja. It is also stated that the appellant was asked to
exercise his option of being searched in presence of the Magistrate or a
Gazetted     Officer  and    when   he    refused, after  observing  necessary
formalities, P.W.3 searched the gunny bag and finally after weighment
found it to have been containing 14 kgs. of ganja. Such possession of ganja
being without any authority, the seizure was made by preparing the seizure
list. It is also stated that the samples were drawn and the appellant was
forwarded to the court on that day with the documents which were also
placed before the Court. The samples were sent for chemical analysis and
the report came in affirmative. So, the prosecution was launched against
the appellant. He accordingly faced the trial being charged for above
offence.
3.             The appellant in the trial took the plea of complete denial with
further explanation that when he was going for work as labourer, he was
forcibly taken and falsely implicated in this case.
               In the trial, from the side of the prosecution, three witnesses
have been examined. Besides seizure list Ext.3, chemical report Ext.6, and
other documents were admitted in evidence. The gunny bag containing

                                    // 3 //
ganja being produced in the trial has been marked as M.O.I. Apart from
that other material objects were also produced in the trial. The defence has
not examined any witness.
4.           The trial court upon analysis of evidence of the prosecution
witnesses and upon their evaluation has arrived at a finding that the
prosecution has been able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt that it
is the appellant who was possession of 14 kgs. of ganja. . In view of the
same, the trial court held the appellant guilty of the above offence and
awarded sentence as aforesaid, which are now impugned in this appeal.
5.           Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the factum of
search, recovery and seizure has not been proved beyond doubt in the
present case by clear, cogent and acceptable evidence. It is also submitted
that the evidence of PWs. 1, 2 and 3 are highly discrepant and according to
him, the trial court erred in law by rendering the finding. He further
submits that the mandatory provision of Section 50 of the N.D.P.S. Act
having not been duly complied with; that makes the entire search, recovery
and seizure suspect. His last contention is that the provision of Section 57
of the Act which casts a duty on the part of the officer arresting to intimate
to the immediate superior officer within 48 hours of arrest having not been
proved to have been complied with, the prosecution is bound to fail. So, he
urges that the impugned judgment of conviction and order of sentence
being unsustainable in the eye of law, are liable to be set aside in this
appeal.

                                    // 4 //
             Learned counsel for the State on the contrary supports the
findings of the trial court. It is also his submission that thread bare
analysis of evidence has been made by the trial court so far as the evidence
of P.Ws. 2 and 3 are concerned. There being no material discrepancy in
such evidence and the documentary evidence being there on record
corroborating the said evidence, the trial court has rightly convicted the
appellant for the above offence. It is next submitted that in the facts and
circumstances of the case, the provision of Section 50 of the Act is not
required to be complied with as the present case is not one of search of a
person. He next contends that the evidence on record are quite sufficient
and acceptable to hold that there has been compliance of provision of
section 57 of the Act. In view of all these, he contends that the appeal
bears no merit.
6.           With the above rival submission, this court is now called upon
to judge the sustainability of the finding with regard to the possession of
ganja by this appellant on the relevant date, time and place.
             P.W.3, the Sub-Inspector of Excise has deposed that on
02.05.1990 the appellant was detained at the western end of the bus stand
of platform and on being asked the appellant fumbled which further
confirmed his suspicion and that led to express his desire to search the bag
of the appellant that he was carrying. He next called some witness when
P.W.1 only came forward. It is also his evidence that the appellant was
asked as to whether he would like to be searched in presence of Magistrate

                                    // 5 //
or the Gazetted Officer, and on his denial for either of the two, search was
conducted. He in view of his special training and experience of service,
could ascertain the contents by physically testing with a little portion of it
that it was ganja. He has deposed that weighment being carried out as per
his direction, it weighed 14 kgs. He has further stated to have prepared the
seizure list, collected the sample in two packets, kept those in paper
packets, tied and sealed by using his own personal brass seal. During trial,
he has produced the bags containing residue ganja and the same has been
marked as M.O.I, Ext-3 has been proved to have been prepared at the spot.
It is further stated that he immediately produced the appellant in the court
with all documents and deposited the seized bag containing the residue
ganja in court malkhana in proper condition. As per his evidence, sample
packet was also sent to the chemical analyst, who has reported it to be
ganja. As regards compliance of Section 57 of the Act, his evidence is to the
effect that he intimated such factum of recovery of seizure of ganja from the
possession of the appellant to his Inspector who is his immediate superior
authority in writing. This P.W.3 has been cross-examined at length. He has
stated that on that day, he detected five cases. Carefully going through his
deposition, I do not find anything substantial to have been brought out
from the leaps of this witness, so as to either to discard or throw any doubt
on veracity of the prosecution case as regards search, recovery and seizure
of ganja from the possession of the appellant.
              P.W.2 the Excise Constable appears to have deposed in same
vain. He has stated with regard to the factum of detention of the appellant

                                     // 6 //
after raising suspicion by P.W.3 and then going for search followed by
recovery of ganja. He has stated to have weighed the contents of the said
gunny bag and also collected the sample. He has denied the suggestion
with regard to the fact that no ganja has been seized from the possession of
the appellant. The independent witness examined in this case is P.W1. He
has also gone to state the details with regard to search, recovery and
seizure while corroborating the version of P.Ws. 2 and 3. No material has
been placed before the court to show that the sample tested by the
chemical examiner was not the one that was collected from the contents of
the gunny bag which was being carried by the appellant. The defence has
also not offered any explanation as to why these witnesses including one
independent would falsely implicate the appellant when they have
absolutely no axe to grind against him and also totally without having prior
acquaintance. In view of all these, on thorough analysis of evidence on
record, this court finds no other option but to confirm the finding of the
trial court with regard to the factum of seizure of 14 kgs. of ganja from the
gunny bag held by the appellant.
7.           Next stands for consideration as regards non-compliance of
provision of Section 50 of the Act. The position of law is no more res integra
that the said provision is mandatory and is required to be complied with
when it’s a case of search of ‘person’ and that is a valuable safeguard. The
law has been settled by plethora of decisions of the Apex Court and this
Court that search of bag being carried by a person either carried on hand
or head, does not amount to search of ‘person’ and for the said reason, the

                                     // 7 //
compliance of provision of Section 50 of the Act is not the mandatory
requirement. Therefore, said provision does not come into play in the
present case. In view of the above, the contention of the learned counsel for
the appellant on that score is hereby repelled and there remains no further
need to go for elaborate discussion of the evidence on that score to examine
proof or otherwise as regards compliance of said provision of Section 50 of
the Act and its affect in case of non-compliance.
8.            Now taking up the contention regarding non-compliance of
Section 57 of the said Act, it is seen to have been stated by P.W.3 and the
same appears to be clear, cogent and acceptable.. It is true that the
prosecution report does not find mention of such fact of compliance of the
provision of section 57 of the Act. However Ext.8 which has been proved by
P.W.3, goes to show that information was duly passed over to the superior
authority, i.e., the Inspector of Excise. P.W.3 has also in clear terms stated
about the said fact and there is no such suspicions features which surface
to infer for a moment that Ext.8 is a document created at a later stage for
showing the compliance. Simply because said fact does not find mention in
the prosecution report, the evidence otherwise establishing the factum of
compliance of said provision in my considered do not either get demolished
nor can be doubted in any manner. So the contention of the learned
counsel for the appellant on this score cannot be countenanced.
9.            For the aforesaid discussion, I do not find any        justifiable
reason to upset the finding of the trial court that the prosecution has

                                         // 8 //
established its case against that the appellant on the relevant date, time
and place was in possession of 14 kgs. of ganja in contravention of the
provisions of the Act. The order of sentence passed by the trial court
appears to be just and proper more particularly taking into consideration,
the deleterious affect of commission of such kind of offence upon the
society at large.
10.                 Resultantly, the judgment of conviction and the order of
sentence are hereby confirmed and consequently this appeal fails.
                                                    …………………………
                                                          D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Date 6 th August 2014/Routray.


