                   HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 332 OF 1990
From the judgment dated 24.11.1990 passed by Shri B.Panigrahi, Sessions Judge,
Balasore in S.T. No. 76 of 1990.
                                                      …….
Jogia @ Jogendra Mallick & another                                        ….                     Appellants.
                                                    Versus
State of Orissa                 .                                          ….                    Respondent
                  For the Appellant                      …         M/s. Y.S.N.Murty, P.Mishra,
                                                                   M.K.Mohanty, B.P.Mohapatra,
                                                                   Mr. B.P.Mohapatra-Amicus curie.
                  For the Respondent                     …         Mr. K.K.Nayak,
                                                                   Addl. Standing Counsel
                                                    ………
PRESENT:
                            THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D. DASH
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Date of hearing : 01.08.2014                        :          Date of judgment : 08.08.2014
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  The appellants challenge the judgment of conviction
passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Balasore convicting them for
commission of offence under section 304, Part-II, I.P.C. and the order
of sentence directing them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
seven years.
2.                Prosecution case is that on 06.03.1990 around 1.30 P.M.
there had arisen a quarrel among the children of the informant,
P.W.6 and appellant Jogendra near the tube-well lying close to the
house of the informant. Hearing the same, informant’s father

                                      // 2 //
Purusottam (deceased) rushed to the place so as to subside the
quarrel of the children. It is stated that at that point of time, the
appellants came there being armed with lathis, dragged Purusottam,
assaulted on his hands and legs and then abused him while asking
appellant Dhuduka @ Rama Chandra Mallik to give a good thrashing.
At that point of time, son of Purusottam P.W.6, who is the informant
and his mother were at a little distance of around 20 cubits and were
witnessing the incident. When P.W.2, the wife of the deceased
proceeded towards the tube-well, she was assaulted. It is further
stated that at the site, other villagers were present and had witnessed
the occurrence. It is also the prosecution case that when P.W.6 the
informant and others asked the appellants as to why at all he
assaulted Purusottam, they left the spot when appellant Jogendra
again twisted the hand of Purusottam. Injured Purusottam was then
shifted to the Gopalpur PHC. The report was then lodged by P.W.6 at
Gopalpur police out-post which having been sent to Khantapada
Police  Station, the     case  got registered and      the investigation
commenced. In course of investigation several witnesses have been
examined and all the         injured persons were       put to medical
examination. Purusottam’s condition then became critical and he
having been shifted to the headquarter hospital at Balasore,
ultimately met his death having succumbed to the injuries. So the
inquest was held and also the post mortem was conducted on the
requisition of police. On completion of investigation, charge-sheet

                                    // 3 //
having been submitted against the appellants putting them to trial for
commission of offence under sections 302/34, I.P.C., they faced the
trial.
3.            During trial, the appellants took the plea of complete
denial of the occurrence and as regards their role as per the
prosecution case. During trial prosecution examined number of
witnesses out of whom P.Ws.1,2 and 6 are the members of the family
of the deceased, the wife and sons. P.W.3 is an independent witness
and so also P.W.7, the Medical Officer conducting the Post Mortem
examination over the dead body of the Purusottam has been brought
to the witness box as P.W.5. The other Medical Officer who had
initially examined Purusottam has also come forward as P.W.5. The
police officials who had played their part in the investigation of the
case are P.Ws.8 and 9.
              The appellants in their defence have examined one
witness.
4.            The trial court on analysis of evidence and their
evaluation has arrived at a finding that the prosecution has been able
to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt that these appellants had
assaulted Purusottam by means of lathi causing injuries on his
person and Purusottam succumbed to those injures. The injuries
sustained by Purusottam being inflicted by these appellants have
been found to have caused the death of Purusottam. Lastly, looking

                                    // 4 //
at the entire scenario and all surrounding circumstances, the trial
court has held that the appellants had caused such injuries on the
head of Purusottam with the knowledge that such injuries are likely
to cause death. Therefore, conviction has been recorded for the
offence under section 304, Part-II, I.P.C.    and the appellants have
been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of
seven years.
5.           Learned counsel for the appellants submits that presence
of eye witnesses are doubtful if evidence of all the witnesses are read
together. Therefore, according to him, the trial court erred in law by
placing reliance on the evidence of P.Ws.1,2,6 and 7 in finding the
appellants to be the author of that head injury. It is also his
submission that other witnesses, who are independent have not been
purposely examined, in order to suppress the real part of occurrence
along with the role of the deceased. He next contends that although
P.W.7 is said to have given a detail account of the incident but the
same ought not to have been believed in the absence of due
corroboration being received from the evidence of other witnesses. In
view of this, he urges that the order of conviction and sentence
impugned in this appeal are liable to be set aside.
6.           Learned counsel for the State, on the contrary, submits
that the trial court has made thorough discussion of evidence and
analysis of the evidence of all the witnesses having been duly made

                                    // 5 //
and then evaluated, correct finding has been arrived at and it is thus,
not liable to be interfered with. He further submits that evidence of
P.W.7 has been rightly accepted by the trial court in the absence of
any material to show that it suffers from any basic infirmity. While
summing up, it is urged that there remains no legal justification to
interfere with the judgment of conviction and the order of sentence.
7.           Faced with such rival submission going to the merit of
the case acceptability of the evidence as advanced, the defensibility of
the finding of authorship of the injuries upon the deceased as resting
with the appellant stands for consideration in this appeal on
reappraisal of the evidence.
             During trial as well as hearing of this appeal, there is no
challenge on the score that Purusottam met a homicidal death. He
was first of all taken to the Gopalpur PHC and then finally to District
headquarter hospital, Balasore where he died. Doctor conducting the
Post Mortem examination has found six injuries including two
contusions one of the size 2”x2”x2” with fracture of temporal bone
and the other is of 1”x1”x1” below the lobule of right ear. P.Ws.4’s
clear evidence is that the nature of injuries were ante mortem and
might have been caused by lathi. On dissection of brain, he has
found corresponding internal injuries to the above stated head
injuries with subdural and intra-cerebral haemorrhage. In view of the

                                     // 6 //
above evidence, Purusottam having met a homicidal death stands as
the irresistible conclusion.
8.            Now coming to the occurrence as projected by the
prosecution and the authorship of the injuries upon the deceased; it
is seen that the entire case of the prosecution ultimately rests upon
the solitary testimony of P.W.7. He has his house near the tube-well
at a distance of around 10 cubits within the visibility range. It is
stated that the house of the appellants are at a distance of hardly 50
cubits from that tube-well. His evidence is to the effect that when
deceased Purusottam came to wash his hands, the appellants
quarrelled with him and both the appellants being then armed with
lathis   indiscriminately    assaulted     him resulting   injuries and
consequential to the same, Purusottam fell down. He has also stated
that the deceased was then requesting the appellants not to assault.
The F.I.R. in the case has been lodged by none other than the son of
the deceased-P.W.6. The genesis of the occurrence has been
differently stated therein in the F.I.R. Ext-1, i.e., the foundation for
the incident. Ext.1 reveals that Purusottam had gone there to refrain
his grand child and the child of appellant Jogendra quarreling and
then immediately the appellants arrived and without any gap of time
assaulted. Suppression of this part that the deceased had gone
hearing the quarrel by P.W.7 from the very beginning creates a doubt
in the mind as regards his presence. F.I.R. narration reveals that the
incident took place within a short span of time. So, the arrival of the

                                    // 7 //
appellants after the arrival of the deceased, who had gone there
finding the children quarreling when is not stated by P.W.7 and when
it is also not stated as to when he arrived and then what immediately
he saw and those being absent doubt becomes more intensified. At a
later stage, witnesses stated that both the appellants abused
Purusottam as there was a quarrel between the grand-daughter of
Purusottam and son of accused Jogendra and he further states that
the deceased asked the appellants as to why they were abusing him
and thereafter since they were armed with lathi without listening to
the request of the deceased, assaulted him. So, as per his own
evidence, he was there at the time of quarrel between the grand-
daughter of the deceased and son of the appellant Jogendra. His
evidence is that first the appellants abused the deceased referring to
that quarrel and then assaulted. The witness states that he was
present near the tube-well as he had gone to take bath at the relevant
time and then deceased went to wash his hand. Thus, his evidence is
to the effect that the children’s quarrel had taken much earlier and
due to that the appellants came near the tube-well when deceased
had gone to the tube-well not for getting the quarrel subsided but to
wash his hands. Thus, the version of this witness is quite in variation
with the F.I.R. averments. These are all material aspects and cannot
be lightly brushed aside as minor. During cross-examination, the
witness has stated that she was alone there as an outsider at the
time of assault upon Purusottam and he has seen the children

                                    // 8 //
quarrelling. Next, he has gone to say that hearing the cry of
Purusottam he and others went there when his earlier version is
otherwise that he was there, Purusottam had been to wash his hands
whereafter the appellants arrived and assaulted. Again, the witnesses
stated during cross-examination to have reached the tube-well when
Purusottam had already washed his face. Thus, in my considered
view, the evidence of this witness is shaky and thus not wholly
reliable and the solitary testimony of this witness cannot be form the
basis of the finding being placed with implicit reliance that it is the
appellants who had assaulted by means of lathis on the head and
other parts of the body of the deceased.
             Let us now search for some corroboration if available
from the evidence of other witness which would help the prosecution
in putting the anchor at the bay. P.W. 7 is the son of the deceased.
His evidence is to the effect that when he arrived there Purusottam
was injured. He states that when he questioned the appellants as to
why they assaulted his father, they threw him into the pond which
interestingly does not find mention in the F.I.R. at all. He is also
unable to show if there was children’s quarrel preceding the incident
of assault upon Purusottam. P.W.2 is the widow of the deceased.
Although in her evidence in-chief, she states to have seen the
appellants assaulting her husband she has not stated as to how they
were assaulting and by means of what. During cross-examination,
she has stated who have gone to protect Dhuduka, who was

                                     // 9 //
assaulted and after hearing the same, her clear statement is to the
effect that by the time she went near the tube-well her husband was
lying on the ground being already assaulted. So, neither this witness
can be said to be a witness to have seen the actual assault and
infliction of injuries upon the person of the deceased nor her evidence
provide corroboration to the evidence of P.W.7 with regard to material
particulars. Rather, on a bare comparison the incident as stated by
each of them from the beginning till the end is found to be lacking
consistency. P.W.6, another son, has also stated in the same manner
that by the time he came out of the house, he found his father to
have already been lying on the ground with injuries. He has again
stated that her mother P.W.2 had arrived prior to him. The evidence
of this witness if taken into consideration, the evidence of P.W.7
becomes more doubtful. He has again stated that when he reached at
the spot no outsider was present. Thus, the evidence of other
witnesses for the aforesaid reason are found to be of no help in
providing corroboration to the evidence of P.W.7 on those material
aspects.
8.             On conspectus of evidence and as per the discussion
with the reasons assigned, this Court find that the prosecution has
not been able to establish its case beyond reasonable doubt against
the appellants as regards their complicity as the assailants of
Purusottam leading to his death.

                                          // 10 //
9.                  In view of the aforesaid, the finding of the trial court is
found to be indefensible, and cannot be sustained. Therefore, the
judgment of conviction and consequential order of sentence are
hereby found liable to be set aside.
10.                 Resultantly, the Criminal Appeal stands allowed. The
impugned judgment of conviction of the appellants for commission of
offence under section 304, Part-II, I.P.C. and the order of sentence for
undergoing seven years of rigorous imprisonment by which all the
appellants are hereby set aside.
                                                        …………………………
                                                             D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Date 8 th August 2014/Humansu.


