               HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                           R.F.A. No. 133 OF 2005
From the judgment and decree dated 05.03.2005 and 17.03.2005
respectively passed by Shri N.Sahu, Civil Judge (Senior Division) Ist Court,
Cuttack, in C.S.(I) No. 410 of 2002..
                                             ………
The Proprietor,
M/s. Sadhana Ausadhalaya, DACCA & anr.                          ………                     Appellants
                                                               Versus.
Smt. Tapasi Roy.                                              ………                     Respondent
                  For Appellants :           M/s. A.Mukherjee,Sr.Advocate, A.R.Dash,
                                             R.N.Behera, M.C.Swain, S.K.Nanda-1,
                                             B.Mohapatra, P.L.Choudhury, G.Mukherji,
                                             P.Mukherji, A.C.Panda,advocates.
                  ,
                  For Respondent:            M/s. S.Kar, P.C.Mohapatra,
                                             A.K.Mohanty, K.A.Guru,advocates
                                             ………
PRESENT :
                         THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of hearing : 25.11.2014                      :        Date of judgment: 09.01.2015
                  The      unsuccessful          defendants          have       challenged         the
judgement and decree passed by the learned Civil Judge, (Senior
Division) first court Cuttack in C.S. (1) Case No.410 of 2002. The suit
filed by the respondent has been decreed directing the appellants to
deliver vacant possession of the suit premises to the respondent and
pay rent `968 per month w.e.f. 01.04.2002 to 31.10.2002 and to pay
damages `2000/- per month from 01.11.2002 till the date of actual
vacation of the suit premises.

                                  -2-
              For the sake of convenience to avoid confusion and for
proper appreciation, the parties hereinafter are being referred to as
they have been arrayed in the original suit.
2.            The case of the plaintiff is that she is the owner of the
said shop room and the defendants were inducted as tenant for
running one Ayurvedic Medicine shop on payment of rent of Rs.880/-
per month. When the defendants gave the proposal on 08.04.2002 for
enhancement the rent there was no response from the side of the
plaintiff being no more interested in continuance of the tenancy. She
admits to have received rent till March, 2002. It is further stated that
she for the purpose of expansion of the business of her son needed of
the suit premises. So finally notice under Section 106 of the T.P. Act
was served asking the defendants to vacate the suit premises within
six months, while indicating therein that they were habitual
defaulters in payment of monthly rent. The defendants in response
requested for continuance the tenancy. However, finally the suit
premises being not vacated by the defendants the suit was filed for
eviction along with claim of damage of `15,000/- per month from
April, 2002 till October, 2002 and future damage at that rate.
3.            While traversing the plaint averments, the defendants
raised some technical objections as regards maintainability of the suit
for non-joinder of the parties, wrong description of the dimension of
the   shop    room;  and    that the    defendant  no.1   being   not  a

                                   -3-
proprietorship concern for having been wrongly described as such.
The purpose of requirement of the suit premises as stated in the
notice under Section 106 of the T.P. Act by the plaintiff was denied
and so also it is said to be invalid. It is also stated that the defendant
were under not legal obligation to vacate the suit premises and pay
damage as claimed.
             It is specifically pleated that defendant no.1 is the
occupation of the two rooms measuring 23 feets and 14.2 feets at a
monthly rent of `800/- in 1995 and they were paying the rent
regularly as per instruction of the plaintiff. The plaintiff wanted an
advance of a sum of Rs.50,000/- from the defendant for carrying out
some renovation work and the defendants paid the same on
03.03.1996 by Bank draft. The repayment of the advance amount was
to be within three years as per the agreement with adjustment of half
of the monthly rent towards this advance and that would not be any
enhancement of the rent till full adjustment of the said advance. It is
also stated that the plaintiff agreed that if he would repay the defence
within three years, then there would be enhancement of 10% in every
three years. The plaintiff failed to repay the advance within three
years, but under one Bank draft dated 05.03.2002 the plaintiff sent
Rs.17,000/- to defendant no.1 who had accepted said             sum. It is
further stated that though the defendant sent rent for April, 2002 to

                                   -4-
June 2002 by M.O., the same not received and finally the suit has
been filed.
4.           The trial court has framed six issues including the
technical issues such as the maintainability; suit is bad for non-
joinder of necessary parties; lack of cause of action etc. Issue no.4
and 5 relate to the validity of notice under section 106 of T.P. Act and
as regards the defendants liability for eviction from the suit premises,
for payment of damage charges.
5.           The trial court having taken into consideration, the rival
pleadings, also the contentions and upon examination of evidence on
record has negated the objections as regards the maintainability of
the suit, and the same being had for non-joinder of necessary parties.
The other two issues relating to the validity of the notice under
section 106 of T.P. Act and also the question of the defendants
vacating the suit premises have answered in favour of the plaintiff.
The claim of damage has been awarded at a lesser rate than claimed.
             It may be stated here that the respondent has filed a
cross objection claiming the relief of enhancement for damage by
setting aside award of the trial court being made on a lower side.
6.           The main contention of the learned counsel for the
appellant is that the plaintiff has utterly failed to prove that the
defendants were habitual defaulter in making payment of monthly
rent. Therefore, according to him, when such is the assigned reason
for termination of tenancy in the notice under section 106 of T.P. Act,

                                   -5-
the said notice given is not valid in the eye of law, as it adversely
affects the defendants by bringing stigma to them. It is also his
submission that no such evidence on record stand as regards the
bona fide requirement of the suit premises by the plaintiff. In view of
the same, he urges that the judgment and decree passed by the trial
court are unsustainable in the eye of law. However, he also contends
that the findings on other issue concerning permanent tenancy etc
are against the weight of evidence and are liable to be set aside.
             Learned counsel for the defendants on the other hand
supports the findings rendered by the trial court on all the issues.
According to him, there remains no legal ground whatsoever to
disturb the findings of the trial court which has been rendered on
proper appreciation of the evidence on record in the touch stone of the
rival pleadings of the parties as well as the settled position of law. He
further   contends   that   the  trial  court’s  award    of  damage    is
unreasonable land without assigning cogent reason and thereby the
damage as claimed by the plaintiff has been illegally refused.
7.           The relationship of the landlord and tenant between the
parties stands admitted. In the court below the defendants had taken
a plea that it was a permanent tenancy and for the purpose reliance
was placed on Ext. B, a letter dated 10.09.1995 said to have been
given by plaintiff. Admittedly no document showing such creation of
permanent tenancy is forth coming. More so, this defendant no.2
during his evidence has given a good bye to such a plea by deposing

                                    -6-
on oath that there exists no written agreement about the period of
tenancy. In this connection another letter dated 22.11.1995 Ext. D
sent to the plaintiff is also projected as the reason to hold so. By that
letter the defendants have requested the plaintiff to accept their
proposal that no enhancement of rent would be made till either full
adjustment of advance of `50,000/- and till then 50% of the rent would
get adjusted every month. Next Ext. F is the response of the plaintiff
advancing a query that the advance if paid within three years whether
there remains scope for enhancement of rent @ 10% or not. This has been
replied  by defendants vide letter dt. 23.02.1996 (Ext.H), agreeing
enhancement of rent by 10% on expiry of three years w.e.f. 01.01.1996 if
the advance is repaid within three years. Admittedly, `50,000/-, the advance
was not paid within three years. The Ext. P was went by plaintiff showing
detail adjustment of advanced amount and seeking defendants response
on the proposal as regards the payment of rest. In that letter the plaintiff
had requested for repayment of advance at one go. Ext. L, the letter of the
defendant shows the request of monthly repayment of advance from
monthly rent up to March, 2002 and payment of a sum of `17,000/- March

                                  -7-
end by Bank draft. Payment of `17,000/- by the plaintiff is not disputed
and that has been candidly admitted by D.W.1. Thus, it clearly shows the
absence of any agreement for creation of permanent tenancy and from
these letters exchanged between the parties no such permanent tenancy
can be construed when rather the conducts of the parties as those
emanate there from show otherwise. So, the issue has been rightly
answered in negative.
              In view of above, now coming to the validity of the notice
under section 106 of the T.P. Act, in the present case that Ext.2 is
dated 17.04.2002 which is prior to the amendment of the provision of
section 106 of the Act by Amendment Act 2002, coming into force
w.e.f. 31.12.2002. On carefully going through the contents of the said
notice under section 106 of the Act which is marked Ext.2, this Court
finds the same to be wholly in consonance with the provision of law.
Law does not mandate that in case of termination of tenancy by
serving notice under section 106 of the Act any such ground is the
requirement to be stated in support of such termination so as to say
that in case said ground is either false or not proved, the termination
does not take effect for the tenant to incur the liability of vacation of
the tenanted premises.

                                  -8-
8.           Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant in course of
argument has not placed any such authority in support of his
submission. Moreover his apprehension regarding inviting stigma to
the appellant does not appear to be well founded, when it is seen that
the trial court has not given any positive finding on that score that it
would be adversely running after the appellant, so far as his conduct
is concerned and, standing on the way of his hope of being inducted
as a tenant for other premises if any for being adversely viewed by
other landlord as a conduct blame worthy for a tenant. Therefore, the
submission of the learned counsel for the appellant is not acceptable.
This being the sole ground on which the defensibility of the finding
rendered by the trial court as well       as the ultimate result being
questioned, this Court feels no further necessity to delve into the
other findings.
9.           Now,     coming    into    cross-objection    with   regard
enhancement of quantum of demand, it is seen that the trial court
has awarded damage of `2000/- per month w.e.f. 01.11.2002. The
plaintiff advanced the claim of `15,000/- per month towards damage.
Admittedly, the rent paid at last stands at `968/- per month. The
claim of the plaintiff is more than fifteen times the last rent paid and
that appears to be without any basis and not backed by any

                                   -9-
reasonable justification. As it appears the plaintiff has neither pleaded
nor led evidence in support of such claim.
             Thus the judgment and decree passed by the trial court
stand confirmed.
10.          In the result, the appeal stands dismissed and the cross
objection is also found to be devoid of merit. The parties are appear
respectively all throughout.
                                      …………………………
                                          D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 09th January, 2015/Sukanta


