               HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                     FIRST APPEAL No. 345 OF 1989
From the final decree dated 28.09.1989 passed by Shri N.B.K.Murty, Sub
Judge, Nayagarh in T.S. No. 13 of 1982-1.
                                             ………
Baidyanath Sathua & ors                                        ………                      Appellants
                                                               Versus.
Somanath Sathua . & ors.                                    ………                     Respondents
                  For Appellants :           M/s.N.C.Pati, A.K.Nanda, B.Sahu,
                                             B.K.Nayak, A.K.Mishra, S.Ratho,
                                             D.K.Mohapatra, advocates..
                  ,
                  For Respondents:           M/s. A.Mukherji, G.Mukherji,
                                             P.R.Barik, advocates.
                  .
                                             ………
PRESENT :
                         THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of hearing : 01.12.2014                      :        Date of judgment: 10.12.2014
                  In this appeal the defendants of Title Suit No.13 of 1982
of the Court of the Learned Subordinate Judge, Nayagarh (as it was
then) have filed are challenging the final decree passed in the said suit
after an order upon acceptance of the report of the Civil Court
Commissioner and making the preliminary decree final.
2.                For the sake of convenience, clarity and to avoid
confusion, the parties hereinafter have been referred to as they have
been arrayed in the court below.
3.                Facts necessary for disposal of this appeal are as under.

                                   -2-
             Respondent no.1 as plaintiff filed a suit for partition of
the properties belonging to the joint family. The extent of land which
is the subject matter of the suit is Ac.6.59 dec. situated in three
different Mouza described in the schedule ‘A’ and ‘B’ of the plaint. The
movables described in the schedule ‘C’ of the plaint are also the
subject matter of the suit.
             The admitted inter se relationship between the parties is
that one Parikhita Sathua had two wives, namely, Kaincha and Hara.
The plaintiff and defendant no.7 are the son and daughter of Parikhita
through Hara whereas defendant nos.1 to 5 are the children of
Parikhita born through wife Kaincha and defendant no.8 is the
daughter of defendant no.1. In the said suit ultimately preliminary
decree for partition was passed on 16.09.1986. Thereafter the said
preliminary decree has been made final upon acceptance of the report
of the survey knowing commissioner, when he was found to have
completed the job as ordained by the preliminary decree in allotting
immovable properties to different parties in conformity with that. The
same is now challenged in this appeal on the grounds as indicated in
the memorandum of appeal. The important of those being culled out
are the followings:-
          a)       the division is illegal and unsustainable, inasmuch
as, the appellants (defendants) have not got their legitimate share

                                 -3-
from the lands of Itamati and Pratap Prasad which are most valuable,
with house and homestead;
          b)       the division is illegal, inasmuch as, the share
allotted to defendant no.1 only contains a cowshed the valuation of
which has been acquired with the pucca structure;
          c)       the defendant no.1 being the eldest member, he
should have been given his share from the eastern portion of the
homestead land;
          d)       land under Plot No.192 should have been divided
according to the convenience of the parties; and
          e)       the defendant no.1 having a large family and only 2
decimals of homestead land when has been allotted to him the same
cannot go to accommodate the family and hence more homestead
lands should have been allotted to him.
4.           Learned counsel for the appellants in course of hearing
just reiterated these grounds and his ultimate submission is for
setting aside the final decree and remitting the matter back to the
court below for deputation of a survey knowing commissioner afresh
for allotment of the lands to the parties in accordance with their
respective share as determined in the preliminary decree, respecting
possession of the parties and looking to their convenience as far as
practicable and possible.

                                   -4-
5.            Learned counsel for the respondents vehemently refuted
the said submission. According to her, the grounds of challenge made
to the final decree are all vague. He submitted that each of those have
been duly taken care of and addressed to by the original court and
finally viewing the best interest of all the parties looking at all
practical angles, the final decree has been passed. According to her
this move of filing of appeal is only to unnecessarily protract the
litigation as much as possible so as to see that the lis does not attain
its finality and the parties in advantageous position continue in that
way where as those disadvantageous are ruined and ultimately
deriving frustration no more pursue.
6.            On such rival submission, it is now necessary to examine
as to whether the grounds as stated above are legally tenable to upset
the final decree passed in the suit. The position of law is no longer res
integra that in the final decree proceeding arising out of a suit for
partition, the court is to carry out the preliminary decree and make it
final both in letter and spirit and following the directions given
therein. So in view of grounds of challenge, the prime consideration in
this appeal is as to whether the final decree drawn up in the case is in
conformity with the preliminary decree or not.
7.            Adverting to the factual aspects as necessary for the
purpose, it is seen that the preliminary decree is dated 16.09.1986. In
the said preliminary decree the plaintiff-defendant no.1 and the

                                  -5-
defendant no.6 each have been found entitled to 9/32 share in
Schedule ‘A’ property except plot no.143 and an area of Ac.0.09 dec.
from plot no.288. The defendant nos.2 to 5 and 7 have been found
entitled to get 1/32 share out of Schedule-A property.
             On an application being made before the court to make
the said preliminary decree final, the survey knowing commissioner
was deputed to inspect the properties and divide the same to the
parties in accordance with their shares as indicated in the preliminary
decree and furnish the allotment sheets, map etc. The Commissioner
receiving the writ from the court issued the notice to the parties and
their concerned Advocates fixing date for such inspection of the
properties and asking the parties to supply their map, khatian,
valuation list etc if they so desired. As per the said date fixed, the
Commissioner made the inspection. He has also gone to serve written
notice on the parties requesting them to apprise him all those details
to be taken into consideration in respect of the convenient enjoyment
of the properties having least adverse affect. The parties supplied
village map, khatian etc. which have been verified. After that the
parties have been asked to submit their written statement as regards
the valuation with necessary document in support of the same which
they did not furnish in writing. However, their version to that effect
were taken note of. The     Commissioner in his report has given the
valuation of each item of the properties and those allotted to the

                                  -6-
parties. His report is to give compensation to the defendant who could
not be given share in respect of some properties. The parties virtually
appear to have consented for the said allotments. The detail report
being submitted with all necessary documents annexed to it, the
court below invited objection, if any, from the parties. The defendant
nos.1 to 5 filed their objection with their view that the division as
made by the Commissioner is not acceptable as it is not fair and in
contradiction to the direction given in the preliminary decree and the
law as well. They stated that defendant nos.2 to 5 had not get their
legitimate share from the land of Mauza Itamati and Pratap Prasad
which are most valuable with house and homestead. They further
stated that the structure standing on the land have not been properly
valued. It has also been indicated that there stands no house on the
portion of the land allotted to the petitioner and simply a cowshed
remains over it; the valuation of which is meager in comparison to the
pucca structure. The same claim has again been advanced that as the
eldest son, the defendant no.1 is entitled to get his share from the
eastern portion of the homestead and it is said that the same is based
on age old custom prevailing in the area. It is further stated that in
village Itamati, there remains excess land of Ac.0.01 dec. as has been
stated in the report and that has not been divided. Defendant no.1
claims to have made a well inside the plot of land incurring loan from
the Co-Operative Bank. It is next stated that in the event the plot of

                                   -7-
land divided north-south with length east-west, the plot can be
conveniently used as homestead as there is road on the eastern side
of the plot. It is further stated in view of lesser extent of land being
allotted to the defendant no.1 who has his large family, they are
unable to be accommodated. Next the allotment made by the
Commissioner is said to be without taking into consideration the
convenience of the parties.
8.            It may be pertinent to state here that after the objection,
the court by order dated 27.02.1988 instead of accepting the report of
the Commissioner directed to reallot the lands keeping in view the
aspects – i) equal distribution of agricultural lands at village Itamati
between the plaintiff, defendant no.1 and defendant no.6; (ii) to take
into consideration and see that the plaintiff, defendant no.1 and
defendant no.6 get some rooms each and in case it is not possible the
valuation be made so far as the rooms are concerned so that the party
deprived would be paid with due compensation; and (iii) to keep in
view the objection raised by defendant no.1 regarding Balikudia and
Pratap Prasad land and for necessary adjustment if so possible. The
Commissioner has submitted his report afresh.
              In the instant case as it is seen that in course of
argument and counter argument on the question of acceptance of the
report of the Commissioner, the parties as well as their counsel made
a request to the Presiding Officer of the court to have a local

                                   -8-
inspection for just and proper appreciation of the case and that
appears to be an honest attempt from both side to put a quiets to the
lis. Learned counsel for the parties have no complain to that nor on
its legality. So the fact remains that in view of the unhesitating
request from both the sides for proper appreciation of the matter of
the acceptance of the report of the Commissioner, the Presiding
Officer paid a visit to the spot and has indicated in detail in Para-7 of
the order which runs as under:-
          “ As per their request and in the interest of justice, I visited
the locality and had seen the home-stead land with structures and
also the land and well situated in different villages which are situated
nearby. After visit and after perusal of the Commissioner’s report, I
think, the Commissioner has no other alternative than to allot the
shares as mentioned in his report. The objections raised by
defendants 1 to 3 are not tenable in law and facts. Similar objections
have been raised by the defendants 1 to 5 on previous occasions and
my    predecessor    in  his  order  dated   27.02.1988    directed    the
Commissioner for equal distribution of agricultural land at village
Itamati between the plaintiff, D.1 and D.6, while allotting the home-
stead lands, the Commissioner should take into consideration
whether the plaintiff, D-1 and D-6 got some rooms each and if it is
not possible, the rooms should be properly valued and compensation
should be given to the party who is debarred from getting the room.

                                  -9-
             Lastly, he directed the Commissioner to keep in view the
objections, raised by D-1 regarding Balikudia and Pratap Prasad land
and if possible to make adjustments by allotting shares. The
Commissioner has strictly followed the instructions, given by the
Court on 27.02.1988 and allotted the shares correctly”.
9.            It has been found that the directions given to the
Commissioner have all been carried out. As what ought to have been
in the best interest of the parties looking to their convenience to the
optimum level at the same time viewing the inconvenience to be
shared by all to some extent or other the division has finally been
made. In respect of homestead land in particular the court below have
said that :-
             “So far as the home-stead land is concerned, the
structures that were standing on the land cannot be demolished.
Hence, according to convenience, the Commissioner has allotted Plot
No.1850 which is Ac0.0.04 dec. to plaintiff and D.6, as they are in
possession of the same and plot No.1949 measuring Ac.0.02 dec. to
D.1 after making proper valuation. I have also seen the land at village
Pratap Prasad. The road runs from East to West and the land is
situated from North to South. So, the land cannot be divided East-
West in length depriving one party to go to the road. Therefore, the
Commissioner has rightly divided the land from North to South
having got the benefit of road which runs from East to West. The D.1

                                  - 10 -
to 5 have themselves claim the well to be allotted in their name.
Accordingly, the Commissioner allotted the well with land to them.
10.          The grounds which are now raised in this appeal were
earlier raised in the court below and finding that those have been duly
addressed to the best extent possible and that due regard has been
given to all the directions of the court, the report has been accepted
when on local inspection of the property upon joint request,
satisfaction has been arrived at that the ways adopted by the
commissioner serves the interest of the parties in conformity with the
preliminary decree and no such glaring discrimination or infirmity
has been noticed. It has further been found that commissioner had no
other alternative than the division he made in obedience to the
directions of the Court. Therefore, the court below having found those
objections to be untenable has finally accepted the report of the
commissioner by overruling the objections raised against it.
11.          Learned counsel for the appellant in course of argument
has not been able to specifically point out as to where the court below
has actually erred and which aspect/s though ought to have been
taken into consideration has/have not been so done. In fact, in the
present appeal, there       is no whisper that the       report of the
Commissioner is not in conformity with what has been ordained in
the preliminary decree as well as the subsequent direction of the
court upon hearing the parties in the matter of objection to the first

                                    - 11 -
report of the Commissioner. When the inconvenience to the objector
defendants and they being allotted with less valued property are
projected as the ground to upset the final decree, the same as it
appears has neither been established in the court below by positive
evidence to that effect nor anything has been placed before the court
to infer for a moment that there has been discrimination in the matter
of distribution of immovable properties amongst the parties and the
present appellants are the victims to that and in fact on local
inspection, the Presiding Officer has observed all these complaints as
unacceptable.
               In view of above, the submission of the learned counsel
for the appellants that the final decree is unsustainable in law merits
no acceptance. The order of acceptance of report of the Commissioner
is found to be free from any such infirmity or illegality.
12.            For the aforesaid discussion the final decree passed by
the court below upon acceptance of the report of the survey knowing
commissioner having overruled the objections raised to it, is hereby
confirmed.
13.            In the result the appeal stands dismissed with cost.
                                                    …………………………
                                                          D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 10th December, 2014/Himansu


