   IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                          R.S.A. NO. 343 OF 2016
        From the judgment and decree dated 19.05.2016 and
23.06.2016 respectively passed by learned 2nd Additional District
Judge, Berhampur-Ganjam in R.F.A. No. 61 of 2015.
                                          ………
        Sanjay Kumar Sahu                                 ::::     Appellant.
                                    -:: VERSUS ::-
        Sri Sri Laxmi Narayan
        Mahaprabhu Bije                                   ::::     Respondent.
                 For Appellant                    ::::    M/s. L. Samantaray,
                                                          R.L. Pradhan, G. Das,
                                                          J. Samantaray,
                                                          Advocates.
                 For Respondent                   ::::    M/s. A.K. Choudhury,
                                                          K.K. Das, Advocates.
                                          ………
PRESENT:
                   THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Date of Hearing:: 05.05.2017:: Date of Judgment 10.05.2017
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        This appeal has been filed questioning the judgment and
decree      passed       by    learned       2nd    Additional       District     Judge,
Berhampur-Ganjam in R.F.A. No. 61 of 2015 confirming the
judgment and decree passed by the learned Civil Judge (Junior
Division), Berhampur in C.S. No. 44 of 2013, decreeing the suit
filed by the respondent as the plaintiff and directing the appellant-
defendant to give delivery of vacant possession of the suit house

                                 =2=
and pay the arrear house rent as well as to clear up the charges
towards electric and water connection to the said house.
       2.     For the sake of convenience, in order to avoid
confusion and bring in clarity, the parties hereinafter have been
referred to as they have been arraigned in the trial court.
       3.     Laxmi Narayan Mahaprabhu (“the DEITY”) Bije, At-
Kasturi Das Matha has filed the suit through Mahant Bhagaban
Das, Chella of Guru Late Raghunath Das. The plaintiff has a tile
roofed house consisting of two rooms in a busy place within the
township of Berhampur. The property belonging to the Deity is
said to be under management of Mahant Bhagaban Das who is
said to be taking all the care and looking after the affairs of the
Deity. It is stated that the house had been let out to the defendant
on 01.09.1986 for a period of 11 months on a monthly rent of Rs.
80/-. A deed to that effect had been executed. The defendant was
last paying a sum of Rs. 700/- per month towards rent. The
defendant though had undertaken to leave the house after the
expiry of the period of 11 months and sometime thereafter as
agreed upon since did not vacate, the suit has been filed, after
issuance of notice to vacate. Some allegations have also been made
regarding improper of suit rooms under the occupation of
defendant as tenant, during period by going for structural
alteration and addition therein unperturbed by the protest.

                                  =3=
       4.    The defendant in the written statement has questioned
the maintainability of the suit on the ground that the plaintiff has
not been properly represented; he has denied the fact that he was
a tenant in respect of the suit house since 01.09.1986. It is
however next stated that since the year 1946 his ancestors have
been in possession of the suit house and when the present Mahant
came into picture, he obtained that formal deed. After expiry of the
period mentioned therein, the defendant claims to have been
continuing as before by paying monthly rent. The allegation of
making structural alteration and addition in the suit rooms have
been refuted. It is again stated that this Mahant who has filed the
suit representing the Deity has no such status and has no locus to
institute the suit. It is stated that the status that he asserts is a
self styled and proclaimed one. It is further stated that for serving
mischievous purpose, said Mahant is hell bent on evicting the
defendant so as to induct his own associates therein as tenants
and it is not at all with the intention of benefit the Deity in any
way which is of paramount consideration.
       5.    On such rival pleadings, the trial court altogether
framed six issues. The first two concern with the maintainability
and cause of action for the suit. The other important issues relate
to the representation of the Deity by this Mahant Bhagaban Das if
proper for the purpose of suit or not and the entitlement of the

                                  =4=
plaintiff to the relief of eviction of the defendant from the said
house which covers also the point of validity of the notice under
section 106 of Transfer of Property Act served prior to the suit.
             The trial court then very rightly proceeded to answer
the issue relating to the representation of the Deity by said Mahant
first. Upon discussion of evidence in the touchstone of the
pleadings, answer      has been     recorded  in  favour   of  proper
representation of the Deity by said Mahant for the purpose of the
suit. The other issues touching the relief of eviction have finally
had been answered in favour of the plaintiff. Basing on these
findings, the suit has been decreed.
       6.    The defendant being aggrieved by the said judgment
and decree directing him to give delivery of vacant possession of
the suit house with payment of arrear house rent with effect from
01.01.2013 by clearing up the charges towards electric and water
connection taken to the said suit house, filed the First Appeal
under section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The appeal having
been dismissed, said unsuccessful defendant is now before this
Court with the prayer for dismissal of the suit as laid by setting
aside the concurrent judgments and decrees passed by the courts
below.
       7.    The appeal has been admitted on the following
substantial questions of law:-

                                       =5=
                  “A.    Whether the findings of the court below that
                         the Deity has been properly represented in
                         the suit as laid for the reliefs claimed being
                         without any basis are as such perverse and
                         thus unsustainable in the eye of law?
                  B.     Whether the present suit for eviction is
                         maintainable in view of the bar contained in
                         section 73 of the Odisha High Religious
                         Endowment Act 1951 and the only course
                         open for eviction by taking recourse to a
                         proceeding under the provision under section
                         25 of the said Act?
                  C.     Whether the findings of the courts below with
                         regard to the validity of the notice under
                         section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act,
                         1982, in the absence of the signature of the
                         plaintiff thereon suffers from error of law?”
 (A)       8.     Mr. L. Samantaray, learned counsel for the appellant
     submits    that  this  Mahant      Bhagaban     Das,  the    self-styled
     representative of the Deity ought not to have been taken to be
     representing of the Deity in filing the suit without establishment
     by proof of any record relating to his competency as such.
     Therefore, according to him, the suit should have been dismissed
     on this lone ground.
(B)               His next contention is that the service of notice upon
     the defendant as required under section 106 of the Transfer of
     Property Act, which is a pre-condition for the entertainment of the

                                       =6=
      suit and which touches its maintainability having not been
      established in the case by clear, cogent and acceptable evidence,
      the courts below have erred in law by recording finding on that
      score in favour of the plaintiff. He also submits that it’s a ploy to
      drive out the defendant who is earning his livelihood and
      maintaining the family and that state has been continuing for past
      few decades.
(C)                His submission is also to the effect that the courts
      below should have held the suit as not maintainable taking into
      account the legal provision contained in section 73 of the Odisha
      Hindu Religious Endowment Act,1951 and in view of the legal
      course available under the said Act for the relief of driving out a
      person from the possession of the property of the Deity, and
      religious institution.
(A-1)        9.    Mr.    A.K. Choudhury,     learned  counsel     for  the
      respondent submits that in the present case the challenge to the
      representation of the Deity by this Mahant Bhagaban Das, Chella
      of Guru late Raghunath Das is of absolutely no significance, in
      view of and on the face of the lease-deed (Ext. 2) between said
      Mahant representing the Deity and the defendant at the time of
      induction of the defendant as a tenant in respect of the suit house.
      It is also his submission that the order of learned Commissioner,
      Endowment passed in C.A. No. 03 of 1984 when is seen together

                                       =7=
      with the lease deed, Ext. 2, the notice of eviction and its reply Ext.
      4 given by the defendant, the contention in that regard gets per-se
      repelled.
(B-1)              He further contends that this being not a suit falling
      within the ambit of the suits as stated in the provision of section
      73 of the Odisha Hindu Religious Endowment Act, 1951, the
      submission concerning the legal bar under section 73 of the Act
      for the suit does not hold water. It is also contended that the
      provision of section 25 of the Act can’t be taken to be standing in
      the way of the suit holding it to be the only remedy available when
      neither there remains any express ouster of jurisdiction of the Civil
      Court so far as these types of suits are concerned nor the same
      can be so implied.
(C-1)              He contends that the courts below having thoroughly
      analysed the evidence both oral and documentary, when have
      arrived at a finding with regard to the proper service of notice
      under section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, such finding on
      fact is not liable to be questioned before this Court when no
      perversity in the matter of appreciation of evidence touching the
      issue is shown and consequently the conclusion arrived at is
      unsustainable.
             10.   Going to answer the first substantial question of law
      by addressing the rival submissions, it is seen that the Mahant

                                =8=
Bhagaban Das being examined as P.W. 1 has proved the rent deed
dated 01.09.1986 wherein he has represented the Deity and the
defendant has not only accepted paid status but also thereafter
acted in pursuance thereof. His status as Mahant gets further
corroborated by the evidence of P.W. 2. This defendant has also
deposed that in the year 1986 he had signed a lease in respect of
the very suit house. This document shows the Deity to have been
so represented by the said Mahant. Ext. 1, the order of learned
Commissioner of Endowment reveals that Mahant Raghunath Das
Babaji has executed a Will in favour of this Mahant Bhagaban Das
in the year, 1947. The same having been accepted, the order has
been passed recognizing this Mahant as the Chella and successor
of late Mahanta Raghunath Das Babaji in respect of the Deity and
the Religious Institution.
             Furthermore, this defendant in view of the lease-deed
which he admits to have executed in the year 1986 vide Ext. 2 is
estopped from raising that question now at this stage when he has
also not disputed this in his reply to the notice given demanding
vacant possession from him. In view of such overwhelming
evidence on record in support of the status of Mahant Bhagaban
Das vis-à-vis the Deity and the Religious Institution, and when
estoppel also operates against the defendant to question that the
first substantial question of law gets its answer in favour of the

                                 =9=
proper representation of the plaintiff-Deity by this Mahant
Bhagaban Das in this suit.
       11.   So far as answer to the second substantial question of
law relating to the bar contained in section 73 of the Odisha Hindu
Religious Endowment Act is concerned, a plain reading of the
provision goes to show that the bar operates for the suit as
referred to therein are the suits in respect of administration of a
religious institution and the suits in respect of other matters or
disputes for whose decision and determination specific provisions
are there in the Act itself. So for the suits touching upon those
aspects, the legal bar comes into play for determination and
decision of which specific provisions are made in the said Act
which stand as final.
             The instant suit is by the Deity for eviction of a person
who after termination of his tenancy in respect of a house
belonging to the landlord, the Deity is continuing with such
occupation. This cannot be said to be a suit in respect of
administration of the affairs of the Deity and the religious
institution. The suit relating to the property of the Deity and
Religious Institution with the relief of getting back the physical
possession for being further dealt on behalf of the Deity and
Religious Institution as such is maintainable.

                                = 10 =
             The provision of section 25 of the OHRE Act prescribes
that after summary enquiry and finding a person to be in
unauthorized occupation of the immovable property given or
endowed for the purpose of any Religious Institution, the
Commissioner can to pass necessary order of eviction. In this case,
the defendant had been inducted as a tenant in respect of the suit
house by said Mahant representing the Deity and the Religious
Institution to whom the property belong and the continuance in
possession of the defendant after the expiry of the period of lease is
as that of a tenant holding over.
       12.   The expression of ‘tenants at sufferance’ is merely a
fiction to distinguish their unlawful possession from that of
trespassers. The possession of a ‘trespasser’ is unlawful both in its
inception and in its continuance, which can mature to title upon
satisfaction of other ingredients as the law mandates. But the
possession of a tenant at sufferance is rightful in its inception,
though wrongful in its continuance after expiry of the period agreed
upon.
             A distinction is drawn between a tenant continuing in
possession after the determination of the lease without the consent
of the landlord and tenant doing so with the landlord’s consent. The
former is called a tenant by sufferance and the latter class of
tenants is called a tenant holding over or a tenant at will. The act of

                                 = 11 =
holding over in any event after expiration of the term does not
necessarily create tenancy of any kind; if the lessee remains in
possession after determination of the term and for all practical
purposes, he becomes a tenant at sufferance.
       13.    “In Mulla’s Transfer of Property Act (7th Edn.) at page
633, the position of tenancy at sufferance has been stated thus; A
tenancy at sufferance is merely a fiction to avoid continuance in
possession operating as a trespass. It has been described as the
least and lowest interest which can subsist in reality. It, therefore,
cannot be created by contract and arises only by implication of law
when a person who has been in possession under a lawful title
continues in possession after that title has been determined,
without the consent of the person entitled. A tenancy at sufferance
does not create the relationship of landlord and tenant. At page
769, it is stated regarding the right of a tenant holding over thus.
The act of holding over after the expiration of the term does not
necessarily create a tenancy of any kind. If the lessee remaining in
possession after the determination of the term, the common law
rule is that he is a tenant on sufferance. The expression “holding
over” is used in the sense of retaining possession. A distinction
should be drawn between a tenant continuing in possession after
the determination of the lease, without the consent of the landlord
and a tenant doing so with the landlord’s consent. The former is
called a tenant by sufferance in the language of the English law
and the latter class of tenants is called a tenant holding over or a
tenant at will. The lessee holding over with the consent of the
lessor is in a better position that a mere tenant at will. The tenancy
on sufferance is converted into a tenancy at will by the assent of
the landlord, but the relationship of the landlord and tenant is not

                                 = 12 =
established until the rent was paid and accepted. The assent of the
landlord to the continuance of the tenancy after the determination
of the tenancy would create a new tenancy. The possession of a
tenant who has ceased to be a tenant is protected by law. Although
he may not have a right to continue to possession after the
termination of the tenancy. His possession is juridical.
       The subtle difference resulting a definite distinction between
a tenant holding over and a tenant-at-sufferance as above has
been noticed in case of Bhupal Prasad reported in AIR 1996 SC
140). Holding over stands equivalent to the retention of possession
after determination of lease, but with the consent of the landlord
whereas, on similar circumstances if the possession is without the
consent of the landlord then the same stands out to be as a
tenant-at-sufferance Section 116 of the Transfer of Property Act
does let a statutory recognition to the concept of holding over.”.
              Therefore, the provision of section 25 of the Act
standing in the Odisha Hindu Religious Endowment Act cannot
stand on the way of entertainment of a suit of present nature so as
to say that provision being therein the said Act, the jurisdiction of
civil court is barred by that special statute or stand so excluded.
       14.    Now coming to aspect of compliance of provision of
section 106 of the T.P. Act, it is seen that said notice has been
issued by an Advocate under the instruction of the Mahant
representing the Deity and the Religious Institution, it has been

                                 = 13 =
proved and marked as Ext. 3. The reply given by the defendant
which has been admitted in evidence and marked as Ext. 4, not
only is silent on that score but also it has not been stated that said
Advocate was not having the instruction nor so proved. More over
the suit having been filed after the said notice, when said Mahant
who is representing the Deity does not challenge that aspect, the
defendant has nothing to urge on that.
       15.   Notice to quit means a notice to terminate a tenancy
(whether periodical tenancy or a tenancy for a term of years certain
or monthly) in accordance with the provisions of Section 106 of the
T.P. Act.
             The object of the provision as to notice is to enable the
tenant to gather up the fruits of his labour. Notice is not a part of
cause of action although it is a condition precedent for the
commencement of the suit. As a matter of fact, the notice is first
step in litigation when the cause of action is complete. It only
provides a mode of procedure for getting a relief in respect of cause
of action, and does not constitute the relief itself. A statutory notice
although essential provisionally for a valid suit, does not make it a
part of the cause of action in the suit itself. At this juncture, let us
advert to the position of law as it stands after amendment in the
year 2002 by Amendment Act 3 of 2003 coming into force on
31.12.2002. The first most important change that has been brought

                                 = 14 =
about in para-1 of the existing section is deletion of the words
“expiring with the end of a year of tenancy and expiring with the
end of a month. In the instant case we are concerned with the new
provisions standing after amendment. So now fifteen days notice is
necessary and as provided in sub-Section 3 of Section 106 of the
T.P.Act, even that notice shall not be deemed to be invalid because
of any shortage in the period when the suit is filed after the expiry
of the period. The objects and reasons of Act 3 of 2003 is to prevent
the situations of dismissal of the suits on the lone technicality being
filed in ignorance of the legal position and to take care of the
hardship faced by the suitor in serving fresh notice and filing fresh
suit despite the fact that the defendant had more time available to
him than the prescribed period of notice by the date when suit is
filed to evict him or even by the date of judgment dismissing the
suit. Feeling the same to be of severe hardship that the suitor is
facing, in the amendment by insertion of sub-section (3) the
provision of sub-section (2) as regards the notice under sub-
section/ shall not be deemed to be invalid…..” have been made to
apply retrospectively to all notices in pursuance of which any suit
or proceeding is pending on the date of commencement of the
Amendment Act and to all notices issued prior to the coming into
force of that Amendment Act where even no suit or proceeding filed
before such commencement.

                                = 15 =
       16.   The above provisions of law as discussed make it clear
that a notice under Section 106 of the Act is to be given by allowing
15 days time to the lessee. A landlord is entitled to eject a tenant
after notice to quit, unless the tenant can prove that he has a right
to remain on the land permanently and the onus to prove that lies
on the tenant. It has been held in case of Nagendra vs. Jotish: AIR
(1952 Cal 221 and Kunj Behari vs. Acharaya Hari; AIR 1975 Raj
138 that a notice should be liberally construed. The essential point
is whether the tenant was asked to vacate. In that notice it is not
necessary to state any ground and a suit for ejectment need not be
on the same ground as stated in the notice (Amarendra vs. Bibhuti;
AIR 1952 Cal 773). It is the settled law that a notice to quit must be
construed broadly not with a desire to find fault with it which would
render it defective, but it must be construed ut res magis valiat
quam pereat, that is , in a manner that it may rather become
operative than null.
       17.          In Bhagabandas vs. Bhagabandas; AIR 1977
SC 1120, the Hon’ble Apex Court has also held that from the
language used, it must be endeavoured to ascertain the intention of
the parties and the effect thereof. It should be conjointly read not
with an intention to split up a straw or in a hypercritical manner or
by pedagogic pendantism or over-refined subtlety, but it must be
construed in a commonsense way.

                                 = 16 =
              The principle laid down in case of Burmah-Shell Oil
Distributing vs. Khaja Midhat Noor: AIR 1988 SC 1470 is that
the notice to quit must be read in the context of the facts of each
case having regard to the situation of the parties to whom it is
addressed.
       18.    Examining the oral and documentary evidence, the
courts below have recorded finding that the notice is valid. This
Court not only finds the finding to be based on proper appreciation
of evidence on record but also to be legally in order by testing the
evidence on said score through the legal spectrum as discussed in
the forgoing paras.
       19.    The above discussion and reasons provide necessary
answers to said substantial questions of law which do not came to
the aid of the defendant in thwarting the suit and thus to emerge
out successful in getting the concurrent findings recorded by the
courts below overturned.
       20.    Having said this, taking into account the last limb of
submission of learned counsel for the appellant and the response
thereto, while dismissing this second appeal, the defendant is
hereby directed to deliver vacant possession of the suit house to
the plaintiff on or before the 31st day of January, 2018 provided he
gives an undertaking to above effect and further undertake to clear
up the arrear as well as the current house rent and / or damage

                                         = 17 =
till vacation as above directed in three equal instalments i.e. 1st
one by end of July, 2017; next one by end of October, 2017 and
the last one on or before the date fixed for vacation.
                   The defendant is accordingly directed to furnish the
undertaking as above before the trial court on or before the 20th
day of May, 2017.
                   It is also made clear that on the failure of the
defendant either to give the undertaking or thereafter if he fails to
abide by the same, the plaintiff would be at liberty to seek the
indulgence of the court for appropriate action as per law for breach
of said undertaking as also for execution of the decree and in that
even the defendant would be liable to pay the cost throughout.
                   The second appeal stands accordingly disposed of.
                                                ……………………..
                                                  D. Dash, J.
Odisha High Court, Cuttack
Dated the 10th day of May, 2017/ Narayan


