                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                             GOVERNMENT APPEAL No. 33 OF 1998
From the judgment dated 06.03.1997 passed by Shri D.K. Sahu,
Sessions            Judge           and         Judge,           Special          Court,          Kandhamal,
Boudh-Phulbani in S.T. No. 93 of 1996.
                                                   --------------
State of Orissa                                                      ……                         Appellant
                                                      Versus
Khageswar Konhar                                                     ……                         Respondent
                  For Appellant                 :           Mr. A.K. Mishra,
                                                            Standing Counsel.
                   For Respondent :                         Mr. Prasanta Kr. Nayak,
                                                            amicus curie.
                                                    ---------------
PRESENT :
                              THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Date of hearing : 11.11.2014                        :         Date of judgment :                12 .11.2014
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  The State in this appeal has called in question the order of
acquittal          passed           by      the        learned         Special          Sessions           Judge,
Kandhamal-Boudh, Phulbani in S.T. No. 93 of 1996 acquitting the
respondent of the charge under section 20(a)(i) of the ND & PS Act
1985.
2.                The case of the prosecution in short is that on 04.09.1996
morning, the Sub Inspector of Excise (P.W.4) along with other excise
staff and Tahasildar had gone to village Doni and in course of patrolling,
they found ganja plants to have been grown in the backyard of the

                                    -2-
respondent. So, they made an entry to the backyard with a person of
the locality and found five numbers of ganja plants to have been grown
there. According to the case of the prosecution those plants were grown
by the present respondent in his backyard. The plants were then
uprooted and seized followed preparation of seizure list and service of
the copy of the same upon the respondent. The ganja plants being
uprooted were packed and sealed. The respondent then being arrested
was forwarded to the court where the seized packets were produced. On
the prayer of the prosecution, sample from the seized plants were
collected by the learned S.D.J.M. and sent for chemical examination.
The report came in the affirmative. That is how the respondent faced
the trial.
            In the trial the respondent took the plea of complete denial
as having no connection with those ganja plants said to have been
seized.
3.          Prosecution in order to bring home the charge against the
respondent has examined four witnesses. P.W.4 the Excise Sub
Inspector, who had gone with other being the leader of the squad. The
constable of Excise a member of the squad has been examined as P.W.2.
The local Tahasildar who is said to have accompanied P.W.4 and others
has been examined as P.W.3 and P.W.2 is a local witness. The defence
has examined none.
            From the side of the prosecution the seizure list has been
admitted in evidence and marked as Ext.1. Ext.2 is the statement of the
respondent said to have been recorded by the P.W.3. The forwarding
letter of the S.D.J.M., for the purpose of chemical examination when

                                   -3-
has been marked as Ext.4, the report to that effect is marked as Ext.5.
Record of right of the land, in question, where the ganja plants are said
to have been grown has been marked as Ext.6.
4.          The trial court on analysis of evidence has come to a finding
that the prosecution is vitiated for noncompliance of the provision of
section 42 (1) and (2) of the Act. Next, finding has been rendered that
the prosecution has failed to establish by clear, cogent and acceptable
evidence that it is the respondent who had grown those ganja plants in
his backward. In the absence of any positive evidence with regard to
cultivation by the respondent the trial court has refused to accept the
evidence of the official witnesses to fasten the guilt upon the
respondent. With the above view, the trial court having acquitted the
respondent, the appeal has come to be filed.
5.          Learned counsel for the State submits that the evidence in
the case coming from the lips of official witnesses who have no axe to
grind against the respondent and who have no apparent reason to
falsely arraigned the respondent when it is not even said that they knew
each other, their evidence with regard to the cultivation of the ganja
plants by the respondent as also the seizure, on being detected ought
not to have been discarded. He further submits that in this case the
factual aspect do not require the compliance of provision of section 42(1)
and (2) of the Act which the trial court has erred in law. According to
him, the evidence being overwhelming on record as regards the
cultivation of the ganja plants by the respondent, the trial court did
commit gross error both in law and fact by recording the order of
acquittal, which, according to him, is liable to be interfered with.

                                      -4-
6.          Learned counsel for the respondent while supporting the
finding of the trial court contended that the evidence of the official
witnesses with regard to the main aspect of the case that it is the
respondent which had cultivated those ganja plants has not been
established beyond reasonable doubt. According to him, there is no
independent corroboration to the evidence of the official witnesses. He
further submits that the writing said to have been given by the
respondent (Ext.2) upon which much stress has been laid by the
learned counsel for the State is not to be given any weightage for the
purpose of arriving at a conclusion with regard to the commission of
offence by the respondent. He of course does not dispute with regard to
the position that compliance of provision of section 42 (1) and (2) of the
Act may not come into play in the facts and circumstances of the case.
In view of all these, he urged that the appeal bears no merit and the
order of acquittal does not call for interference.
7.          Keeping the rival submission in mind, this Court is now
called upon to examine the evidence of the prosecution and evaluate
the same in judging the defensibility of the finding of the court below on
which the order of acquittal is found. But before taking up the said
exercise, it is felt apposite to take note of the settled position of law with
regard to the powers of this Court to interfere with the order of acquittal
in seisin of an appeal at the behest of the State.
            It has been held in case of Basappa Vrs. State of
Karnataka; (2014) 57 OCR 1044 that the High Court in an appeal
under section 378 Cr.P.C. is entitled to reappraise the evidence and put
the conclusions drawn by the trial court to test but the same is

                                    -5-
permissible only if the judgment of the trial court is perverse. Relying
the case of Gamini Bala Koteswara Rao and others – Vrs. State of
Andhra Pradesh; (2009) 10 SCC 639, it has been held that the word
“perverse” in terms as understood in law has been defined to mean
‘against weight of evidence’. In ‘K. Prakashan Vrs. P.K. Survenderan;
(2008) 1 SCC 258, it has also been held that the Appellate Court should
not reverse the acquittal merely because another view is possible on
evidence. It has been clarified that if two views are reasonably possible
on the very same evidence, it cannot be said that prosecution has
proved the case beyond reasonable doubt (Ref.:- T. Subramaniam Vrs.
State of Tamil Nadu; (2006) 1 SCC 401). Further, the interference by
appellate Court against an order of acquittal is held to be justified only
if the view taken by the trial court is one which no reasonable person
would in the given circumstances, take (Ref.:- Bhima Singh Vrs. State
of Haryana; (2002) 10 SCC 461).
8.          Keeping the above in mind, let’s now go to the evidence of the
prosecution witness and first of all examine the evidence of the P.W.4,
who is the leader of the squad. He has stated that while patrolling, he
found ganja plants to be there in the backyard of the respondent. So,
they entered there and next he says that the plants to have been
carefully watered, manured and fenced by thorny bamboos. He further
states to have uprooted those, then seized and packed whereafter other
courses were adopted. In his entire deposition, he has not stating about
the Tahasildar to have ever recorded any statement of the respondent
there at the spot much less to say that the respondent had ever stated
anything before them as regards such cultivation. This witness has no

                                     -6-
personal knowledge about the possession of the land and also the
person doing the cultivation made therein. Simply because a piece of
land stands recorded in the name of a person, the same does not go to
attract the liability of that person for the cultivation of any
objectionable plants over the same, unless of course it is shown either
that he is the cultivator or that he has got the cultivation done under
direction with the command key remaining with him. The other official
witness is P.W.1. He is not stating anything as regards the cultivation of
the said ganja plants. It is his evidence that they arrived there at 7.50
A.M.
9.           The local witness has not supported the prosecution case
with regard to such cultivation. The Tahasildar examined as P.W.3
though has stated that they found the ganja plants to have grown in the
backyard and those were having good growth being properly watered
and manured, he is not breathing a word as to who was involved in
such watering and manuring or for taking care of those plants. He for
the first time is stating to have recorded the statement of the
respondent which has been marked as Ext.2. When a look to Ext.2 is
given, it is seen that the father’s name of the respondent is not correctly
written there. The respondent appears to be a illiterate person and
there being no evidence as regards the fact that he did not know writing
Odia, the statement instead of being written by the respondent has
been written by P.W.3. Furthermore, cross mark (x) having been put,
the signature of respondent stands. In the case (another doubt arises
that) when P.W.4 states that he had called P.W.3; P.W.3 states to have

                                      -7-
got the requisition for the purpose. Interestingly, that requisition has
not seen the light of the day during trial. Next, when it is stated by
P.W.1 that they had gone to the place at 7.50 A.M., P.W.2 has said that
it was around 10 A.M. The evidence of P.W.3 is to the effect that they
arrived there at 4 P.M. whereas in the Ext.2 it is indicated that around
9 A.M. the excise official uprooted the ganja plants. P.W.4 most
interestingly has not stated anything as regards the time of their arrival
or seizure. The seizure list, Ext-1 shows that it was prepared at 7.50
A.M. All these give rise to genuine doubt in mind as regards the
recording of statement of respondent and also the presence of P.W.3 at
the spot when such suspicions are not explained away. Thus, on
reappreciation of evidence with all the above discrepancies and for the
reasons and discussions made herein before, this Court independently
arrive at a conclusion with regard to failure on the part of the
prosecution to establish the factum of cultivation of the ganja plants by
the respondent in the backyard. Therefore, the ultimate finding
rendered by the trial court is not found to be a flawed one.
               In view of the above, the submissions with regard to other
aspects are not felt necessary to be delved into.
10.         In the result, the appeal stands dismissed.
                                                   …………………………
                                                       D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated 12th November,2014/Himansu .
11.       Resultantly, the revision and the appeal stand dismissed.\\\\\
      …………………………

-8-
    D. Dash, J.


