             HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                          RSA. NO.95 of 2005
From the judgment and decree dated 19.11.2004 and 3.12.2004
respectively passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Nayagarh
in Title Appeal No. 14/5 of 2003/1983 confirming the judgment and
decree dated 25.10.83 and 3.11.83 respectively passed by the learned
Munsif Nayagarh in O.S. No. 48/81.
Malati @ Mahadei, Bewa (dead)
her L.Rs and others                                …… Appellants
                                - Versus-
Jhintika Bewa and others                           ……     Respondents
             For Appellants    :    M/s. S.P.Mishra, S.Dash, S.Mishra,
                                           S.Nanda, B.S.Panighrahi,
                                          B.Mohanty and A.Dash,advocates
             For Respondents : None
                                 ---------
PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE D.DASH
       Date of hearing- 15.10.2015 : Date of judgment-16.11.2015
      1.         The predecessor-in-interest of the appellants had
      filed O.S. No. 48/81 in the court of learned Munsif, Nayagarh
      for declaration of his right, title, interest over the suit land

                                    2
 confirmation of his possession and permanent injunction
 against the respondents.
          The suit having been dismissed, an appeal had been
 carried to the court of learned Addl. District Judge, Nayagarh
 in Title Appeal No. 14/5 of 2003/1983. The lower appellate
 court affirmed the finding rendered by the trial court on the
 vital issue and has finally confirmed the trial court’s judgment
 and decree by which the suit stood dismissed. So the present
 appeal under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure has
 been filed.
 2.         For the sake of convenience, in order to bring in
 clarity and avoid confusion, the parties hereinafter have been
 referred to as they have been arraigned in the trial court.
3.        The plaintiff’s case is that the suit land originally stood
recorded in the name of one Lachhaman Pradhan as per record
of 1932 settlement. The plaintiff claims to be the adopted son of
Lachhaman and as such to have succeeded to all his properties
alone on the death of Lachhaman being his sole heir. It is stated
that he had been in enjoyment of the said property all through

                                  3
by paying rent to the State. The plaintiff alleges that the
defendants having no manner right, title and interest over the
suit land, suddenly came over the suit land on 6.7.81 being
armed with deadly weapons. Then they attempted to forcibly
dispossess the plaintiff and take over the possession of the suit
land. They asserted their claim on the basis of their purchase
under a registered sale deed which according to the plaintiff has
no value in the eye of law.
4.        The defendants while traversing the plaint averments
denied the status of the plaintiff as adopted son of Lachhaman.
They stated the plaintiff to be the son of Braja. It is their case
that one Kalu Pradhan had three sons namely, Lachhaman,
Braja and Hari through his second wife. It is also stated that
Kalu had another son namely, Khetra Pradhan through his first
wife who was living separate in mess and estate. It is stated
that Kalu Pradhan’s sons namely, Lachhaman, Braja and Hari
were living joint both in mess and estate and were in enjoyment
of joint family property. The defendants further state that land
measuring an area of Ac.1.97 decs. though was purchased from
out of the joint family funds from one Raj Kishore Das, yet

                                  4
Lachhaman Pradhan being the eldest brother and acting as
Karta of the joint family, the said purchased land was recorded
in his name. In spite of such recording the fact remained that
all the brothers were in enjoyment of the same having equal
share.   Subsequently,    an   amicable    partition  was  effected
between Lachhaman, Braja and Hari and the said land having
an extent measuring Ac.0.62 decs. is said to have fallen to the
share of Hari in the partition. On the death of Hari, his son
succeeded to the same and remained in possession. On 15.7.53
Khali sold the suit land to the father of the defendants by a
registered sale deed for valuable consideration and delivered
possession to him. It is said that since 15.7.53 the father of the
defendants remained in possession of said suit land and after
him, the defendants being the successors have been continuing
to be in possession of the suit land on their own right by paying
rent to the State. For that reason, during the settlement the suit
land also stood recorded in their names and it is said to be
within the knowledge of the plaintiff. The defendants alleged
that the move by filing the suit is to grab the suit land.

                                  5
5.        On such rival pleadings, the trial court framed seven
issues. The vital issues are with respect to the right, title and
interest of the plaintiff over the suit land and his possession
and the next one is with regard to the maintainability of the suit
on the ground of limitation.
          The trial court at the outset has gone to decide the
claim of the plaintiff as regards the status as adopted son of
Lachhaman which has the definite say over his claim of right,
title and interest. Upon analysis of evidence both oral and
documentary, it has concluded that the plaintiff has failed to
prove the factum of his adoption by Lachhaman Pradhan.
Simultaneously, it has been held that the defendants have been
in possession of the suit land by purchasing the suit land from
Khali by registered sale deed dated 15.7.53. The trial court has
thus found the defendants to be having right, title and interest
over the suit land. The suit has also been held to be hopelessly
barred by limitation being not earlier agitated by plaintiff by
filing suit calling in question the registered deed of sale dated
15.7.53 within a period of twelve years. The plaintiff being

                                  6
unsuccessful had carried an appeal and it was heard by the
learned Sub-Judge, Nayagarh.
          The appellate court finding no issue to have been
specifically framed with regard to adoption as claimed by the
plaintiff and denied by the defendants, upon hearing the parties
had remanded the suit for fresh disposal in accordance with law
by framing that as an additional issue and answering that with
others. But on remand also the finding on that additional issue
went against the plaintiff. So again an appeal came to be filed at
the behest of unsuccessful plaintiff. The appeal having been
dismissed confirming the judgment and decree passed by the
trial court now this Court has been moved in the second appeal.
6.           This second appeal has been admitted on the
following substantial question of law:-
          “Whether the appellate court is justified by not
considering the evidence of the plaintiff with regard to ancient
adoption basing upon the Ext.1?”
7.           Learned counsel for the appellants submits that
finding given by the trial court which has been affirmed by the
lower appellate court on the score that the plaintiff is not the

                                  7
adopted son of Lachhaman Pradhan is just perverse as
according to him the material evidence available on record have
been left out of consideration. It is submitted that it being a
case of ancient adoption the courts below on the basis of
evidence let in by the plaintiff ought to have placed the onus of
proof upon the defendants to show in the negative that the
plaintiff was not the adopted son of Lachhaman Pradhan. Thus,
he submits that the courts below have committed grave error of
law not only in the matter of       appreciation of the evidence
committing wrong in placing the burden of proof but also in
arriving at a conclusion on the score of adoption of the plaintiff
and assignment of his status as adopted son of Lachhaman
Pradhan. It is also his submission that circumstances as those
emanate from the evidence clearly go to show that it is a case of
ancient adoption and as per the settled principles of law in case
of ancient adoption unlike cases of other adoption of recent
origin, the person staking his claim as adopted son is relieved of
the obligation of discharging the burden of proof on that score
by leading direct evidence. So far as the factum of adoption is
concerned, it would be suffice on his part to simply show the

                                 8
circumstances that the person was all along being treated as
the son of the adoptive parents. So he first contends that such
finding though have been concurrently rendered by the courts
below cannot stand in the eye of law.
8.           Learned counsel for the respondents on the other
hand submits that an adoption simply being said to have taken
place long back cannot be termed to be an ancient adoption.
According to him, in the facts and circumstances of the case in
hand, the principles relating to the proof of factum of adoption
as relaxed in case of ancient adoption do not get attracted. It is
his contention that here no evidence having been let in to show
that direct evidence on the factum of adoption is not available
and other evidence on that score being available, the plaintiff in
the present case has to shoulder the burden of proving the
factum of adoption by leading clear, cogent and acceptable
evidence. It is his submission that the courts below have
churned the evidence let in by the parties and upon proper
analysis having rendered the concurrent finding of fact that the
plaintiff is not the adopted son of Lachhaman Pradhan, the
same does not suffer from the vice of no perversity so as to be

                                     9
interfered with in exercise of the power as the second appellate
court.
9.        Admittedly, suit land stood recorded in the name of
Lachhaman Pradhan in the record of right of 1932-33
settlement.
          It is the settled position of law that the fact of adoption
must be proved in the same way as any other fact, but where
there is lapse of long period from the date of adoption and time
when it is being questioned, every allowance for the absence of
evidence to prove such fact must be favourably entertained as
after the lapse of long period direct evidence to prove adoption
may not be available. The law on this score is fairly settled.
10.       The Supreme Court in the case of L. Debi Prasad v. Smt.
Tribeni Devi, AIR 1970 SC 1286, observed:-
          “In the case of all ancient transactions, it is but natural
        that positive oral evidence will be lacking. Passage of time
        gradually wipes out such evidence. Human affairs often
        have to be judged on the basis of probabilities. Rendering
        of justice will become impossible if a particular mode of
        proof is insisted upon under all circumstances. In
        judging whether an adoption pleaded has been
        satisfactorily proved or not, we have to bear in mind the
        lapse of time between the date of the alleged adoption
        and the date on which the concerned party is required to
        adduce proof. In the case of an adoption said to have
        taken place years before the same is questioned, the

                                   10
      most important evidence is likely to be that the alleged
      adoptive father held out the person claiming to have been
      adopted as his son the latter treated the former as his
      father and their relations and friends treated them as
      father and son. There is no predetermined way of proving
      any fact. A fact is said to have been proved where after
      considering the matters before it, the Court either
      believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable
      that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of
      the particular case, to act upo the supposition that it
      exists. Hence if after taking an overall view of the
      evidence adduced in the case, we are satisfied that the
      adoption in the case, we are satisfied that the adoption
      pleaded is true, we must necessarily proceed on the
      basis, in the absence of any evidence to the contrary that
      it is a valid adoption as well.”
11.     The aforesaid view of the Supreme Court has been
followed in a number of cases of this Court and of other High
Courts. The aforesaid principle only regulates the mode of
proof of the factum of adoption. In the decision in the case of
Sri Kanchumarthi Venkata Seetharama Chandra Row v.
Kanchumarthi Raju, AIR 1925 PC 201, which has been
approved by the Supreme Court in the case of Voleti Venkata
Ramarao v. Kesaparagada Bhasararao, AIR 1969 SC 1359, it
has been authoritatively said that in the case of an ancient
adoption, it stands to reason that after a very long term of
years and a variety of transactions of open life and conduct
upon the footing that the adoption was a valid act, the burden

                                  11
 must rest heavily upon him who challenges its validity. The
 appellants in this case rely upon the aforesaid principles and
 have contended that the date of adoption as available from the
 evidence on record was 1909 and it is not possible to prove the
 factum of adoption by direct evidence. Thus, according to them
 the orverall view of the evidence on record should lead to the
 conclusion that there was a valid adoption as alleged by them.
 12.        The law is equally well settled that where direct
 evidence is available for establishing the ceremony of adoption
 irrespective of lapse of time, the relaxation permissible in the
 case of an ancient adoption is not available to be applied. (Vide
 (1968)34 Cut LT 778, Jadumani Patra v. Padan Patra and AIR
 1973 Orissa 160, Jagannath Mohanty v. Chanchala Bewa).”
13.      Keeping in view the above stated settled position of
law, the case in hand now needs due examination. The plaintiff
has been examined as P.W. 6 who has stated to be the adopted
son of Lachhaman Pradhan. He is rightly silent about his taking
in adoption or that he was given in adoption. However, he states
even to have not ascertained the same from his natural father
as to when he was given and taken in adoption; but he just

                                   12
states that natural father has stated about he being the adopted
by Lachhaman. The plaintiff could have very well stated about
the time of adoption or at least as to what was his age at the
time of adoption from which at least the time of adoption could
have been inferred. In the absence of same, it is extremely
difficult on such generalized pleading and evidence to term the
adoption to be an ancient one, in finally saying that in the case
despite of all possible efforts no direct evidence as regards the
adoption is available or that it is not expected. The plaintiff has
examined witnesses such as P.Ws.1 and 2. Their evidence are
also in generalized manner that the plaintiff is the adopted son
of Lachhaman Pradhan. The only circumstance that they have
stated is that they have seen the plaintiff to have been staying
with Lachhaman till his death and that then the plaintiff’s wife
and children were also staying there. It may well be said that
such living together is of no definite significance or strong
circumstance favouring the adoption more particularly in view
of relationship notwithstanding the adoption. The death blow to
the argument that it is a case of ancient adoption comes when
the evidence of P.W. 1 is further scrutinized. He does not say

                                    13
that such adoption was prior to his attaining the age of
discretion, though he admits to have never seen the adoption
ceremony. P.W. 2’s evidence is just one step ahead as he has
stated    that  the   plaintiff  had   performed   the  Sradha     of
Lachhaman Pradhan which is also not of such great importance
in view of relationship irrespective of the adoption. He is not
stating anything about the time of adoption and he admits to
have not seen the ceremony of adoption without giving any sort
of explanation, why it was so. Thus, from the evidence of these
witnesses no such circumstances emanate to come to a
conclusion that the adoption in question was an ancient one.
P.W.4’s evidence is of no help on this score. Therefore, the
plaintiff has utterly failed in the present case to show that it is a
case of ancient adoption. There being no evidence as regards at
the time of adoption, the question of saying that with the
passage of time there has been gradual wiping out of all such
direct evidence, does not arise. The evidence let in by the
plaintiffs are also not that clinching to show that the adoptive
father held out the plaintiff claiming to have adopted as his son
and the plaintiff to have treated the adoptive father as his father

                                  14
and their relations and friends treated them and recognized
them as father and son. There is no evidence as regards the
treatment as such standing for a long time for drawal of any
such inference. Here also there is no evidence regarding the
variety of transaction of life and conduct upon the footing that
the adoption was a valid one. The plaintiff was under definite
obligation to establish in proving at least those facts by leading
clear, cogent and acceptable evidence so as to take the benefit
of an ancient adoption by placing the burden of proof heavily
upon the defendants who challenged the validity of such
adoption to show in the negative.
14.      A person who claims title on the basis of adoption
must prove the adoption and it has to be established that
essential ceremony of giving and taking did take place. That
burden however shifts to the person who challenges the
adoption to disprove the adoption when on account of long
lapse of years, direct evidence of giving and taking has
disappeared. But if direct evidence is available, then the burden
would not shift and the person who claims title on the basis of
adoption    must   discharge    that  burden.   The    method   of

                                    15
appreciation of evidence regarding an old adoption, however, is
not that strict as in case of recent origin.
         In case of Rup Narain v. Mussammat Gopal Devi
(1909) 36 Ind App 103, it was indicated:-
         “…..The adoption, if it took place, was about fifty years
       ago, so that direct evidence of much value could hardly be
       looked for.
         Their Lordships are of opinion that the adoption is
       established. Before the death of Sultan in 1861 Wazir is
       described as his adopted son. On the death of Sultan,
       Wazir succeeded to the estate without controversy, which
       he could only have done as adopted son, and enjoyed it
       and disposed of it as is own without controversy down to
       his death in about 1870. Almost every document, both
       during the life of Wazir and since his death, is framed
       entirely upon the basis of adoption.”
       It is worthwhile to note that in the said case the Court
       took into account that on account of the fact that fifty
       years had elapsed direct evidence of much value could
       hardly be looked for and then it considered the
       circumstance that during the lifetime of the adoptive
       father and after his death till the death of the adopted
       son, the adopted son has been treated and has behaved
       as the only heir of the adoptive father and dealt with the
       properties of the adoptive father without any controversy.
         In the case of vithoba Bhanji v. Vithal Sakroo AIR 1958
       Bom 270, adoption was being challenged after forty years
       and in that setting, the Court held that the fact that since
       1913 the adopted son has throughout described himself
       and acted as an adopted son and was so accepted by
       various persons including the creditors and persons who
       took transfers of immovable property from him, was of
       considerable importance and relevant to show that he was
       being regarded by everyone connected with him in
       business or otherwise as the adopted son. Those
       documents had been brushed aside by the trial court, but
       the High court held that the documents were relevant in
       considering the question of adoption specifically in a case

                                    16
       where the adoption was being challenged after lapse of
       thirty years and having regard to the fact that
       considerable evidence must have disappeared during that
       time. This decision is, therefore, not a direct authority in
       support of Mr. Mohanty’s contention, though as a fact, in
       that case the alleged adoption had been challenged after
       forty years from the date of adoption.
         In the case of Harihar Rajguru Mohapatra v.
       Nabakishore Rajaguru Mohapatra AIR 1963 Orissa 45, a
       Bench of this Court was considering the applicability of
       sections 101 to 104 of the Evidence Act and in that
       connection it was held (para 12):-
         “…. The law is well settled that the evidence in support
       of adoption must be sufficient to satisfy the very grave
       and serious onus that rests upon any person who seeks
       to displace the natural succession by alleging adoption. It
       is equally well settled that when there is a long lapse of
       years between the adoption and its being questioned,
       every allowance for the absence of such evidence to prove
       such fact must be favourably entertained, the reason
       being that after very long terim of years it is difficult to
       procure evidence. Admittedly in this case there is no oral
       evidence of giving and taking. It is not also possible to
       procure such evidence after this long lapse of years. But
       evidence is available that Gopinath was being treated as
       the adopted son and this is apparent from Exts. 5, 5/a of
       the year 1906, Exts. 6, 6/a of the year 1926 and Ext. 3 of
       the year 1951. So there is a long variety of transactions
       upon the footing that the adoption of Gopinath to
       Dasarathi was a valid act. In such circumstances, the
       burden rests very heavily upon defendants 5 who
       challenges its validity.”
         It may be noted that in the aforesaid decision, the
Court took into consideration that there was no oral evidence of
giving and taking and further it was not possible to procure
such evidence after the long lapse of years. But where the
evidence discloses that witnesses are available to prove giving

                                  17
and taking, the ratio of the aforesaid case, in my opinion, will
not be applicable.
15.       In the case of Smt. Pentapati Venkatratnam v. karri
Venkatanarasayamma, AIR 1964 Andh Pra 109, a Bench of
Andhdra Pradesh High Court was considering the case of an old
adoption. In that case, the adoption was being challenged after
lapse of more than forty years. There was also direct evidence of
D.W. 12 who was about 80 year old on the date when she gave
evidence and she stated on oath that the adoption took place in
accordance with the ceremony of giving and taking and she had
witnessed the same being invited to the ceremony. The trial
court as well as the High court had accepted the said evidence
and came to hold in favour of adoption. Accordingly, this is not
a direct authority on the point at hand.
16.       In the case of Gouranga Sahu v. Bhaga Sahu AIR 1976
Orissa 43, the Court was considering the case of an old
adoption and also the burden of proof and the mode of
appreciation of evidence thereto. In that case, the adoption was
36 year old. In paragraph 6 of the judgment, His Lordship held:-

                            18
  “….So even though the normal rule is that one who seeks
to deflect the natural line of succession to properjty by
alleging adoption must discharge that heavy burden, in
case of ancient adoption every allowance for the absence of
evidence to prove such fact must be favourably
entertained. Where there is a long lapse of years between
the adoption and the time when it is being questioned and
during that period of interregnum a variety of transactions
of open life and conduct upon the footing that the adoption
was a valid act have taken place, the initial burden
necessarily shifts to the person who challenges its
validity….”
After applying the law to the facts of that case, his lordship
held:-
  “…..Considering the entire evidence on record, both
documentary and oral, and the variety of transactions of
open life and conduct upon the footing of adoption coupled
with the weakness of the defence evidence, and absence of
any casteman or relative coming forward in support of the
defence case, it is impossible to say that the plaintiff is the
adopted son of Mohana is erroneous……”
From the said judgment, it is not quite clear as to what
was the evidence which his lordship has considered in
coming to the aforesaid conclusion.
  A conspectus of the aforesaid authorities unequivocally
lays down the rule that a person who claims title on the
basis of adoption must prove the adoption and it has to be
established that the essential ceremony of giving and
taking did take place. That burden however shifts to the
person who challenges the adoption to disprove the
adoption when on account of long lapse of years, direct
evidence of giving and taking has disappeared. But if direct
evidence is available, then the burden would not shift and
the person who claims title on the basis of adoption must
discharge that burden.
10. The method of appreciation of evidence regarding an
old adoption, however, is not that strict as in case of recent
origin. The Privy Council in the case of Tammanna
Shivappa Kori v. Parappa Girimallappa Kori, AIR 1945 PC
111, affirmed the judgment of the High Court. In that case,
the trial court had disbelieved the evidence of adoption on
the ground that it was discrepant in many materials. The

                             19
High Court had reversed that judgment. The Privy Council
while affirming the judgment of the High Court observed as
follows:-
  “….They (discrepancies) were mainly discrepancies to the
respective positions occupied by the parties and witnesses
during the ceremony in the house where it took place; but
all the witnesses agreed as to the vital facts necessary to
establish an adoption.
  “…..Their Lordhsips agree with the learned Judges of the
High court in thinking that in the circumstances there was
no sufficient ground for rejecting the evidence in support of
the adoption ceremony, and that the discrepancies in such
evidence can be explained by the length of time which had
elapsed between the ceremony and the date when the
witnesses were called upon to give evidence…….”
Thus, it is apparent that direct evidence of giving and
taking was there and in appreciating the same, the Privy
council rightly took into consideration that the so-called
discrepancies with regard to the respective positions
occupied by the parties will not be treated as
discrepancies, sufficient to reject the oral testimony of the
witnesses and must be allowed taking into account the
long lapse of time between the ceremony and the date
when the witnesses were called upon to give evidence.
11. As this stage it would be appropriate to dispose of the
petition filed by respondent no. 1 for additional evidence.
The hearing of this case began on 9.8.1984 and was
continued on 10.8.1984. Thereafter, the hearing was
adjourned to 13.8.1984. On that date, the respondent No.
1 filed an application for additional evidence stating
therein that the maternal uncle and mother-in-law of
defendant No.2 who had direct knowledge of the adoption
of defendant No. 2 are living and the court should permit
evidence of those two to be taken in support of the
adoption of defendant No.2. We have heard Mr. Mohanty in
support of the application and Mr. Sinha in opposition of
the same. We do not think it appropriate to allow the said
petition, as in our opinion the condition precedent for
allowing production of additional evidence has not been
established by the respondent. Neither the trail court
refused the defendant respondent to admit such evidence
nor the defendant has been able to establish that

                                    20
        notwithstanding the exercise of due diligence such
        evidence was not within his knowledge. Therefore, we
        would reject the said application. But at the same time we
        cannot lose sight of the fact which has been stated on oath
        in the affidavit filed on 13.8.1984 that the mother-in-law
        and the maternal uncle of defendant No. 2 who had direct
        knowledge of the adoption of defendant No. 2 are still alive
        and, therefore, defendant No. 2 could have discharged the
        burden of proving his adoption by giving their evidence. In
        view of the aforesaid state of affairs, it is not permissible
        for a court to apply the theory of ancient adoption and
        then shift the burden to the other side to prove that the
        adoption in fact never took place.”
17.          Upon examination of the evidence adduced on
behalf of the plaintiff, it is also found that those do not satisfy
the tests laid down Section 50 of the Evidence Act. Under
Section 50, the essential requirements are : (i) there must be a
case where the court has to form an opinion as to the
relationship of one person to another : (ii) in such a case, the
opinion expressed by conduct as to the existence of such
relationship in a relevant fact : (iii) but the person whose
opinion expressed by conduct is relevant must be a person who,
as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of
knowledge on the particular subject of relationship. (See AIR
1959 SC 914 (Dolgobinda Paricha v. Nimai Charan Misra). As
has been laid down in the aforesaid case, what is relevant is the

                                  21
opinion expressed by conduct and opinion means something
more than mere retelling of gossip or of hearsay; it means
judgment or belief, that is, a belief or conviction resulting from
Section 50 does not make evidence of mere relationship, it is
the conduct or outward behavior which must be proved in the
manner as laid down in Section 50 of the Evidence Act.
          The documentary evidence placed by the plaintiff are
Exts. 1 to 3, the voter identity card, voter list and record of
rights. It is stated that in all the documents, the plaintiff has
been described as son of Lachhman. The trial court as well as
lower appellate court have examined each of the document in
great detail. Ext. 1 is an Istahar of the then Dewan of Nayagarh
District which has been held to be an ambiguous document.
Ext. 2 has been found to be a self serving document being a
challan showing deposit to have been made by the plaintiff
himself. Ext. 3 is again a document though shows permission to
have been granted by the Dewan, it does not speak about the
date of adoption as also with regard to performance of giving
and taking ceremony. In such state of affair, the courts below
are found to have rightly discarded those documents from being

                                   22
taken into consideration in support of the factum adoption. The
record of right, voter list and voter identity card have been
rightly refused by the courts below so as to give a conclusive
finding in favour of adoption.
          In view of above, the finding of the trial court negating
the case of the plaintiff that he is the adopted son of Lachhman
which has been affirmed by the lower appellate court are not at
all found to be perverse. Rather, this Court finds the said
finding to be based upon just and proper appreciation of
evidence keeping in view the settled position of law holding the
subject.
18.       For the aforesaid discussions and reasons this Court
thus renders the answer on the substantial question of law
against the plaintiff. No other point has also been urged in this
appeal. Thus I find no merit in the present appeal to inference
with the judgment and decree passed by the lower appellate
court giving seal of approval to the judgment and decree passed
by the trial court in dismissing the suit of the plaintiff.

                                         23
      19          The appeal is accordingly dismissed. In the peculiar
      facts and circumstances of the case, there would however be no
      order as to cost.
                                                   ….………………
                                                   D.Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 16th day of Nov. , 2015/Aswini


