                 HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                  SECOND APPEAL NO. 164 OF 1995
From the judgment and decree dated 7.10.1994 and 4.11.1994
respectively passed by the learned District Judge, Sambalpur in Title
Appeal No. 45/93 confirming the judgment and decree dated 19.7.1993
and 27.7.1993 respectively passed by the learned Munsif, Sambalpur
in T.S. No.88/116 of 1986/1989.
State of Orissa and others                          ……    Appellants
                                  - Versus-
Nanda Kishore Poddar                                ……     Respondent
             For Appellants     :       Mr. K.K.Nayak,
                                        Additional Standing Counsel
             For Respondents :          M/s. A.Mukherjee, N.K.Pati
                                              G.Mukherjee, P.Mukherjee,
                                              A.C.Panda, S.Patra,
                                              Suvalaxmi and S.Das
                                        M/s. Miss.S.Ratho,
                                        M/s. R.N.Acharya, S.K.Choudhury,
                                              S.R. Kanungo, P.S. Acharya,
                                              B.N. Nayak, A.K.Sa,
                                        M/s. Ramakanta Mohanty,
                                              D.K.Mohanty,
                                              Smt.S.Mohanty, Mrs. P.Jena,
                                              S.Biswal, A.Mohanty,
                                              D.Varadwaj, S.N.Mohanty
                                              and S.Mohanty, advocates.
                           ---------
PRESENT:
               THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE D.DASH
    Date of hearing- 03.05.2016       :   Date of judgment- 20.05.2016
1.           The appellants in this appeal have called in question the
judgment and decree passed by the learned District Judge, Sambalpur in

                                      2
Title Appeal No. 45/93 confirming the judgment and decree passed by the
learned Munsif, Sambalpur in T.S. No.88/116 of 1986/1989.
2.          It is pertinent to mention here that the appellants were the
defendants in the trial court wherein the respondent as plaintiff had filed
the suit.
3.          For the sake of convenience, in order to bring in clarity and
avoid confusion, the parties hereinafter have been referred to as they have
been arraigned in the trial court.
4.          The case of the plaintiff is that the disputed land was Nazul
land and it was acquired by one Onkarmal Poddar, the father of the plaintiff
in the year 1942. In a family partition, the land came to be allotted to the
share of the respondent. So he applied for renewal of the lease and by order
dated 22.10.1972 in Nazul Revision Case No. 2/72, the Revenue Divisional
Commissioner renewed the lease. Accordingly, renewed lease deed came to
be executed on 9.1.1973. It is stated that soon thereafter, the Collector
Sambalpur initiated a resumption proceeding. However, all of a sudden on
13.1.73, the plaintiff was directed to vacate the land measuring Ac.1.63
decimals out of the total lease-hold on the ground that the same was very
much required for public purpose. The plaintiff filed his counter. The then
Collector, Sambalpur after hearing the parties by order dated 28.3.74 in
Nazul Case No. 79/73 allowed the lease to stand and continue as before.
Thereafter, on 23.4.82 again the Collector directed the plaintiff to show
cause as to why the said lease hold land would not be resumed for violation

                                        3
of condition Nos. 4, 5 and 10 as contained in the deed of lease dated 9.1.73,
Ext. 3. In support of violation of the condition no. 5, it is alleged that the
land measuring Ac.1.55 decimals out of the lease-hold being kept vacant,
the same is in violation of the said condition. The other ground stood on the
footing that the plaintiff had let out the building to different persons without
obtaining due permission from the competent authority. The allegations
were denied by the plaintiff. His specific case as placed before the authority
was that the building was rented out with due and prior permission and
that   one Seva Sadan has been carrying out charitable activity therein
opening an outdoor dispensary and it had been so functioning there under a
trust created by the plaintiff himself. The next ground of objection that such
state of affairs were prevailing when the Revenue Divisional Commissioner
was pleased to renew the lease in his favour and therefore those questions
are not permissible to be reagitated further. The Collector heard the plaintiff
in the matter of resumption on 22.11.82 but the matter stood thus with any
and no final order being passed thereafter. On 23.3.83, the plaintiff to his
utter surprise came across a notice that on 22.3.83 in the said Resumption
Case No. 1/73, the Collector had passed an order authorizing the
Tahasildar to re-enter into the land and take possession of the said site. On
the same day direction was given to the plaintiff to remove all his materials
from the suit site within 15 days and red flags around the land were fixed.
So the plaintiff filed the suit.

                                        4
5.            The defendants admitted the factum of lease and its renewal by
the   Revenue     Divisional   Commissioner     in favour of the plaintiff. In
support of the allegations leveled as regards the breach of condition of the
lease, it is asserted that no such permission was granted by the Collector to
the plaintiff to let out the building standing on the land though one such
permission was granted for letting out one part of the building to the Deputy
Director Consolidation and that was in the month of February, 1979. It is
alleged that the plaintiff let out the disputed site to others in clear violation
of the terms and conditions of the lease and thus has used the area for
commercial purpose in opposition to the purpose for which the lease was
granted. It is said that the plaintiff has kept a portion of the lease-hold land
without going for any construction and that runs contrary to the terms of
the lease as the lease-hold has thus been kept being made unfit for house
site. The authority of the Collector to initiate the resumption proceeding has
been asserted and consequently the order of resumption as passed is said to
be legal, valid, operative and binding on the plaintiff and others.
6.            On the above rival pleadings, the trial court framed six issues.
Addressing the issue nos. 2 and 3 regarding the violation of the terms and
conditions of the deed of lease, it has come to the conclusion on going
through the evidence on record and upon their examination in the backdrop
of rival pleadings that the plaintiff has not violated any of the terms and
conditions of the lease. Consequentially, the Collector’s order of resumption
has been held to be have not been legally passed.

                                          5
7.           With these findings the suit has been decreed granting the
reliefs as under:-
             “The right and title of the plaintiff as a lease over the suit plot in
             1866 is declared. It is further declared that the order of
             defendant no. 1 in resumption case No.1/73 is illegal. The
             defendants should deliver possession of the said premises to the
             plaintiff within two months henceforth, failing which the
             plaintiff can recover the possession through the process of
             court.”
8.           The unsuccessful defendants carried an appeal under Section
96 of the Code of Civil Procedure which came to be heard by the learned
District Judge, Sambalpur. The findings on issue nos. 2 and 3 as passed by
the trial court were called in question. The lower appellate court then having
sat over to examine the sustainability of said findings recorded by the trial
court. Analyzing the details of the conditions of lease as well as the facts
constituting the allegations with reference to such conditions it has finally
recorded the same answer as rendered by the trial court.
             When it was urged there that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court
in the matter is barred in view of the provision of Section 7-B of Orissa
Government Land Settlement Act, 1962, the lower appellate court has also
gone to address the same. Viewing the introduction of the said provision
barring the institution of suit in the principal Act to have been made in the
year 1983 when the cause of action for the suit had arisen much prior to it
and that too the amendment having been brought during the pendency of
the suit, said contention has been repelled. Thus, the appeal having been

                                        6
dismissed, the unsuccessful defendants are before this Court with the
Second Appeal under Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
9.            In this appeal, the following substantial questions of law have
been formulated for being answered:-
              “i) Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case,
             the Civil Court had any jurisdiction to entertain the suit, in
             view of the bar created by Section 7(B) of the Orissa
             Government Land Settlement Act, 1962?
              ii)  In case the suit is maintainable, whether the Civil
             Court has jurisdiction to set aside the order of the
             Collector, Sambalpur, in Resumption Case No.1 of 1973 on
             merits on the ground that it is erroneous?”
10.           Learned Additional Govt. Advocate for the State (appellant)
though submits that the point remains as to whether the courts below have
erred in law by holding that the Civil Court has the jurisdiction to entertain
the suit ignoring the clear bar as contained in Section 7 (B) of the Orissa
Government Land Settlement Act and thus the assumption of the
jurisdiction is illegal, yet in course of further submission as well as in the
written note of submission has not been able to place any such provision of
law or precedent that the said amended provision barring the entertainment
of the suit is retrospective in operation and that would apply to the pending
suit or appeal as the case may be. However, according to him, the suit
having come to be decided in 1990, the provision containing the bar was

                                        7
very much there in the Act; being introduced by amendment; so the courts
below ought not to have held that such provision cannot be held to
have retrospective operation viewing the date of the resumption order
passed by the Collector.
             He next contends that in any view of the matter, the Civil Court
ought not to have gone to decide the legality of the order of resumption
passed by the Collector in finding out any legal infirmity therein as if an
appellate or revisional authority sitting over the order. According to him, the
order having been passed in exercise of statutory jurisdiction and power
vested in the Collector, in the eye of law there was no scope for the Civil
Court to enter into the arena of judging its sustainability when such order
has been passed duly observing the principles of natural justice. Therefore,
he contends that the judgments and decrees impugned in this appeal are
vulnerable.
11.          Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand submits
that the amended provision in the form of Section 7 (B) of the Act was not
there when the cause of action for the suit arose and also when the suit was
instituted and the same having been introduced much later during
pendency of the suit, the courts below have rightly refused to even take into
consideration as regards the applicability of the said provision to the case in
hand, standing as a bar for entertainment of the suit in the absence of any
express provision in the Amending Act to that effect.

                                         8
              She further submits that the courts below having found the
resumption proceeding to have been initiated and order of resumption to
have been passed by the Collector without at all arriving at a satisfaction as
regards the violation of the fundamental terms and conditions of the deed of
lease and rather wholly in the absence of any evidence to support such
allegation of breach of terms and conditions, the concurrent findings
rendered on issue nos. 2 and 3 are unassailable and the Civil Court had all
the jurisdiction to so record. She further contends that the State having
mutated the suit property vide Ext. 2 and there being publication of the
record of right in the year 1982 in favour of the original plaintiff followed by
the acceptance of the rent since April, 1982 onwards, in fact there was no
justification for initiation of the resumption proceeding.
12.           It is the settled position of law that exclusion of the jurisdiction
of civil court is not to be readily inferred. Such exclusion must either be
explicitly expressed or clearly implied.
              As the position stands, the provision of Section 7(B) as it now
finds place was introduced in Odisha Government Land Settlement Act,
1962 by way of amendment. The said provision creates an express bar for
entertainment of suit in the matters covered under the Act and that is
sought to be used for the Collector’s order of resumption to be not called in
question in the present suit. The fact however remains that said provision
came to be introduced in the Act by Amendment Act 11 of 1990. Thus not
only that the cause of action for the suit by the time the provision

                                       9
containing bar for the civil court to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter which any officer or authority is empowered by
or under the Act nor to determine nor to grant injunction in respect of any
action taken in exercise of any power conferred by or under the Act had
already arisen, the resumption order having been passed on 22.03.1983 but
also that the suit had already been instituted by then i.e. on 01.10.1986.
              So, the question arises as to whether said provision containing
the bar would come to apply with retrospective operation and even to the
pending suits or appeal. When there is no such express provision in the
Amending Act and particularly when the barring provision was not there at
the time of institution of the suit wherein the remedy has been availed by
the plaintiff, for such suits pending as on the date of introduction of said
provisions, the newly inserted provision creating bar of entertainment of suit
as stated above has no affect at all and does not come to apply and those
suits not withstanding said provision coming into force during the pendency
would proceed for its decision in accordance with law. A particular forum of
availing the remedy being barred by subsequent amendment in the original
statute, cannot deprive the party who had already knocked at the door of
the said forum in a duly constituted proceeding for availing the remedy in
the forum. Therefore, the first substantial question of law receives its
answer against the appellant and thus the lower appellate court having
rightly repelled the said contention advanced in the appeal there arises no
scope for interference.

                                        10
13.           Let me now proceed to address the next substantial question of
law.
              The renewed deed of lease in the case being the basis of the
claim of the plaintiff, the same has been admitted in evidence as Ext.3
which is dated 09.01.1973. The resumption proceeding is founded on the so
called violation of conditions no. 4,5 and 10.
              Clause 4 reads as under :-
              “ The lessee shall not use the land for any other purpose
        for which the lease is originally granted without the sanction of
        the Collector.”
              The lower appellate court having said that the burden of proof
to establish the alleged breach lies on the defendant and that no such proof
is available much less to say on any specific point. Before this Court learned
Additional Government Advocate has not been able to place any such
evidence in showing that the same have not been considered by the courts
below or to have been sidelined while recording the finding.
              Next clause 5 comes as under :-
         “That the lessee shall not commit any act of waste on his
         holding so as to render it unfit for the purpose of being used
         as a house site.”
              With regard to above, the same being the state of affairs in
evidence, the finding of the courts below on that aspect is not seen to be
erroneous in any way.

                                         11
14.           Above being found in respect of so called violation of conditions
imposed as per clause 4 and 5, now falls for consideration          the   alleged
violation of condition imposed under clause no.10.
              Let it be first reproduced for proper appreciation:-
              “That the lessee shall not by any means of in any way
        whatsoever bequeath, mortgage, charge, transfer, assigns,
        sublet or part with possession of his holding or any portion
        thereof to any person without first obtaining the written
        permission      of    the  Collector.  Any    bequest,   transfer,
        assignment, sub letting or parting with possession of the
        holding or part thereof without the permission of the Collector
        previously obtained in writing shall be voidable at the option
        of the Collector and he may determine the lease and take khas
        possession of the holding or part thereof. In case of
        unauthorized bequeath taking effect from the death of the
        lessee the option to take Khas possession will accrue on the
        death of the lessee.”
              This    condition    prohibits  the   lessee  from   bequeathing,
mortgaging, charging, transferring, assigning, subletting or parting with any
portion of the lease hold to any person without prior permission of the
Collector in writing and the Collector may at his option either to avoid or to
determine the lease and resume possession in further saying that for the
unauthorized bequeath taking effect from the death of the lessee, the option
to take khas possession would accrue on the death of lessee.
              The courts below have held that the building over the suit site is
under occupation for the Government offices and officers. It has been

                                       12
further said referring to Ext.D and the evidence of the plaintiff that an
outdoor charitable dispensary opened by the lessee is running through a
charitable trust of his own and it is not a case of letting it to someone. The
institution is ‘Bansidhar Seva Sadan.’ The letter of Tahasildar to the
Collector, Ext.14 proved by plaintiff shows the recommendation of the
Tahasildar to permit the plaintiff to let out the building situated over the
lease hold to any institution either Government or being privately run
indicating clearly therein that the central building let out to Food
Corporation of India to be lying vacant. The defendants have not shown the
order if at all to have been passed on that recommendation. The trial court
on detail analysis of the evidence in the back drop of so called violations has
held that the documents Ext. A, B, C and D do not make out a case of
violation of conditions embodied in Ext.3 in any way. The lower appellate
court has accepted the said finding to be having adequate foundation
through evidence.
              Thus when the very foundational facts constituting so called
violation of terms and conditions under the renewed deed of lease Ext.3 are
found to have been non-existent being not established through evidence, the
courts below are in no way to share the blame to have so held erroneously
that too having left the statutory right and authority of Collector untouched
to initiate the resumption proceeding noticing the commission of violation of
terms and conditions of the lease in appropriate case if any such violation or
breach of terms and conditions of the lease is projected in the affirmative.

                                         13
               In view of aforesaid discussion and reasons, the second
substantial question of law receives its answer against the defendant. This
leads to conclude that the judgments and decrees passed by the courts
below are not liable to be interfered with in this appeal.
15.            Resultantly, the appeal fails. No order as to cost.
                                                     ….………………
                                                      D.Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 20th day of May, 2016/Aswini


