      IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                       F.A. O. NO. 174 of 2012
From the judgment dated 13.02.2012 passed by the learned Orissa
Education Tribunal, Bhubaneswar in G.I.A. Case No. 255 of 2010.
                                ………….
Sri Basanta Kumar Patra                            ……    Appellant
                                 - Versus-
State of Orissa & others                           ……    Respondents
             For Appellant      :   M/s. Sameer Kumar Das,
                                    S.K.Mishra, S.Patra,
                                    S.Rath, D.D.Sahu,
                                    advocates.
             For Respondents :      Mr. B.Senapati,
                                    Addl. Government Advocate.
                          ---------
PRESENT:
              THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE D.DASH
 Date of hearing-05.10.2016           :   Date of judgment- 21.11.2016
             The appellant in this appeal under section 24-C of the
Orissa Education Act, 1969 (hereinafter called as ‘the Education Act’)
calls in question the order passed by the learned State Education
Tribunal, Odisha, Bhubaneswar in G.I.A. Case No.255 of 2010.
             The appellant by filing the application under section 24-B
of the Education Act before the State Education Tribunal has sought

                                       2
for a direction to the respondent nos.1 and 2 for      approval    of  his
service under the provision of Orissa Aided Educational Institutions
(Appointment of Lecturer Validation)Act, 1998 (in short hereinafter
referred to as ‘the Validation Act, 1998’) as against the 3rd post of
Lecturer in Economics of Charampa College, Charampa and for
consequential release of Grant-In-Aid w.e.f. 17.10.1998 in modification
of the earlier approval order dated 13.04.2010 erroneously making him
entitled to receive the Block Grant which, according to him, is illegal
and arbitrary.
              The college in question was established in the year 1979
with +2 Arts course at the beginning. From the academic session
1986-87, the college received necessary concurrence and affiliation for
running +3 degree wing. The college received Grant-In-Aid w.e.f.
01.06.1985.
2.            In course of time on account of increase in roll strength in
the Department of Economics, the Governing Body having taken a
decision to appoint a third lecturer in Economics, the appellant finally
came to be appointed and he joined on 20.09.1991. The appointment
was also approved by the Governing Body in its resolution dated
01.11.1991 and was confirmed by resolution dated 08.08.1992 as it
reveals from Annexures-1 to 4. It is the case of the petitioner that at

                                      3
the relevant time of his appointment, the justification        for  the
additional post of lecturer in Economics was found out as per the
Government Resolution/Circular dated 08.08.1983 by taking into
account the work load of 25 classes per lecturer in a week with its
increase providing necessary justification for another post in the
college. When the appellant was appointed as lecturer in Economics
for the 3rd post, the work load of the college was very much justifying
the said    appointment. The appellant       accordingly  continued to
discharge his duty as such. Thus, the appellant being appointed in the
college after it came within the Grant-In-Aid fold and became an aided
college of the Governing Body through its own selection process, the
Governing Body was not competent to do so. So, initially the claim of
the appellant to receive the benefit of G.I.A. Order 1994 was not
considered. However, the State Government later on came out with the
Validation Act, 1988 w.e.f. 17.10.1998 whereby all those lecturers
appointed in the aided colleges in between the period 01.01.1985 to
31.12.1992 are declared to have been validly appointed and as such
their services standing for regularization, provided they are receiving
the salary from the college fund and continuing as such against the
admissible or approved post. Accordingly, with the provision in the
said Validation Act, 1998, there remained further provisions in the

                                     4
said Act that such appointees would be entitled            to   get   the
Grant-In-Aid with effect from the commencement of the Validation Act,
1998, i.e., 17.10.1998. All the colleges being asked to submit their
proposals in the prescribed form, the Principal of the college in
question pursuant to the same sent the proposal with all the relevant
records as per Annexure-6. However, it is stated that for no such
cogent and valid reason, the case of the appellant was not considered.
It later on came to his knowledge that the authorities finding the 3rd
post of lecturer in Economics to be not justified as per the work load
statement prior to 31.12.1992, the appellant’s claim had been refused.
             The case of the appellant is that the computation of work
load has been made erroneously and in case it being proper made as
per the Grant-In-Aid Order, 1994, the 3rd post of lecturer of the college
stands justified from the academic session 1992-93, i.e., on and from
01.06.1992. So, it is his case that his services ought to have been
validated under the Validation Act, 1998, he being appointed on
20.09.1991 in the post having the justification since 01.06.1992 and
as his case satisfies other conditions laid down therein. It is also
stated that although so many other persons similarly situated with the
appellant have been extended with the said benefits yet he has been
deprived and discriminated on unjustified ground.

                                         5
3.            The      matter      being     then continuously      raised
and placed before the Director and the State Government by filing
successive     representations,    finally  the   Director  referring   to
Government letter dated 03.04.2010 approved the appointment of the
appellant with some other lecturers holding them to be entitled to
Block Grant w.e.f. 01.02.2009 as per Annexure-8. This is challenged
as wholly arbitrary and discriminatory. In this connection, the case of
one Hara Priya Behera, lecturer in Political Science in Indira Gandhi
Women’s College, Cuttack has been cited under Annexure-9 stating
that being similarly situated in all respect with the appellant; she had
so received the benefits of which the appellant has been deprived of.
              It is the further case of the appellant that his case being
squarely covered under the Validation Act, 1998 and payment of salary
being guided under section 3(2) of the said Act, the Director’s order
merely entitling him with the Block Grant as per the Grant in Aid
order, 2009 is untenable.
4.            In the counter affidavit the main contention raised to
thwart the claim of the appellant is that since +3 degree wing of the
said college had not come within the fold of Grant-In-Aid w.e.f.
01.06.1994, the 3rd post of lecturer in Economics does not stand
justified in accordance with the work load of +2 wing. So when that +3

                                        6
degree wing of the college was brought within the Grant-In-Aid fold
with the entitlement to receive the grant in aid later, the appellant is
not entitled to be extended with the benefit of Grant in Aid Order,
1994.
5.           Learned Education Tribunal as it appears has aptly gone
to formulate the point for consideration that whether the appellant is
entitled to validation of his service under the Validation Act, 1998 and
consequential release of Grant-In-Aid as per section 3(2) of the
Validation Act, 1998 or not.
             Proceeding to answer the said point for determination at
para-6 of the judgment, it has however abruptly concluded that since
the Director, Higher Education has found that the 3rd post of lecturer
in Economics was not justified prior to the notification of +3 degree
wing of the college as an aided one which is final as per para-9(2)-C of
Grant-in-Aid Order, 1994, the claim of the appellant for validation of
service does not fall within the fold of the Validation Act, 1998 and for
other benefits flowing therefrom.
6.           Learned counsel for the appellant contends that nowhere
in the Validation Act, 1998 the concept of receipt of wing wise Grant-
In-Aid to a College is provided so as to attract the said provision under
the said Act. According to him, the Validation Act, 1998 with reference

                                      7
to the G.I.A. Order, 1994, this college in question, clearly falls
as Category-1 institution as per para 4(a) of the Grant in Aid Order,
1994 which further provides at para 5(i) that all non-government
educational    institutions  are  deemed    to   be  aided  educational
institutions.
              He next contends that as per Clause-9(2)-C of G.I.A.
Order, 1994 the workload is prescribed for determination of the
admissibility of a post and in consonance with the same, the
computation has to be made taking into account the total work load of
+2 as well as +3 degree wing in all the streams conducted in the
institution and similarly as per Clause 2(d) of the said Order, the work
load is required to be determined with reference to the actual
enrolment during the academic year in which the post is admissible
limited to the strength of students for which recognition and affiliation
has been given. It is further contended that as per the Government
resolution dated 06.11.1990, the colleges mean aided colleges having
government concurrence and University affiliation for opening of +3
degree wing by 01.04.1989 and as per the Validation Act, 1998, it is
not required that such lecturers should have been from the beginning
appointed in the aided educational institution so as to get the benefit

                                        8
of the validation of their services as also to the entitlement to  the
Grant-In-Aid.
             With the above, he sums up his argument contending that
the Tribunal’s order is wholly unsustainable both in fact and law and
it has not dealt with the matter in hand in accordance with the
provision of law governing the field so as to examine the acceptability
of the claim of the appellant being properly scanned under those
provisions of law and instead the order of the Director has been taken
by the Tribunal to be having the final say in the matter which is
untenable since the very provision confers the jurisdiction upon the
Tribunal to adjudicate upon the matter which exercise has not been
taken up independently. In support of his contention, he has placed
reliance upon the decision of this Court in case of M/s. Bilkesh
Parveen Vrs. State of Orissa & another, 2007(I) OLR, 133 and State
of Orissa and another Vrs. Sarada Prasanna Mohapatra, 2011
(Supp.I) OLR, 775, while further contending that the said order passed
in case of Bilkesh Parveen (supra) having been called in question at
the behest of the State before the Apex Court, the same has been
confirmed being not interfered with and thus the principles stand
finally decided therein.

                                       9
7.           Learned   Additional    Government Advocate contends all
in support of the order of the learned Tribunal and according to him,
the Tribunal did commit no mistake in accepting the order of the
Director by disallowing the claim of the petitioner as regards his
entitlement to be covered under the Validation Act, 1998 in getting his
service validated and consequentially his entitlement to the benefit as
provided under the G.I.A. Order, 1994. He contends that +3 degree
wing of the college having come within the Grant-In-Aid fold later, the
appellant cannot get the benefit as claimed from an anterior period
and thus he has been rightly allowed with the block grant. He next
submits that the petitioner being appointed validly by the Governing
Body of the college in the +3 wing when that wing was not within the
fold of Grant-In-Aid, the question of his service standing validated and
as such regularized under the Validation Act, 1998 does not arise and
therefore his claim as laid is not entertainable in the eye of law.
8.           In case of Bilkesh Parveen (Supra), the court was seized
with the situation to decide whether the post of lecturer in a subject
in the college was admissible to the college         at the time of his
appointment and whether said appointment is to receive the
validation under the provision of Validation Act, 1998. The stand of
the State therein was that since the petitioner was appointed at the

                                        10
time in the college which though was an aided, the +3 decree
wing having been opened later was not aided one and accordingly the
work load of the college for approval of any post stands to be
adjudged taking into account the +3 decree wing work load only and
therefore in such cases, the provision of Validation Act, 1998 would
not come into play to save the appointment of the petitioner as
lecturer in the said post. It was further pleaded that the +3 decree
wing having been declared an aided institution by the Government on
01.01.2004, the same is just and legal.
             In the rejoinder affidavit filed therein, the college was
stated to be a composite college with +2 and +3 decree wing followed
by assessment of the work load in accordance with rule 4 of the
G.I.A. Order, 1994. So it was stated that the post was admissible and
as there was justification in view of the work load, the governing body
had created the post and appointed the petitioner therein and it was
further pleaded that similarly situated colleges prior to that had been
brought into the fold of Grant-in-Aid and such appointees being
extended with the benefit of Validation Act, 1998.
       9.    The Division Bench of this Court in the case has taken
the following view:-

                                11
           “In this connection, we have looked          into
the provisions of Grant-in-Aid Order, 1994. Rule 4
of the Grant-in-Aid Order prescribes three categories
of institutions in existence when 1994 Grant-in-Aid
Order came into force. This order, inter alia
prescribes     that    Non-Government         Educational
Institutions and approved posts in such institutions
which     have    received    Grant-in-Aid      from     the
Government or in respect of which Grant-in-Aid has
been    sanctioned    by    the  Government       prior   to
commencement of Amendment Act are to be treated
as Category-I institution. It further stipulates that
other    posts    in   Non-Government         Educational
Institutions covered under Category-I (1) which were
admissible on the basis of work load and prevalent
yardstick had been filled up prior to commencement
of the Amendment Act, but in respect of which no
Grant-in-Aid had been sanctioned are also covered
under Category-I intuition. It is pertinent to note
here that the Amendment Act came in the year
1994. Rule 9 (c ) of the Grant-in-Aid Order, 1994
categorically states that the work load to be
determined for admissibility of a post by computing
the total work load on account of Decree Course and
Higher    Secondary     course    in   all   the    streams
conducted in that institution. In view of this
provision of the Grant-in-Aid Order as amended
above,    as  the    petitioner’s   college,   i.e.,   Tangi

                              12
Mahavidyalaya was having +2 and +3 stream with
the approval of the State Government and             the
institution being an aided institution before the
Amendment Act came into force and further since
the petitioner was appointed before coming into
force the Amendment Act and also the existence of
the Grant-in-Aid Order, 1994 there can be no
dispute, in our view, that Tangi Mahavidyalaya
would    come    within  the   ambit    of    Category-I
institution and therefore, the admissibility of the
post in any discipline are to be adjudged computing
the work load of both +2 and +3 stream. It was
submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner and
it is also revealed from Annexure-17 that the 2nd
post of Lecturer in English is admissible and the
same was justified to the college. This stand has
been taken in the writ petition and the same has
nowhere been denied by O.P.No.2 in the counter
affidavit nor in the additional affidavit filed in reply
to the rejoinder affidavit of the petitioner. From a
reading of the affidavit filed by O.P.No.2 it is
apparent that O.P.No.2 has not taken into account
the work load of +3 stream and has rejected the
claim of the petitioner only on the basis of the work
load of +2 wing. This, in our view, and in the facts
and circumstances is not sustainable in the eye of
law. Rather, the 2nd post of Lecturer in English was
admissible and it was justified in the college in

                                       13
        question when the petitioner was              appointed
        and    for   that  the   Order   of   the  Government
        under challenge, vide Annexure-16 appears to be
        incorrect and the same has been passed without
        taking into consideration the aforementioned facts
        and without application of mind.”
      10.   Discussing the next submission, following view has been
expressed:-
                   “The second plank of argument that was
        advanced on behalf of the petitioner is about
        validating the services of the petitioner in pursuance
        to the Validation Act, 1998. On a bare reading of the
        said Validation Act, it is found that the Lecturers of
        aided    colleges   who   have   been    appointed   on
        temporary      basis   against   the    approved   and
        admissible post by the concerned Governing Body
        during the period between 1.1.1985 and 31.12.1992
        and are continuing as such having the requisite
        qualification prescribed to hold such post and are in
        the pay roll of the concerned college against the said
        approved and admissible post, as the case may be,
        shall be deemed to have been validly and regularly
        appointed. In the case at hand, as we find
        undisputedly, when the petitioner was appointed the
        college was an aided college. The petitioner was
        admittedly appointed on 1.11.1991 having the
        requisite qualification. She is continuing in the said

                                        14
         college     right   from  her   date  of appointment
         till date and she is in the pay roll of the    college.
         The post to which she was appointed is an
         admissible post as we have observed earlier in the
         preceding paragraphs. In that view of the matter,
         she    fulfils  all  the requirements   necessary   for
         attracting the provisions of Validation Act. We have
         also found that O.P.No.1 has not considered the
         case of the petitioner in its proper perspective and
         has rejected her case on 2.5.2001 under Annexure-
         16.”
       11.    The above judgment rendered by this Court had been
carried before the Apex Court in Civil Appeal No.(s) 2401 of 2011 at
the behest of the State of Orissa and that has been dismissed finding
no reason to interfere.
       12.    This Court in the case of Akshya Kumar Mohanty V.
State of Orissa and others, 1997(II) OLR 136, upon consideration
of various notifications of the Government with regard to justifiability
of a 2nd post in a subject came to the conclusion that where the
number of classes per week in a subject is 29 or more, the 2nd post
stands justified.
       13.    The case of M/s. Bilkesh Parveen (supra) having been
referred to in the case of State of Orissa v. Sarada Prasanna
Mohapatra, (supra) under similar factual setting of the cases, this

                                       15
Court therein refused to interfere with the order of the learned
State Education Tribunal rendered in favour of the claimant-
petitioner finding their cases to be covered under the Validation Act,
1998 holding the posts to be admissible with effect from 17.10.1998,
the date covered under the Validation Act, 1998 followed by
entitlement of benefit of Grant-in-Aid under section 3 of the said act.
             On the face of the above settled position in the facts and
circumstances, I find the submissions of learned counsel for the
petitioner have got full force and as such acceptable.
       14.   Keeping in mind, the provision of law holding the field as
well as the settled position as expressed in above noted decisions of
this Court and upon examination of the facts and circumstances of
the instant case, I am of the considered view that the order passed by
the learned State Education Tribunal on 13.02.2012 in GIA Case No.
255 of 2010 is unsustainable. Therefore, while allowing this appeal, I
set aside the said order and direct opposite party nos. 1 and 2 to
accord approval to the appointment of the petitioner as lecturer in
Economics in the third post with effect from the date of his
appointment i.e. 20.09.1991 in consonance with the provisions of
Validation Act, 1998 entitling him to the benefits as provided under
sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the said Act, 1998 with effect from the

                                             16
date of commencement of said Validation Act, 1998             and     as
stipulated therein. The opposite party nos. 1 and 2 are hereby
directed to implement this order within a period of four months from
the date of communication of this judgment.
               The      appeal     is  accordingly allowed and    in the
circumstance without cost.
                                                       ….………………
                                                        D.Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 21st day of November, 2016/Himansu


