            HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                          RSA. NO. 73 of 2006
From the Judgment and decree dated 27.09.2005 and 07.11.2005
respectively passed by the learned District Judge, Koraput-Jeypore in
M.A. No. 05 of 2002.
Jagabandhu Banda and another                        …… Appellants
                                 - Versus-
State of Orissa                                     ……     Respondent
             For Appellants     :       M/s. B.Pr. Das, P.K.Nayak,
                                      advocates.
             For Respondent     :      Mr. R.P.Mohapatra,
                                       Addl. Standing Counsel.
                           ---------
PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE D.DASH
  Date of hearing- 08.09.2015         :   Date of judgment- 22.09.2015
             This appeal has been filed challenging the judgment and
decree passed by the learned District Judge, Koraput-Jeypore in M.A.
No. 05 of 2002 modifying the judgment and decree passed by the
learned Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Koraput in M.S. No. 53 of 2000
      2.     The appellants as the plaintiffs being the parents of the
deceased had filed the suit claiming compensation of Rs. 2 lakhs on

                                        2
account of unnatural and untimely death of their            deceased    male
child reading in the primary school
              The respondent i.e., State of Odisha with a view to reduce
high rate of school drop outs among the tribal children had opened the
residential primary school at Kularsingh a remote Adivasi hamlet in
the district of Koraput providing all other facilities to the children.
              On 19.11.1997, a Video show was organized by some
villagers at Kularsingh with the consent of the School Authority.
Fourteen boarders including deceased child of the appellants went to
watch the said show. When such show was going on, they felt uneasy.
So, instead of going to the hostel, they slept in a nearby room of the
school, where the organizers of the Video show had placed a generator
run by kerosene. The door and windows of that room were closed. So,
carbon monoxide emanating on account of said run of the generator
engulfed rooms and out of suffocation eight boarders including the
male child of the plaintiffs died when six others luckily survived. The
allegation is that the tragic incident was on account of negligence of
teacher-in-charge of the hostel and had the teacher-in-charge
remained present or at least guided those boarders back to the hostel
from the Video show, the incident could have been well avoided or

                                      3
prevented. So, the suit was filed attributing vicarious      liability to
the State for such negligence act on the part of its employees.
             The defendant-State denying such vicarious liability came
out with a case that the boarders had gone out of the hostel on their
own volition to witness Video show and had slept in the room not
earmarked for the hostel. It is stated that the State Government had
provided financial help as an ex-gratia measure to the tune of Rs.
30,000/- (Rupees thirty thousand) to each of the bereaved family of
such deceased boarders.
       3.    The trial court framing necessary issues finally answered
those in favour of the plaintiffs holding the State to be vicariously
liable to pay the compensation amount on account of death of the
child as the said incident took place on account of negligence of the
school and hostel authority. In view of that, the trial court awarded
compensation of Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand) to be paid to the
appellants by the State within two months and in case of default,
interest @ of Rs. 12% per annum from the date of decree was ordered
to run.
             The State being aggrieved by the said judgment and
decree preferred an appeal. The appellate court concurred with all the
findings of the trial court including the quantum of compensation as

                                        4
awarded. But finally it passed an order reducing the payment
of said compensation by Rs. 30,000/- as already paid as ex-gratia. It
may be stated here that these appellants had neither filed any cross-
appeal    nor   cross-objection   challenging  quantum    of  award   of
compensation as determined by the trial court. So, now, in this appeal
their grievance centres round simply on this score of reduction of
payment of the compensation in the appeal and now their claim is
confined to the entitlement of the compensation as awarded by the
trial court i.e. the ex-gratia payment is not liable to be considered in
the matter of grant of compensation in the suit.
       4.     The appeal has been admitted on the following substantial
question of law:-
              “Whether the lower appellate court is legally right in
              reducing the compensation as awarded by the trial court
              after holding the said determination to be in order taking
              into   consideration  the   ex-gratia  payment    and   by
              deducting the same from the compensation determined as
              payable?”
       5.     In view of the scope of appeal, the only point falls for
consideration as to whether the lower appellate court was right in
doing such reduction in the quantum of compensation.

                                         5
                    As per Chambers Dictionary the      word    ‘ex-gratia’
             means an act of grace given or made as a favour and not
             out of obligation, and with no acceptance of liability.
                    The word ex-gratia as finds place in the Black’s
             Law Dictionary refers to something made as favour or gift
             and not because of any legal duty. An ex-gratia payment
             means payment not illegally required; as for example an
             insurance payment not required to be made under
             insurance policy if so made is said to be an ex-gratia
             payment.
             The learned District Judge without any discussion of any
sort while holding the determination of compensation made by the
trial court to be in order has abruptly gone to pass an order reducing
its payment by the amount paid as ex-gratia measure. It has adjusted
said ex-gratia payment while ultimately passing the order of payment
of compensation without even holding that said ex-gratia payment if
can be said to be the payment towards the compensation as
determined to be payable by the State. Such an approach is held to be
wholly erroneous and unsustainable in the eye of law. The State
having taken the measure in making ex-gratia payment, the same has
nothing to do with its legal liability in paying the compensation, if any,

                                        6
determined in a duly constituted proceeding in a court of law. The
appellants cannot be said to have so received the ex-gratia payment as
part of the compensation which they are legally entitled to receive.
               The aforesaid, provides the answer to the substantial
questions of law as formulated in this appeal.
        6.     In the result, the appeal stands allowed with cost
throughout. The judgment and decree passed by the lower appellate
court to the extent of reduction of payment of the compensation as
awarded by the lower appellate court is set aside and that of the trial
court is restored. The defendant is held liable to pay compensation of
Rs. 50,000/- to the appellants with interest @ 9% per annum from the
date of the decree till payment.
                                                  ….………………
                                                   D.Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 22nd September., 2015/Narayan


