               HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                     FIRST APPEAL No. 105 OF 1986
From the judgment and decree dated                             19.02.1986 and 06.03.1986
respectively passed by G.C.Tripathy, learned Sub Judge, Nayagarh in O.S.
No. 67 of 1984-I.
                                             ………
State Government of Orissa represented
through District Collector, Puri                                       ………              Appellant
                                                               Versus.
Maheswar Mahapatra                                             ………                    Respondent
                  For Appellant              :     Mr. R.R.Mohanty,
                                                      Addl. Standing Counsel
                  For Respondent             : Mr.P.K..Mohapatra,
                                             ………
PRESENT :
                         THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Date of hearing : 21.03.2014                  : Date of judgment: 23.04.2014
                  Being aggrieved by the judgment and decree passed by the
learned Sub-Judge, Nayagarh in O.S. No.67 of 1984 (as it was then),
the State being the unsuccessful defendant has preferred the appeal.
For the sake of convenience, parties hereinafter have been referred to
as they have been arranged in the trial court.
2.                Plaintiff’s case-
                   Land measuring Ac.37.36 dec from out of Plot No.156
under Khata No.10 of Mauza-Sanahamara was purchased by him from
Rani Smt. Saubhagyamanjari Devi. It is claimed that the plaintiff
having been delivered with the possession of the said land continued to
possess and also was making payment of rent. It is the further case of

                                   -2-
the plaintiff that land under Sabak Plot No.156 covered an area of 306
Acres, was a bushy jungle. So, he reclaimed the purchased land to the
above extent and made it fit for culativation. It is also his case that he
out of his purchased land sold Ac.16.50 dec in total to different persons
and remained in possession of rest land of Ac.20.86 dec. It is said that
the defendant forcibly constructed a road covering an area of Ac.1.50
dec. on this plot of land and from within his purchased land.
Thereafter, in the current settlement, an area of Ac.14.47 dec. is said to
have been recorded in the name of the plaintiff and the rest has been
recorded in the name of defendant-State of Orissa. The plaintiff claims
to have filed an objection before the Settlement Authority, which went
unheeded. Therefore, the suit has been filed after issuing notice as
required under section 80, C.P.C.
              The prayer in the suit is for declaration of right, title and
interest of the plaintiff over the suit land measuring Ac.20.36 dec and
for necessary direction to the defendant for undertaking the correction
in the settlement record and map accordingly.
2.            The   defendant   contested   the  suit   by  filing  written
statement. It is stated that in the year 1932-33 during the settlement of
Ex-State of Nayagarh so far as village Sanahamera is concerned, land
measuring Ac.82.64 dec has been recorded in the name of Rani Smt.
Saubhagyamanjari Devi, the wife of the Ex-Ruler. It is next stated that
the plaintiff had purchased 25 acres under the registered sale deed
dated 18.08.1968 and Ac.12.36 dec under another registered sale deed

                                      -3-
bearing the same date. The lands covered under the two sale deeds is
from Plot No.156. It is further stated that as against the purchased
land of Ac.37.36 dec the plaintiff got possession with respect to
Ac.33.77 dec and it is said that he was never in possession with respect
to the balance land said to have been purchased by him at any point of
time. Thus, it is averred that the Settlement Authority have rightly
recorded the land measuring Ac.17.27 dec in favour of the plaintiff
when the admitted case of the plaintiff with regard to sell of Ac.16.50
dec is taken into consideration. In paragraph-7 of the written statement
as per the defendant’s case a total picture has been given as regards
recording of the land in the name of plaintiff while specifically pleading
that over the land of Ac.1.30 dec. recorded in the name of the
defendant, the plaintiff has no right, title, interest or possession and
that it was never in his possession. In the concluding portion, it is
admitted that an area of Ac.1.50 dec has been recorded as
‘Sarbasadharana’ being used as REO road and the rest Ac.1.30 dec has
been rightly recorded in the name of the defendant whereupon the
plaintiff’s right, title, interest and possession has been denied. With the
above pleading the prayer has been made to non-suit the plaintiff.
3.             The trial court framing five issues has gone to record the
evidence in support of the case of the respective parties. Plaintiff has
examined two witnesses including himself as P.W.2 and has proved the
sale deeds Exts.1 and 2 by which he had purchased the land of Ac.3.73
dec., rent receipts Ext.3 series, R.O.R. Ext.4, Commissioner’s report

                                   -4-
Ext.5 and the village map Ext.6. The defendant has neither adduced
any oral evidence nor has tendered any document for being admitted
any evidence on their behalf.
4.          On going through the issues, I find that the vital issue is
Issue no.4 which concerns with the principal prayer made in the plaint.
The direction for correction of the R.O.R. is dependant upon the finding
as regards the right, title and interest and possession of the plaintiff.
The trial court having decided the said issue in favour of the plaintiff
has gone simply to answer all other issues accordingly which appears
to be the right approach. Thus, the suit having been decreed the
defendant has impugned the same in the appeal.
5.          Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the
defendant has not got due opportunity to contest the case by examining
witnesses and proving required documents in support of its case.
Therefore, he urges that the petition filed on their behalf under Order
41 Rule 27 C.P.C. numbered as Misc. Case No.274/1994 need be
allowed.
            Learned counsel for the respondent objects the move on
the ground that the petition is bereft of necessary details, which are
required to be considered for the purpose by this Court. It is also his
submission that with such evasive pleading in the petition, the prayer
at this stage merits no consideration, when the defendant had all the
opportunity but failed to do so. The objection is also for this belated
move and as highly prejudicial to the plaintiff.

                                  -5-
6.           The defendant being well aware of the claim of the plaintiff
in the court below has not adduced any evidence. In the petition simply
a plea has been advanced to the effect that these facts regarding detail
sales made by plaintiff were not known and the documents then could
not be obtained. The suit was filed on 07.11.1984. The defendant filed
written statement on 26.06.1985. In fact order sheet dated 10.02.1986
maintained in the court below shows that the defendant declined to
give any evidence. The appeal being filed on 17.06.1986, on 04.12.1993
an application was filed for adduction of additional evidence which was
numbered as M.C. No.882/1993 and was withdrawn on 28.01.1994.
Then again the present petition under Order 41 Rule 27 C.P.C. was
filed with better particulars and documents on 06.04.1994 numbered
as M.C. No.274 of 1994. It is stated that although the records were
maintained in the Office of the Sub-Registrar, the facts were not known
earlier. This shows the half hearted manner and as to how in a cavalier
fashion the suit was contested.
             As it appears that the defendant has taken no such step
earlier in this regard in pleading these facts in detail of all the sales
made by plaintiff and also took no steps to adduce evidence on that
score. During cross-examination of plaintiff (P.W.2), he has not been
put with such facts for being explained if any. In view of this at this
belated stage, I find no ground to allow the petition Under Order 41
Rule 27, C.P.C. in admitting the documents which are copies of
registered sale deeds in evidence. Therefore, the petition under Order

                                   -6-
41 Rule 27 C.P.C. is rejected and consequently M.C. No.274 of 1994
stands dismissed.
7.           Learned counsel for the State-appellant next submits on
merit that the plaintiff has not been able to prove his case for the
purpose of the relief as granted by the trial court. According to him, it
was incumbent upon the plaintiff to prove by positive evidence to the
satisfaction of the court duly proving the identity of the land that he
purchased, possessed and then those he sold in piece-meal to others
through documents and other records and also as regards the present
possession with reference of the specific land. This having not been
done his submission is that the trial court ought to have dismissed the
suit of the plaintiff.
             Learned counsel for the respondent submits that the
evidence led by the plaintiff have gone unchallenged and no such
material exists on record to discard such evidence, which is wholly in
consonance with the pleading of the plaintiff. It is also his submission
that the oral evidence coupled with the documentary evidence tendered
by the plaintiff is sufficient enough to grant decree for the reliefs and
those having been granted, the trial court did commit no error.
Therefore,    according    to  him,  the   judgment    and   decree    are
unsustainable.
8.           Keeping the above rival submissions in mind, now, it is to
be seen as to whether the finding rendered by the trial court on Issue
No.4 which has practically led to decree the suit of the plaintiff is

                                   -7-
sustainable in the eye of law or not and if is based on proper
appreciation of the evidence on record in touch stone of the pleadings.
             Over and above all the pleadings as has been referred to in
the forgoing paragraph, it may be stated that the plaintiff’s purchase is
of Ac.37.36 dec of land from out of Sabak Plot No.156 by two registered
sale deeds is not denied. It has also emerged during the suit that O.S.
No.52 of 1984 has been filed for the land measuring Ac.1.30 dec, which
is said to have been in occupation of ‘Sarbasadharana’ for the purpose
of road and is used as such.
9.           The plaintiff’s averment in the plaint is that he has sold
land measuring Ac.16.50 dec. to different persons from out of this
purchased land of Ac.37.36 dec. So, the balance when calculated
comes to Ac.20.86 dec. But in the plaint it has been shown as Ac.20.36
dec. As per the Record of Right of the current settlement, it is said that
land of Ac.14.47 dec. instead of Ac.20.30 dec. has been recorded under
two khatas. Thus, the deficit in that way comes to Ac.6.39 dec.;
whereas if the plaint averment is taken into consideration then it comes
to Ac.5.89 dec. Interestingly, the declaration of title has been sought for
with respect to land of Ac.20.36 dec. The plaintiff has been examined in
this case as P.W.2. He has stated to have sold Ac.16.50 dec. to P.W.1
and others and to have been in possession of land measuring Ac.20.86
dec. That apart, in this case the plaintiff while proving the registered
sale deeds Exts.1 and 2 by which he has purchased the land has
neither stated anything as regards the details of the sales he has made

                                   -8-
in favour of different persons and the possession of those lands to have
been resting with whom, nor he has proved the registered sale deeds by
which he has sold said extent of lands. It is the settled position of law
that the plaintiff has to establish those necessary facts by leading clear,
cogent and acceptable evidence for the purpose of grant of relief in his
favour and he cannot take advantage of weakness of the defence. In the
present case, the defendant in the written statement has called upon
the plaintiff to prove those details of sales made by the plaintiff. Thus,
for the purpose of grant of relief of declaration, the burden was upon
the plaintiff to prove the sales he had made from out of his total
purchased land of Ac.37.36 dec as pleaded and to establish that he
remained as the owner in possession of the balance land of Ac.20.36
dec. It was also his further obligation to prove that after recording in
the current settlement the land from out of his purchased land, the rest
area having remained in his hands in possession after the sales, the
same has erroneously been recorded in the name of the defendant.
Only on proof of all these facts the onus would have shifted to the
defendant to show as to how the recording of the land as per the
current settlement record in favour of the plaintiff is correct. On going
through the evidence of the plaintiff, it is found that all those required
facts have not been proved, more particularly, with regard to the sales,
the balance remaining with him under his possession so as to provide
justification for his claim that lesser area of land has been recorded in
his name with the deficit from his land being recorded in the name of

                                        -9-
the defendant. The report of the Commissioner Ext.5 cannot be taken
to have relieved the plaintiff of the burden of proof of the facts as stated
above. This having not been done by the plaintiff, I am lead to hold that
the plaintiff has failed to establish his claim for the purpose of
declaration of his right, title and interest in respect of the suit land
measuring Ac.20.36 dec.
               In the upshot of above discussion and for the reasons as
assigned, the finding of the trial court on Issue No.4 by inventing a
third case for the plaintiff has right, title and interest with respect to
the suit land comprising an area of Ac.15.97 dec. is untenable and thus
liable to be set aside.
               Therefore, the judgment and decree impugned in this
appeal are hereby set aside and the suit of the plaintiff stands
dismissed.
10.            Resultantly,        the appeal stands   allowed and   in  the
circumstances without costs.
                                              ……………………
                                                 D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
Dated the 23rd April, 2014/Himansu


