               HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                     FIRST APPEAL No. 33 OF 1992
From the judgment and decree dated 23.12.1991 and 18.01.1992 B.N.Mishra,
Sub-Judge, Baripada in Title Suit No. 30 of 1986.
                                             ………
Antaryami Behera & others                                              ………              Appellants
                                                               Versus.
Dinakrushna Behera & others.                                   ………                   Respondents
                  For Appellants             : Mr. R.Ch. Mohanty, R.K.Mohanty,
                                                 D.K.Mohanty, P.C.Acharya,
                                                 N.Behuria, S.Mohanty, N.Das,
                                                S.Mohanty, S.K.Mohanty,
                                                P.Jena, advocates.
                  For Respondents            : M/s. N.C.Pati, J.P.Das,
                                                 B.K.Sharma, G.K.Dash,
                                                 S.P.Mishra, S.Mishra, B.S.Panigrahi,
                                                J.R.Mohapatra, S.K.Sahoo,
                                               S.K.Samantaray,advocates.
                                             ………
PRESENT :
                         THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of hearing : 05.09.2014                   :       Date of judgment: 25.09.2014
                  The unsuccessful defendant no. 1 and 2 as the appellants
have filed this appeal challenging the judgment and decree passed by
learned Sub-ordinate Judge, Baripada (as it was then) decreeing the
suit of the plaintiff. (Respondent No. 1) in part by passing the
preliminary decree allotting one fourth share in Schedule – B property

                                   -2-
to respondent no. 1 (plaintiff), appellant no. 1 and 2 (defendant no. 1
and 2 each and three tenth share from the Schedule – C, D and D-1
properly and further allotting one fourth share from Schedule – B and
one tenth share from Schedule-C and D and D-1 properties to the
respondent no. 3 (defendant no. 3).
2.          For the sake of convenience, to bring clarity and to avoid
confusion, the parties herein after have been referred to as they have
been arrayed in the court below.
3.          The case of the plaintiff is that the parties are governed
by Mitakhara School of Hindu Law. One Haguru Behera is their
common ancestor. He died in the year 1970 leaving behind widow
Hiramani who died in 1983, and three sons such as the plaintiff,
defendant No. 1 and defendant no. 2, two daughters defendant no. 3
and one Damayanti, who shortly after marriage in the year 1973 left
her husband’s house and went away somewhere having got affected
with leprosy and her whereabouts remained unknown for a more than
seven years. So she is said to have met civil death, leaving no son or
daughter. It is stated that Schedule – B property belonged to
Hiramani and it stood recorded in her name; Schedule – C property
originally belonged to Mali Bewa, the maternal grandfather of the
plaintiff who sold it to the plaintiff by registered sale deed dated
17.03.1948 where-after in mutation case No. 762 of 1948 -49, it was
so recorded in the name of plaintiff on the strength of the said

                                   -3-
purchase. Schedule – C property is said to be the joint family property
of plaintiff, defendant no. 1, 2 and their father Haguru. Subsequently
in mutation case No. 776 of 1953-54 it was recorded in the name of
defendant no. 1 and 2 under misconception of the fact as alleged
though their names ought to have been recorded along with plaintiff
and their father Haguru. Schedule – C property though was recorded
only in the name of defendant no. 1 and 2, it was possessed and
enjoyed by them alongwith plaintiff and Haguru. It is stated that by
the time it was purchased, the plaintiff was carrying on sundry
business having good earning and Haguru was a teacher at one
Chatasali having little income of his own. When the defendant no. 1
and 2 were minors and the dependent upon the income of the
plaintiff, with the help of his hard earned money, the plaintiff
constructed a building over the Schedule – B and C land and the
building consists of five rooms with front verandah which was
completed in the year 1960. It is further stated that two more rooms
and kitchen were added and the old latrine being constructed by the
plaintiff existing till now with a ring well constructed later on.
Schedule– D-1 properties are said to be the paternal property
standing in the name of Haguru. In the current settlement, it has
been recorded in the name of the plaintiff, defendant no. 1 and 2. The
land described in Schedule D-2 of the plaint originally belonged to one
Padru Majhi. During life time Haguru purchased it orally from the

                                   -4-
Padru in the year 1939 on payment of consideration of Rs. 30/-
accompanied by delivery of possession and he began to possess the
same as of right till his death. After his death, the plaintiff, defendant
1 and 2 are said to in peaceful possession of the same. It has been
currently recorded in the settlement wrongly in the name of one
Bhunda Majhi, the father and husband of defendant no. 4 and 5
respectively with the note of possession in favour of plaintiff, the
defendant no. 1 and 2. Since Bhunda Majhi is dead leaving his son
defendant no. 4 and his widow defendant no. 5, they have been
included as parties in the suit. But defendant No. 4, 5 and Bhunda
are said to be having no right, title, interest and possession over the
suit plot. It is further stated that during the year 1955, the plaintiff
left his business, and served under State Government, worked under
Revenue Department. When dispute between himself and his parents
in the year 1956 came to such a height that he was compelled to
reside in a rented house at the place of his service. It is also the case
of the plaintiff that for the first time in the year 1947-48, he was
appointed as bhakta and was given 4-8-12-0 Gunth of land towards
bhakta jagir. Those being his separate and self acquired property, he
used to cultivate the same. Subsequently with the help of his savings,
he purchased a piece of homestead land in Ward No. VII of Baripada
town and constructed a house thereon, side by side incurring some
loan from Urban Cooperative Bank, Baripada. The aforesaid bhakta

                                   -5-
jagir land was later on converted to hasilat rayati land in O.A. case
No. 38 of 1971. One Hari Behera got it recorded in his name
fraudulently without being appointed as bhakta. In Revenue mutation
no. 197 of 1958 which was initiated at the instance of the plaintiff
that bhakta jagir land again was recorded in his name and at that
time the defendant nos. 1 to 3 did not raise any objection. Since then
the plaintiff has been performing the duty as a bhakta which has also
been so recognized and recorded during consolidation in the year
1976. Further, on the death of Hiramani, the Schedule – B land was
inherited by the plaintiff, defendant no. 1 to 3 in three equal shares.
In Schedule – C property, the plaintiff, defendant no. 1 and defendant
no. 2, they have got 1/3rd share each since it was not the paternal
property But Schedule – D and D-1 properties being paternal
property, the plaintiff, defendant no. 1, 2 and 3 inherited those in
equal shares. It is stated that the deceased mother of the plaintiff was
all along residing with the defendant no. 1 and 2 since 1955 and as
she used to love them very much, both of them taking advantage of
such relationship obtained a fictitious sale deed with respect to
Schedule – B land without payment of any consideration and by
excise of undue influence. The aforesaid sale deed is a sham
transaction without creation of title in favour of the defendant no. 1
and 2. According to the case of the plaintiff, the mother of the plaintiff
did not incur any loan and she had absolutely no necessity for sale of

                                   -6-
the same. Defendant no. 1 and 2 both were cultivating Schedule –D
and D-1 property and maintaining their mother. Over and above, the
mother was also collecting house rent from the tenants for the
occupation of the building as describing Schedule –D. Further, it is
stated that the suit properties have never been partitioned previously.
It is the case of the plaintiff that on 26.01.1986; he approached the
defendant no. 1 to 3 for amicable partition and as they did not pay
any heed to it, he had to so he had to institute the suit.
4.           It may be stated that defendant no. 3, 4 and 5 did not
contest the suit and have been set ex-parte. So also is their position
in this appeal.
             The defendant no. 1 and 2 filed a joint written statement.
             While traversing the plaint averments, it is stated that
maternal grand father Govinda Behera had some jagir land. One Hari
Behera was cultivating their land performing as bhakta on behalf of
their parents. After death of Govinda, father of defendant nos. 1 and 2
took steps to have those lands recorded in the name of some of the
members of the family and it was so recorded in the name of the
plaintiff only for and on behalf of the family. It is asserted that the
joint family possessed the bhakta jagiri land and according to their
case each co-sharer has got interest therein. It is stated that on
10.04.1952, the plaintiff without knowledge and consent of the
deceased father and by excise of undue influence upon his mother

                                  -7-
mortgaged schedule- B and C land for sum of Rs. 1000/- and
misappropriated the entire amount. Subsequently there arose dispute
between the plaintiff and his father in connection with the said
mortgage as it invited burden to the family. The plaintiff remained
adamant and severed all connection with the family. This actually
gave rise to an occasion for the parties to sit for a mutual family
arrangement in presence of local gentlemen in the year 1953. The
case of the defendants is that in the said family arrangement, the
plaintiff got bhakta jagir land and it was decided that he would not
advance any claim over any other property of the family and in turn
the father would liquate the aforesaid mortgage amount of Rs. 1000/-
along with the interest. In the said family arrangement, it was further
decided that Schedule – C property would be of defendant no. 1 and
2. It is though said to be an oral arrangement, but has been duly
acted upon and in the result, the defendant no. 1 and 2 and their
parents lived in a coparcenary to the exclusion of the plaintiff who
separated himself and rest constituting the coparcenary began to own
and possess exclusively the said suit property. It is also stated that
the plaintiff was a minor in 1948, and was having no income of his
own. He had built a house in mandira sahi and has been staying
there since about last 25 years having no connection with the family
of defendant no. 1 and 2 and their parents or with the suit land. The
defendant no. 1 joined in Government service in 1961 so also the

                                   -8-
defendant no. 2 in 1969. Their father had built only two rooms and
verandah. All other constructions in Schedule- B and C lands have
been made by defendant no. 1 and 2. Apart from it, in 1958 just small
edging of two rooms were added to the other two rooms which were
existing, partly made from the income of their mother who was
carrying on business of selling parched rice (mudhi as locally called)
and fried whole gram etc. According to the case of these defendants
about 40 years back Haguru acquired property described in Schedule-
D in an auction and possessed the same and after his death,
defendant no. 1 and 2 possessed the same exclusively. So it was not
recorded in the name of the plaintiff along with themselves. They
further state that the plaintiff left the house in 1953 after partition
and again in the year, 1955 returned and wanted to stay in the house
as described in Schedule – E. At that point of time he was not so
allowed and was ousted as he had no claim. As per their case, mother
Hiramani validly sold Schedule – B property to them by execution of
sale-deed dated 21.07.1980 for legal necessary on receipt of full
consideration. Since then they have become absolute owners having
exclusive possession over the same. They have also taken a plea that
they have acquired indefeasible title over Schedule – C, D and D-1
land by way of adverse possession by possessing the same openly,
peacefully, continuously ousting all others since 1955. An alternative
claim has also been advanced hinting that the bhakta jagir land

                                   -9-
would have enured to their joint benefit in case of absence of family
arrangement. With all these they prayed for non-suiting the plaintiff.
5.            Placed with such rival pleading, the court below framed
altogether five issues. Issue no. 1 relates to the maintainability when
issue no. 2 relates to the suit being barred by law of adverse
possession. Factual aspects as placed in the rival pleadings have been
considered in framing issue no. 3 and 4. Issue no. 3 is to the effect as
to whether around the year 1953, there was complete partition
between the plaintiffs on the one side and defendant no. 1 to 3 and
his parents on the other hand remaining in a coparcenary with
respect to the rest of the property. Issue no. 4 concerns as to whether
the plaintiff has any partiable interest in schedule - B, C, D and D-1
properties.
6.            The court below as it appears first of all has taken up the
issue no. 3 and 4 for decision rightly stating that the fate of the suit
rests upon the decision on of these two issues.
7.            Considering the rival pleading and on analysis of the
evidence, finally these two issues have been answered. The issue no. 3
has been answered in negative and issue no. 4 has been answered in
the affirmative. Next taking up other issues practically the answer
given on issue no. 3 and 4 have prevailed upon.
              The court below has disbelieved the case of defendant
no.1 and 2 as regards the family arrangement as projected by them to

                                  - 10 -
have taken place in the year 1953 as also that there remains no such
acceptable evidence     that the    parties acted in terms of said
arrangement. Next on evidence it has also seen held that bhakta jagir
land is the separate property of the plaintiff and it is not the joint
family property for others to lay any claim. The sale deed, Ext-B said
to have been executed by Haramani, the mother of plaintiff in favour
of defendant nos. 1 and 2 has been held to be unconscionable one
and that has been held to be of no avail to the defendant nos.1 and 2.
In view of that Schedule ‘B’ property being that of mother Hiramani,
the two sons and daughters (defendant nos.1, 2 and 3) have been
allotted 1/3rd share each whereas Schedule C, D and D-1 being the
ancestral properties by application of the provision of Section 6 of
Hindu Succession Act, 1955, when plaintiff, defendant No.1 and 2
have been allotted with 3/10th share, the defendant no.3 has been
allotted with 1/10th share.
8.            Learned counsel for the appellants (defendant No.1 and 2)
has raised the following grounds in support of the appeal in
challenging the judgment of the Court below:-
    (a)     that the finding of Court below that there was no family
            arrangement is based on perverse appreciation of evidence.
            According to her, the overwhelming evidence as regards the
            family arrangement of the year 1953 have been ignored and
            filmsy grounds have been picked up to say that the same is

                            - 11 -
    not believable when also the evidence have been overlooked
    that it was wholly acted upon by the parties. So in that
    view of the matter, the partition having already taken
    place, the present suit for partition ought to have been
    dismissed;
(b) that the bhakta jagir lands ought to have been held to be
    joint family property as the settlement of the same enures
    to the benefit of all the members of the family and
    therefore, it ought to have been held that it was rightly
    given to the plaintiff in that family arrangement of the year
    1953;
(c) that the trial court’s finding that Ext. B, the sale deed is
    not a valid document and has not clothed the defendant
    no. 1 and 2 with title is not only against the weight of
    evidence but also the settled position of law which have not
    been appreciated and applied in their proper perspective;
(d) that the Schedule – C property being the exclusive property
    of defendant nos. 1 and 2 and on the basis of ROR, Ext. E,
    the court below erred in law to bring it within the purview
    of partition as prayed for by plaintiff;
(e) that the trial court has erred in law in negating the case of
    ouster pleaded and proved by these defendant nos. 1 and
    2.

                                 - 12 -
9.           Learned counsel for the respondent no. 1 (plaintiff) placed
the following submissions in support of the judgment impugned in
this appeal:-
    (a)    that in the case, the family arrangement of the year 1953
           as pleaded by respondent no. 1 and 2 has been rightly
           found to have not been proved when the evidence on that
           score of oral family arrangement is highly discrepant and
           when the conduct of the parties do not go to establish that
           it was wholly acted upon. Moreover, the very claim of
           defendant no. 1 and 2 on the basis of sale deed Ext. B said
           to have been executed by their mother Hiramani runs
           wholly in conflict with their case of family arrangement as
           there was no necessity for it in that event. According to
           him, such claims are contradictory and indirect conflict
           with one another;
    (b)    that the bhakta jagir lands have been rightly held to be
           separate property of plaintiff when it has been found that
           plaintiff was rendering the service as bhakta since 1953
           and when it is not the case that such service was
           previously   being  rendered    by   father or  grandfather.
           According   to   him,  the   service   though  was   initially
           performed by maternal grand father of the parties but after
           him another came to perform it and enjoy the property and

                                     - 13 -
             thereafter when plaintiff did so, he enjoyed the property
             and got it ultimately settled in his name;
    (c)      that the trial court has rightly held the sale-deed Ext. B as
             invalid in the eye of law. According to him, that Hiramani
             was staying with the defendant no. 1 and 2 and the
             document is a got up one without any consideration taking
             advantage of her age and relationship and abusing the
             trust and confidence reposed upon the defendant nos. 1
             and 2 that it is to be approached with great suspicion when
             at in one breath it is said that there was family
             arrangement and completed partition, on the next this Ext.
             B is projected as the triumph card to keep that property
             out of the purview of partition.
    (d)      that the plea of ouster has been rightly negatived as the
             pleadings are contradictory and when the very basis is not
             proved. The evidence on that score of that degree also do
             not surfaces.
10.            On such rival submission, the defensibility of findings of trial
    court stands for examination.
               The defendant no-1 and 2 when plead that there was
family arrangement in the year 1953, the Plaintiff stoutly denies it.
Family arrangement is a well-recognized mode of distribution of
Hindu joint family property. It need not always be reduced to writing.

                                  - 14 -
But when such a fact is disputed, the burden lies on the party who
either stakes his claim on the basis of that or puts up the defence of
said family arrangement to thwart the claim of adversary, to prove it
by leading clear and cogent evidence as also showing other
surrounding circumstances in support of such family arrangement
i.e. parties to have all along acted upon it, with continuance for quite
a good length of time and also their conduct interse or with others,
altering their position as such. In that event, the court keeping in
view the very objective of said arrangement to settle the dispute for
ever brought into existence for maintaining peace, bringing harmony
and also to prevent present or future dispute and litigation must give
due weightage to it. But here also remains a word of caution that on
the whole the said family arrangement must be found to be
reasonable and fair for the court to accord its seal of approval to it
i.e., it must also pass the test of transparency, reasonableness and
fair play in short we may say TFR test.
             It is the settled position that a family arrangement or
settlement is not a transfer of property. It is also not a creation of
interest. In a family settlement each party takes a share in the
property by virtue of the independent title which is admitted to that
extent by the other parties. It is not necessary that every party has a
claim in law. All that is necessary to show is that the parties are
related to each other in some way and have a possible claim to the

                                 - 15 -
property or even a semblance of a claim, on some ground, such as,
say affection.
       (Ram Charan     vrs. Girija; AIR 1966 S.C. 323, Shanmugam
vrs. Shanmugam; AIR 1972 SC 2069 and Haraprasad vrs.
Jagmohan; AIR 1973 Orissa 227).
             The position of law has also been laid down by, the
Hon’ble Apex Court in case of Kale vrs Dy. Director, Consolidation;
AIR 1976 SC 807. It has been held that the family settlement must
be bonafide one so as to resolve family disputes and rival claims by a
fair and equitable division of properties between the various members
of the family. The said settlement must be voluntary and should not
be by fraud, coercion or undue influence.
             Members of a joint Hindu family6 may to maintain peace
or to bring about harmony in the family, enter into such a family
arrangement. If such an arrangement is entered into bonafide and
the terms thereto are fair in the circumstances of a particular case,
the courts will more readily give assent to such an agreement than to
avoid it. (Pullaiah vrs. Narasimham; AIR 1966 SC 1836).
11. The contesting defendants in the case rely on the evidence of
    D.W.1 and D.W.3 and other circumstances in support of their case
    of family arrangement said to have taken place in the year 1953.
    D.W.1 in his evidence has stated that the dissension arose
    between the plaintiff and his father when the former did not repay

                               - 16 -
the mortgage dues and this ultimately led for the family
arrangement coming into being in presence of a panchayati called
for the parties. D.W.3 is said to be a member in the said
Panchayat alongwith others as named by him. The decision taken
was that the bhakta jagir land would go to the plaintiff and lands
under Schedule-B and Schedule-C would remain in the share of
the parents and contesting defendants who were then minors
living with parents and that Hagru would pay the mortgage money
and Schedule-B and Schedule-C land and get it mutated in the
name of Defendant nos.1 and 3. The plaintiff waived his claim over
the Schedule-B and Schedule-C land and vice versa. Admittedly,
in this case, the family arrangement was not reduced into writing
for the sake of evidence. It is also the evidence of D.W.1 that when
the talk was going on, the Plaintiff voluntarily declared to leave the
house to have his separate stay and in fact he did leave the place
at that very moment when his wife also followed him. Now D.W.3
as regards the distribution of the property, says that this land in
Schedule-D and Schedule-D1 (Saradiha land) was exclusively
allotted to Hagru. This is against the case of the contesting
defendants. They say that Plaintiff separated and they with their
father constituted a separate coparcenary and continued to live
together and enjoyed the property as such. When D.W.1 says
about the leaving of the plaintiff at the very moment to make stay

                              - 17 -
separate, D.W.3 has denied it which circumstance rather tend to
militate against the case that the plaintiff had his consent to it. He
also says that no property document was even placed before the
panchayat which also rather seems to be an unusual feature. The
evidence of D.W.5 is that the panchayati was convened when the
plaintiff did not pay the mortgage dues and then Haguru declining
to give any share to the plaintiff on the ground that he had already
taken the bhakta jagir land in his share. This circumstance if
taken into consideration, the voluntariness on the part of plaintiff
lacks. It is further stated that plaintiff then declared not to take
any share from any other property and not to stay in the house,
when Hagru would pay back the mortgage dues.               When the
evidence of all these witnesses as discussed are together taken
into consideration and a cumulative view is taken, it becomes
difficult to accept the case of family arrangement as projected by
the defendant nos. 1 and 2. There remains discrepancy and more
so, it appears to be detrimental to the interest of the plaintiff and
that reasonableness, fairity as well as transparency are lacking so
as to accept it for a moment that the plaintiff agreed to get only the
bhakta jagir land in the said arrangement leaving rest. At this
point, it becomes necessary to see as to whether that jagir land
was the joint family property with subsisting interest of the
members of the family or it was the separate property of the

                                - 18 -
plaintiff. If this answer is given against the Plaintiff that it was not
his separate property, the factum of family arrangement as
projected will be backed up with some strength. The record of right
of said land is Ext.4 wherefrom it is seen that it stood recorded in
the name of Hari Behera and then it was mutated in favour of the
plaintiff. As per the order in O.E.A. Case No-38/1971, the
mutation has taken place. No evidence is forthcoming that it was
in joint enjoyment of the members of the family. At this juncture, a
question arises that since the plaintiff was residing with others, it
came to him or that two to three years thereafter, the plaintiff got
it in lieu of his rendering service as such bhakta. It is not
forthcoming either from oral or documentary evidence that the
service of bhakta was being performed even by any ancestor of
plaintiff and also in the present case when it is not proved that the
plaintiff applied for the settlement as a co-sharer, the principle
that the settlement would ensure to the benefit of all the co-
sharers would not get attracted. It is not the case here that all the
parties had intermediary interests in the said property and after
abolition of the estate the plaintiff having applied for settlement
had got it so done. There is no material to show that as on the date
of vesting of the land for and on behalf of the members of the joint
family, this plaintiff was rendering the service as bhakta being the
eldest son of Haguru. In view of the fact that one Hari Behera has

                              - 19 -
intervened in the meantime by performing the service as bhakta,
enjoying the said property and that it has been so recorded in his
name after the death of Govinda Behera, the maternal grandfather
of the parties, there also stands the real hurdle to say that
Govinda Behera having left rendering the service as bhakta, it is
the plaintiff who stepped in to render the said service for and on
behalf of the legal hairs of Govinda's daughter Hiramani. The fact
also remains that the plaintiff has been continuously discharging
the service as bhakta since the pre-independence period and that
also derives good support from the evidence of D.W.3 who said
that the plaintiff in that family arrangement openly declared that
he was rendering of service as bhakta.
          Next as regards the sale deed Ext. B for a sum of
Rs.2500/-, the transaction is seriously challenged by the plaintiff
as nominal and sham one that too being obtained by defendant
nos.1 and 2 taking advantage of their relationship and by exercise
of undue influence when they were fully in a position to dominate
the will of the mother. The court below has taken said fact into
consideration to hold the said transaction as invalid in the eye of
law. Generally, the consideration of Rs.2500/- as stated according
to the trial court is abysmally low when the property admittedly is
situated within the jurisdiction of urban local body, in the heart of
the town with a pucca building standing thereon. This Court find

                                 - 20 -
no justification so as to be led to take any view to the contrary.
The very case of these defendants as regards such purchase of
that land is very difficult to be accepted in view of their own case.
They say in the year 1953 in the family arrangement where the
parties divided their properties, the bhakta jagir land was given to
the plaintiff. If that is so, there was no reason or occasion for their
mother to again sell any land to these defendant nos.1 and 2. By
relying on sale transaction Ext. B they themselves have gone to
use that as an axe to cut their own legs as regards the case of the
family arrangement and this fact itself when being asserted by
them clearly leads to show that the family arrangement if at all
made was neither acted upon by them nor they did intend to act
upon it and so also their mother, Hiramani.
12.               Adverting to the case of validity of the above sale-
deed besides the factum of valuation, it is seen that admittedly
Hiramani was then staying with defendant nos.1 and 2 with the
admitted relationship as mother and sons and she was then old.
In view of these as per the settled position of law the beneficiary is
shouldered with the strict burden of proof as regards the factum of
due execution of sale-deed that it was with full understanding
about the nature of the document and also its contents with
necessary independent advise and its implication as well. First of
all, in the case when it is said that the mother sold the property to

                               - 21 -
the sons ordinarily suspicion arises as regards payment of
consideration unless it is of course proved that the mother had
certain compelling liabilities to be cleared up and that it was so
immediate that there was no option but to sale the property and
when the sons so found, they were preferred instead of others.
However, no such evidence is forthcoming in the case. The
transaction appears to be unconsciousable on this score that the
land covered under the sale-deed was having the house where they
were staying. So, accepting the sale for a moment, it can be
undeniably said that by the sale-deed the mother put herself in a
great danger of being driven to the street the very next moment of
execution of said sale deed in question, when admittedly no
provision is said as regards her right to stay at least being saved
till her death. In view of that such execution of the sale deed gets
further pushed under thick cloud. At the cost of repetition it may
be stated that the consideration here is also too low.
                 For the aforesaid discussions and reasons, the trial
court’s finding holding this Ext. B to have been obtained by undue
influence and as such is not sustainable in the eye of law and that
no title has flowed by that to the hands of defendant no-1 and 2 in
respect of the said Schedule-B property is found to be unassailable.
13.              The property under Schedule-'C admittedly stood
recorded in the name of maternal grandfather of the plaintiff and

                               - 22 -
the defendant nos. 1 and 2 and it was purchased in the name of
the plaintiff. The contesting defendants claimed that in terms of the
family arrangement the property came to them and it has been so
recorded under Ext. E. Already the case of the defendant no. 1 and
2 as regards the family arrangement has not been found favour
with as to have not been proved in the case by clear evidence.
Therefore, when this recording is consequential to the said family
arrangement though, without any indication about it in the very
document, the case of the defendants as regards the family
arrangement is further pushed into the heap of suspicion and thus,
the property has been rightly held liable for partition.
 14.             In view of above, the question that at last arises for
decision as regards the modification of the share of the parties if
any over Schedule-C, Schedule-D and Schedule-D1 properties in
view of the amendment carried out in Section 6 of the Hindu
Succession Act. In view of the decision rendered in case of Subash
Chandra Panigrahi v. Rajib Lochan Panigrahi & others;
2014(1) CLR 1214 there is no need for going to further address the
matter as regards the applicability of the said amended provision to
the present case for allotment of shares amongst plaintiffs and
defendant nos. 1,2 & 3. In view of that, this Court find that the
plaintiff,  the defendant nos. 1, 2 and 3      are     also entitled to

                                 - 23 -
get 1/4th share each over Schedule-C, D and D1 properties as they
have been allotted in respect of the Schedule-B property.
15.            In the wake of aforesaid, the appeal stands disposed of
with the modification to the extent of shares of the parties over
Schedule C, D and D-1 properties as stated above. The suit is
preliminarily decreed allotting 1/4th share from Schedule-B, C, D
and D1 properties to the plaintiff, defendant no. 1, 2 and 3. The
parties are directed to bear their respective cost all throughout.
                                               …………………………
                                                  D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 25th September, 2014/Narayan


