                   HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                           CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 136 OF 1991
From the judgment dated 26.04.1991 passed by Shri R.C.Patnaik, learned Sessions
Judge, Bolangir in S.C.No. 88 of 1990.
                                                      …….
Debananda Bhoi                                                         ….                        Appellant.
                                                    Versus
State of Orissa                                                   ……                             Respondent
                  For the Appellant                      …         M/s. N.C.Pati, S.K.Swain,
                                                                   B.K.Nayak, A.K.Nanda, A.K.Sahoo,
                                                                   Sanjit.K.Das
                  For the Respondent                     …         Mr. S.K.Nayak,
                                                                   Addl. Government Advocate
                                                   ………
PRESENT:
                            THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D. DASH
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Date of hearing: 27.06.2014                      :             Date of judgment:             25.07.2014
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  The present appeal has been directed against the judgment
of conviction and order of sentence passed by the learned Sessions
Judge, Bolangir in Sessions Case No. 88 of 1990 convicting the appellant
for offence under Section 304(II) IPC and sentencing him to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for two years with payment of fine of Rs. 1000/-
in default to undergo simple imprisonment of three months.
2.                Prosecution case in short is that on 30.06.1990 around
11.00 AM Sarkaru Bhoi had been to his land situated near canal, locally
known as ‘Khaliaduli’. It is stated that appellant had raised ridge over
his land and in doing so,, some earth had got staked on the land of

                                      -2-
Sarkaru. So, Sarkaru asked the appellant for not putting earth on his
land in that way. It is next stated that the appellant suddenly became
angry and chased to assault Sarkaru with a spade. It is alleged that the
appellant dealt a blow with that spade on the back of the head of
Sarkaru resulting his fall. It is said that the appellant fled away from the
spot. Sarkaru was lifted from the place by Nuakhau Behera and others
who carried him first to his house and then to Rampur Police Station
where he lodged a written report of the incident. Police registered the
case on that basis and the investigation commenced. Injured Sarkaru
was taken to Rampur hospital for medical examination and appellant in
the meantime was arrested and released on bail as the offence by then
was one under section 323 IPC. On 05.07.1990 information came to be
received by police that Sarkaru who was being finally treated at Burla
hospital met his death. Accordingly the case got converted to graver
offence and the appellant ultimately being charge-sheeted faced the trial
being charged for offence under section 302 IPC.
            The defence of the appellant is of complete denial that he
never assaulted Sarkaru with spade and that he has been falsely
implicated.
3.          Prosecution has examined 12 witnesses, when no witness
has been examined from the side of the defence. F.I.R. and other
documents have also been admitted in evidence from the side of the
prosecution during trial.

                                    -3-
4.           The trial court on going through the evidence first of all has
gone to answer that Sarkaru met homicidal death. Next on the point of
complicity of the appellant, the court below having analysed and
evaluated the evidence on record has arrived at a finding that the
prosecution has been able to establish the factual aspect of the case that
it is the appellant who had given one blow by spade on the back of the
head of the Sarkaru on the spur of the moment in course of quarrel
without pre-mediation or prior enmity or without any previous ill will.In
view of the above, the trial court has found the appellant guilty for
commission of offence under Section 304(II) IPC and accordingly, the
appellant has been convicted and sentenced as stated above.
5.           Learned counsel for the appellant (amicus curie) submits
that in this case, the appreciation of evidence as done by the trial court
is improper. According to him, the trial court ought not to have relied
upon the evidence of P.W.3 and 4 for fastening the guilt upon the
appellant. He further submits that the trial court has ignored the fact
that the prosecution has adopted pick and choose method in examining
the eye witnesses and only the relation and interested witnesses have
been selected for being examined while leaving others. So according to
him, non-examination of other eye witnesses is fatal to the case of the
prosecution and the version of the case as presented ought not to have
been accepted. He further submits that even accepting the case of
prosecution as laid, the case is one for conviction for offence under

                                    -4-
section 325 IPC and not for offence under Section 302 (II) IPC as done.
In order to butress his submission, he has placed the evidence of P.W. 3
and 4 to the effect that evidence as developed during trial that the blow
as given with the blunt side of the iron portion of the axe is not
believable and it is to be held that the blow was with the handle of the
spade. So the trial court having accepted that by giving a clear finding in
para 9 (nine) of the judgment has erred in the law by going to convict the
appellant for offence under section 304(II) IPC and that is not keeping in
view all other relevant circumstances as those emanate from evidence on
record. Thus, he contends that in the alternative, the appellant may be
held liable for offence under Section 325 IPC and the order of sentence
in that event is also liable to be modified. Last but not the least, he
contends that considering all the relevant factors, even in the event of
confirmation of conviction under Section 304-II IPC, the substantive
sentence if reduced to the period undergone would be just and proper
and would meet thge ends of justice.
6.           Learned counsel for the respondent-State, on the other
hand, supports the finding of the trial court which according to him is
based on proper appreciation of evidence. According to him, the trial
court has taken all the circumstances as those emerge out of the
evidence on record and has accordingly proceeded to appreciate the
evidence of P.W. 3 and 4 as well as the other evidence. He contends that
the finding rendered by the trial court holding the appellant liable for

                                     -5-
offence under section 304(II) IPC is unassailable. According to him, when
P.W. 3 and 4 have deposed in clear terms as regards the role of the
appellant as the assailant, and their evidence is clear, cogent and
trustworthy, the prosecution cannot be blamed for non-examination of
other eye-witnesses as the prosecution is not bound to examine all
witnesses and particularly when their non-examination does not call for
any inference in the absence of any material to suggest even that they
attempted to suppress the truth. He also contends that interestedness or
relationship of witnesses with the deceased itself is no ground to suspect
the evidence of those witnesses and approach those with distrust. So, he
submits that the appeal bears no merit.
7.           Keeping in view all the above submissions, this Court is now
called upon to examine the evidence let in by the prosecution in order to
judge the defensibility of the finding of guilty rendered by the trial court
against the appellant.
             The question first required to be answered is as to whether
Sarkaru has meet homicidal death. He was first treated by the doctor
who has been examined as P.W. 6. It is his evidence that he found two
swellings of 2” diameter on the occipital reason and one abrasion of 1”
diameter over the left zygomatic region. His further evidence is that the
injuries were simple in nature. Ultimately, on Sarkaru’s death, P.W. 9
has conducted the autopsy over the dead body. He has gone to depose
that on dissection he found contusions on scalp on occipital region of

                                      -6-
the size of 4”X3”;   with linear fracture on scalp on right temporal reason
of 2” long with sub-dural      blood clot on the left temporal region and
laceration of brain matter. His further evidence is that all of these
injuries are ante-mortem in nature and sufficient in ordinary cause of
nature to cause death. He has specifically deposed that the death was
homicidal. This evidence marches over the evidence of P.W.6. Absolutely
no challenge is levelled to said evidence by the defence. Therefore,
irresistible conclusion stands that Sarkaru met homicidal death and the
trial court finding on that score is found to be correct.
8.            Now coming to the important point for determination as
regards the complicity of the appellant in causing such death of Sarkaru,
the entire prosecution case as it appears rests on the evidence of two eye
witnesses who are P.W. 3 and 4. P.W. 3 has stated that during noon
hours, when he was going for bath, he heard hullah near the ‘Duli’ of the
appellant and saw the appellant assaulting Sarkaru with a spade with
its blunt side on the back of his head. He has further come forward to
say that the said incident has been seen by Dakhila Bhoi, P.W. 4. It is
his evidence that both of them lifted Sarkaru, took him to the ridge and
carried him to the police station in a basket and then to the hospital,
wherefrom they took him back to his house. This witness was examined
in course of investigation under section 164 Cr.P.C. and said statement
has been marked through this witness as Ext. 4. He is none other than
the nephew of the deceased Sarkaru. This witness appears to have

                                   -7-
withstood the cross-examination successfully. He has further deposed
that the appellant fled away from the scene of occurrence after the blow
and that he had dealt the blow by means of spade on the back of the
head of Sarkaru resulting some swelling. Nothing surfaces in his
evidence so as to discard his version with regard to the fact that he had
witnessed the occurrence and as regards the role played by the present
appellant therein giving blow by means of spade on the head of Sarkaru
on its back. However, his evidence remains on the score that prior to the
dealing of the blow by the appellant and infliction of the injury he had
heard hulla which in commonsense leads to an inference that there was
hot exchange of words between the two.
             Let us now turn attention now to the evidence of P.W. 4. He
has stated that when he at the relevant time was on his land, he saw
that the appellant and Sarakaru were engaged in hurling abuses to each
other and quarrelling. He has further deposed that during the quarrel
the appellant dealt a spade blow with the blunt side on the back of the
head of Sarkaru and then fled away and as a result of the said blow,
Sarkaru fell on the ground. Next, he has gone to depose about his
immediate reaction in going near the place and lifting of Sarkaru with
P.W. 3; carrying him in a basket to the police station. This witness has
also been cross-examined at length and during then he has reiterated to
have seen the assault and again has stated as regards the manner of
assault by the appellant in further clear terms. Both these above

                                     -8-
witnesses, when during trial have deposed that the blow was given on
the blunt side of the spade by the appellant on the head of the deceased
on its back; their earlier version during investigation of course are
otherwise and not to the effect that the blow was given by the appellant
using blunt portion of the spade. It has been proved through P.W. 8, the
Investigating officer who had recorded their statements. But this cannot
be said to be a material discrepancy so as to discard their version all
together as regards their witnessing the incident and more particularly
the role of the appellant therein. Both of them have stated that blow was
given by the appellant with spade on the back of the head of the
deceased. Admittedly, they were not close to Sarkaru and came near on
seeing the assault when respondent took to his heels. Under the
circumstance, it is but natural on their part not to have exactly
witnessed as to which part of the spade ultimately came in contact with
the head and was hit. Such discrepancy thus, here does not appear to be
material one and rather is bound to occur and is very natural.
             True it is there in evidence that there were other eye
witnesses but in the absence of anything being brought out in cross-
examination that these two witnesses examined had any axe to grind
against the appellant, non-examination of other eye witnesses cannot be
said to be fatal to the case of the prosecution in the absence of evidence
to show that it was purposeful and to suppress truth. The relationship of
P.W. 3 also cannot be taken to be the sole ground to discard his

                                     -9-
testimony when it otherwise appears to be natural and no such doubtful
or suspicious circumstance emanate to discredit their evidence to
suspect their version as regards their presence at the relevant time near
the place of occurrence. Therefore, the prosecution case that the
appellant had dealt blow on the back of the head of the deceased has
been established beyond reasonable doubt and also that the blow was
given with the handle of the spade M.O.-I, resulting the ultimate death of
Sarkaru. In view of above, the trial court’s finding of this score is found
to be impregnable.
10.          Next question arises as to whether the trial court was right
in recording the conviction for offence under Section 304(II) IPC or not. It
is there in the evidence as already discussed that in the F.I.R. it finds
mention that quarrel ensued first between the appellant and the
deceased and they remained engaged for sometime in exchanging words
between them. It is also the evidence of P.W. 3 and 4 that the blow was
given by the appellant in course of the said quarrel. The evidence of P.W.
4 is that the blow was given with the blunt portion of the iron of the
spade is not believable and it remains the evidence that the blow was by
means of handle of the spade. It is true that the head injury caused
thereby has ultimately led to the death of the Sarkaru. It has also been
brought out in evidence that after some first aid treatment in the
Rampur PHC, Sarkaru was taken back home and then after 3-4 days he
was taken to Burla hospital. So, there appears that had there been some

                                     - 10 -
promptness in the treatment the death would not have been hastened
but that lack can not be attributed as the sole cause for the death. It is
the evidence that the solitary blow was given and most importantly it is
stated by P.W. 6 that injury was sufficient in ordinary case of nature to
cause deathwhen it also appears in evidence that the blow was given by
means of handle of the spade on vital part. Cumulatively viewing all
these, it can only be said that the appellant has caused the injury with
the knowledge that it is likely to cause death. The submission of learned
counsel for the appellant on this score cannot be countenanced.
Therefore, the finding of the trial court holding appellant guilty of offence
under Section 304(II) IPC is not liable to be interfered with and the same
is hereby affirmed.
11.          In view of above, when the appellant has been held liable for
commission of offence under Section 304(II) IPC, the last submission of
learned counsel for the appellant as regards reduction of term of
substantive sentence needs consideration. The present age of the
appellant is around 45 years and when the incident had taken place, he
was aged about 22 years. It is true that for a long period he is enjoying
liberty when now he must be having his family members as his
dependants who would suffer in the event of his detention and they will
be ruined. These factors put forth by the learned counsel for the
appellant are meant to invite mercy but this Court is disposed to think

                                          - 11 -
that the factual matrix with the conclusion arrived at cannot allow the
rainbow of mercy to magistrate.
                    In that view of the matter, this Court considers it just and
proper to maintain the sentence of rigorous imprisonment for a period of
two years and also the sentence of fine with all other stipulations as
ordained by the trial court. In the wake of aforesaid, the judgment of
conviction and order of sentence are hereby confirmed.
12.                 Resultantly the appeal, being sans merit, stands dismissed.
                                                 …………………………
                                                      D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Date 25 th July 2014/Narayan.


