               HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                           F.A.O. NO. 713 OF 2014
From the order dated 29.11.2014 passed by the learned Civil Judge (Senior
Division), Bhubaneswar in I.A. No. 304 of 2014 arising out of C.S. No. 6727 of
2014.
Bishnupriya Paikaray & anr.                                   ………                        Appellants
                                                               Versus.
Rashmirekha Paikaray.                                         ………                      Respondent
         For Appellants :           M/s.Banshidhar Baug, M.R.Baug,
                                    R.R.Jethi, P.C.P.Das, advocates.
                  ,
         For Respondent:           M/s. S.S.Das, Rajjeet Roy,
                                    S.K.Singh, S.Sourav,
                                    advocates.
                                             ………
PRESENT :
                         THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of hearing : 21.01.2015                        :       Date of judgment: 27.03.2015
                  This appeal has been filed against an order passed by the
learned Civil Judge (Senior Division), Bhubaneswar in I.A. No.304 of
2014 arising out of C.S. No.6727 of 2014 in the matter of petition
under section 39 Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
                  By the said order the court below has passed an order
directing the parties not to change the nature and character of the
suit properties except those under schedule- D which are movables
and maintain status quo in respect of those immovable properties
described in other schedules.

                                  -2-
2.           Facts necessary for disposal of this appeal are as under:-
             The respondent as the plaintiff filed the suit for partition
of the properties described in Schedule-A, A-1, A-2, A-3, A-3(i), B, C
and D properties. She has claimed 1/3rd sharer in all those
properties. The prayer is also for rendition of the account towards
income and expenditure of joint family properties since the time death
of Rabindra Kumar Paikaray, the husband of appellant no.1 and
father of the appellant no.2 and respondent no.2.
             Rabindra Kumar Paikaray died in the year 2007 leaving
behind his widow and two daughters as stated above. The properties
described in schedule-A, A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-3(i) are standing
recorded in his name. The property under schedule-B standing in the
name of appellant no.2 is said to have been acquired by Rabindra
Paikray during his life time. Similarly schedule-C lands standing
recorded in the name of appellant no.2 are said to have been
purchased from out of the joint family income. As already stated the
schedule-D describes movables of the family. It has been pleaded in
the plaint that the appellants being in control of the properties
involved in the suit are misappropriating rent of around `.1,99,000/-
per month, which is derived from out of those properties besides
agricultural income of a sum of `1,30,000/- per month, which is
coming as income from the user of these properties. It is further

                                   -3-
stated that a sum of `2,02,33,600/- received on account of land
acquisition compensation from the year 2010 to 2014 has also been
misappropriated by them and the accounts towards the same has not
been rendered.
             In view of above, the respondent thus being deprived of
her legitimate share and a victim of the misappropriation at the hands
of appellants has filed the suit.
3.           The appellants as the defendants deny the fact that
Schedule-B, C and D properties have been acquired from joint family
funds. It is stated that the plaintiff, who got married in the year 2009
was paid dowry and thus the compensation received on account of
land acquisition was spent for that. It is stated that they are
maintaining themselves from out of the income that they are receiving
from flats by letting out those to different persons. Specifically, it is
stated that Rabindra Kmar Paikaray had incurred family loan and to
meet the expenses in his funeral ceremony loan to the tune of
`30,00,000/- have been taken from the bank over and above some
hand loans. It is stated that schedule B properties are the absolute
properties of defendant no.1 whereas schedule C property is the
absolute property of defendant no.2. Thus, it is stated that the
plaintiff cannot lay any claim in respect of those properties in view of
the provision of section 4 of the Benami Transaction (Protection) Act

                                   -4-
1988. Schedule B is said to be the self acquired properties and
absolute property of defendant no.1 and that schedule C is the
absolute property of defendant no.2. They have denied the plaint
averments with regard to the income from cultivable land through
bhag tenants. However, they admit the receipt of `23,000/- per month
as against the plaint assertions of `44,000/- per month towards the
money earned through schedule A/1 properties. Similarly, it is stated
that `18,000/- per month is earned from Schedule B property and
`60,000/- is being earned per month from schedule A-3(i) properties
against the plaint allegation of `50,000/- and `1,00,000/- respectively.
The income from the schedule D property is denied and 1/3rd share of
the respondents over schedule A, A-1, A-2 and A-3(i) stands admitted.
Importantly enough, despite of the fact that the property under
schedule C is claimed by the defendant no.2 as her own, she has
ultimately expressed her consent for partition of that property with
allotment of 1/3rd share to each. So, admittedly there is no dispute
with regard to the partition of schedule A property and also those
finding mention in schedule C.
4.          The trial court on consideration of rival fact and on going
through the documents as placed has directed the parties not to

                                   -5-
change the nature and character of the suit land and maintain the
status quo of the same except schedule D property till disposal of the
suit.
5.           Learned counsel for the appellants submits that such
order of status quo ought not to have been passed in the case in
respect of the schedule properties. However, without going to the
details of the merit, he confines his submission for grant of
permission to appellant no.1 to sell plot nos. 362 and 363 of Mauza
Paika Nagar and Plot Nos. 1481, 2355, 2370, 5108 of Mauza-
Baramunda from out of the land described in schedule B on any such
terms and conditions as deemed fit and proper since the amount is
badly necessary for the purpose of performing the marriage of
defendant no.2. He submits that though in the order of the trial court
the appellant has not been specifically restrained from alienating any
portion of the suit property, however, when status quo is directed to
be maintained, the appellants so feel it necessary that it be clarified..
             Learned counsel for the respondents vehemently objects
the move in view of the specific submission of the learned counsel for
the appellants.
6.           In view of the above submission, this Court feels not to
enter into the arena of judging the sustainability of the order of status
quo in respect of all the properties other than the plots as indicated in
the aforesaid paragraph-5 as per the submission of the learned

                                   -6-
counsel for the appellants. Admittedly, the said properties are
standing recorded in the name of the appellant no.1 the mother of the
parties. It is the case of the plaintiff-respondent that those were
purchased by their father in the name of their mother and as such it
is claimed to be the property of the father being available for partition
amongst the parties.
              As provided in section 4 of the Benami Transactions
(Prohibition) Act, 1988 no suit, claim or action to enforce any right in
respect of any property held benami against the person in whose
name the property is held or against any other person shall lie by or
on behalf of a person claiming to be real owner of such property. As
provided in section 3 of the Act, the prohibition has been brought that
no person shall enter into any benami transaction. However, sub-
section (2) of the said section 3 creates exception that the property
purchased by any person in the name           of his wife or unmarried
daughter shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, to have
been so purchased for the benefit of the wife or the unmarried
daughter. In other words, such kind of transactions have been kept
out of the purview of benami transaction till proved to the contrary.
The basic element of benami transaction that the property must not
have been purchased for the benefit of the person who is shown as
the purchaser has been slaughtered by such Clause (a) of Sub-section
(2) of section 3 of the Act. The property purchased would be presumed

                                  -7-
to be in order to benefit of the wife or unmarried daughter. Thus, the
initial presumption remains that those are the property of wife or
unmarried daughter as has been purchased it in their name.
7.           The question now vexes as to what facts are required to
be proved to hold to the contrary.
             In my considered view the source of payment of
consideration has no significance because it says that it has been
purchased by the husband in the name of wife or by the father in the
name of unmarried daughter as the case may be. The custody of the
original document is also not a significant factor to be considered
when in spite of the admitted case that the property has been
purchased by the husband or father in the name of wife and
unmarried daughter, the law presumes those to have been purchased
for the benefit of the purchasers, i.e., wife and unmarried daughter.
Similarly, the enjoyment of property with such relationship does not
generally stand for consideration save and except under some
peculiar circumstance. So, it all depends upon the intention behind
such purchase. There cannot be any direct proof of intention. It has to
be gathered from the attending circumstances prevailing shortly prior
to the transaction and thereafter till the dispute; the intention of the
person who has purchased and the intention of the persons in whose
name those have been purchased. In my considered view also the
enjoyment of the property by all the members of the family has got

                                   -8-
very little to do in support of the proof to the contrary as stated in
Clause (a) of Sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act. Most important
factor in the case is the dealing of the property by the persons in
whose name the property has been purchased; that they abandoned
their right from the very beginning as such purchaser and have never
dealt with the property as such and that        they waived their right,
whatsoever, which have to be gathered from their conduct all through.
Also by some act or other or conscious omission leading to strong
inference as regards their expression to have no such exclusive right
over the property so purchased in their name would stand for
consideration and that whenever such occasion has arisen, they have
not stacked their independent claim. All these are mattes of evidence
and only on being       led during trial would stand for appropriate
consideration for a finding in the suit.
7.            Now in view of the statutory presumption, on the basis of
the very case of the respondent as projected in the plaint and
accepting in toto, the property standing in the name of the appellant
nos.1 and 2 are to be viewed as their property to have been purchased
for their benefit even accepting that it was with the money provided by
the father of the respondent and appellant no.2. The finding to the
contrary may only be rendered that it was not to benefit them
ultimately at the end of the suit while rendering the final decision and
not before that. So, prima facie case for the temporary injunction as

                                  -9-
prayed for by the respondent with regard to those items of the
properties described in the plaint cannot be said to be existing in
favour of the respondent. The court below has committed an error of
law to have held so in respect of those properties without being alive
to the provisions of Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 as
discussed above and without any such discussion giving mind to it.
Be that as it may, considering the submission of the learned counsel
for the appellants confining to few plots of lands as indicated, this
Court is led to hold that the prima facie case for temporary injunction
as prayed for by the respondent does not exists only in respect of
those plots of land. Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that
in case appellant no.1 sells those plots of land in order to meet the
immediate marriage expenses of appellant no.2 she has no objection
to place necessary accounts in court and other details of the
transaction, if any. In fact the very legislative intention behind such
statutory presumption as discussed above in my considered opinion
stands for such situations which have prevailed upon for engrafting
the said provision looking at the ground realities that the properties
so purchased shall till contrary is proved, be treated as such which is
for the purpose of safe guarding the interest of such persons in whose
name it is purchased to meet these exigencies.
             For the aforesaid discussion the order impugned in this
appeal needs modification to the extent that the order of status quo as

                                       - 10 -
passed by the court below would no more hold the field and be
operative in respect of the lands described in para 5 of this judgment
further taking into account the submission of learned counsel for the
appellants. Accordingly it is so ordered.
8.                  The appeal thus stands allowed in part to the extent as
indicated above. However, in the facts and circumstances, no order is
passed as to the costs.
                                                   …………………………
                                                        D. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 27th March, 2015/Himansu


