                           HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
                                     CRA No.198 OF 1993
             In the matter of an appeal under section 374(2) of the Cr.P.C. and
     from the judgment dated 31.05.1993 passed by Shri D.K. Sahu,
     Additional Sessions Judge, Sambalpur in S.T. Case No.157/61 of 1992.
                                                  ...
             Rabi Sahu and three others                   ...            Appellants.
                                                   Versus
             State of Orissa                              ...            Respondent
                     For appellants        :       M/S. A.K. Misra, A.R. Sahoo,
                                                          S. Ratho, B.C. Panda,
                                                          advocates.
                     For respondent        :       Mr. P.Ch. Das,
                                                   Additional Standing Counsel.
     PRESENT:
                          THE HON’BLE SHRI JUSTICE D.DASH
      ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Date of hearing and judgment: 28.08.2019
     ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
D.Dash,J             The appellants, by filing this appeal, have questioned the
     judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 31.05.1993 passed by
     the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Sambalpur in S.T. Case No.157/61 of
     1992.
                     The accused persons facing the trial for commission of
     offence under sections 302/324/34 IPC, they have been convicted for
     commission of offence under section 324 IPC and each of them has been
     sentenced to undergo rigours imprisonment for a period of one year.
     2.              The prosecution case in short is that the accused persons are
     related to each other. It is stated that on 1.4.1992 one Manda had been
     murdered by the informant of the present case who has been examined as
     P.W. 1 and her sons namely, Chintamani and Santosh. Said Manda is the
     wife of the brother of the husband of the informant. Manda and the family
     of P.W.1 had dispute in relation to land. It is alleged that on the date
     when the deadbody of the Manda was lying, these accused persons being

                                       2
armed with lathi and gainti came to the house of the informant. Then they
mercilessly attacked Santosh son of P.W. 1, which led to his death. P.W. 1
when protested she was also assaulted by the accused persons and
sustained injuries. The report being given by P.W.1 at Rairakhol Police
Station, P.S. Case No. 27 of 1992 was registered. Investigation being
completed, the accused persons were finally put to trial for commission of
offence under sections 302/324/34 IPC.
3.            The defence is one of complete denial. It is the plea of accused
Debadhi that they had gone to bring the deadbody of Manda which was
lying near the brick kiln and at that time, there was scuffle between him
and Santosh who was then holding a gainti. During that scuffle deceased
fell down and had sustained injury.
4.            In the trial, the prosecution in total has examined ten
witnesses. It has also proved the FIR (Ext.11), inquest report (Ext.1), post
mortem report of deceased Santosh (Ext.5) and the injury report of P.W.1
(Ext.6). The prosecution has also proved some other documents as such
seizure list , report of the chemical examiner, spot map etc.
              The trial court on examination of evidence on record and
upon their evaluation has found all the accused persons guilty for
commission of offence under sections 324/34 IPC for having assaulted
the deceased and P.W.1.
5.            Learned counsel for the appellants (accused persons), from
the very beginning, instead of questioning the merit of the finding of guilt
recorded against the accused persons for commission of offence under
section 324 IPC, confines his submission to the order of sentence. It is
submitted that accused Debadhi has already undergone the period of
sentence as has been imposed by the trial court for his conviction for
offence under section 324 IPC. He further submits that other accused
persons namely, Rabi and Suramani have remained in custody for near
about two months whereas accused Kambhu has remained in custody for
near about six months. It is his submission that accused Rabi is now
aged about 67 years and the present age of accused Suramani and

                                        3
Kambhu are around fifty. He submits that the accused persons are now
living their family and the members of the family are dependent upon the
income of the accused persons.
              In view of all the above, when the incident does not appear to
have been the outcome of any prior planning and had taken all of a
sudden, he urges for appropriate modification of the order of sentence.
According to him, direction to the accused persons to undergo the
remaining period of custodial sentence, now would not be in the interest
of justice.
6.            Mr. P.Ch. Das, learned Addl. Standing Counsel submits that
in the facts and circumstances of the case, the trial court’s order of
sentence for the conviction of the accused persons for offence under
sections 324/34 IPC is just and proper.
7.            In view of the submission of the learned counsel for the
appellants (accused persons), this Court does not feel the necessity to
enter in to the arena of judging the sustainability of the finding of
conviction of the accused persons for offence under section 324 IPC.
       Coming to address the above submission on the question of
sentence, it is seen that the incident dates back 1.4.1992 and in the
meantime, there has been lapse of more than 27 years. When accused
Rabi is over the age of sixty, other accused persons have cross their fifty.
Accused Debadhi appears to have served out the entire period of sentence
as has been imposed by the trial court. Other accused persons have
remained in custody for quite some time i.e. Kambhu for about 6 months
whereas the rest for two months or so. They all come from rural
background and depend upon cultivation for their livelihood without
having any other source of income. No report is forthcoming to show that
during all these period when they have been enjoying the liberty, they
have misused the same by indulging in any criminal activity. It is not
stated that they have any criminal track record. The incident was not with
any prior planning but after the members of the prosecution party had
indulged in criminal activities. They have undergone mental agony in

                                        4
defending themselves for more than 27 years by now and have no such
criminal track record.
                Cumulatively viewing all those factors, in my considered view,
the interest of justice would be met if the custodial sentence imposed
upon the accused persons is reduced to the period already undergone and
they are further sentenced to pay fine of Rs.1,000/- (Rupees one
thousand) each with the default stipulation that in case of non-payment,
they would undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of two months.
8.              With the aforesaid, while confirming the judgment of
conviction passed by the trial court for committing offence under sections
324/34 I.P.C; this appeal stands disposed of with the modification of the
order of sentence to the extent as indicated herein above.
                The LCR be sent back immediately.
                                                        …………………….
                                                           D.Dash,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 28th day of August, 2019/Aks.


