                           HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                                      JCRLA No.5 of 2016
    From the judgment dated 05.10.2010 passed by Smt. Dipti Mohapatra,
    Chief Judicial Magistrate-cum-Assistant Sessions Judge, Khurda Circuit at
    Bhubaneswar in S.T.Case No.33/84 of 2010.
                                              --------
    Siba Behera                                          ………                Appellant
                                              Versus
    State of Orissa                                      ………               Respondent
           For Appellant             : M/s.Biswajit Nayak, B.R.Sahu
                                           S.Samal and D.K.Pattnaik
           For Respondent            : Mr.J.P.Patra
                                       (Additional Standing Counsel)
                                     ………
    PRESENT:
                       THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE D.P.CHOUDHURY
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                        Date of hearing and judgment:14.10.2017
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Dr.D.P.Choudhury, J.          The     appellant,    having     been    convicted     for
    commission of offence under Section 376(2)(f) of the Indian Penal Code,
    1860 (in short “the IPC”) on 05.10.2010 and sentenced to undergo R.I. for
    ten years and to pay a fine of Rs.20,000/- in default to undergo R.I. for
    one year with a further direction to set off the U.T.P period already
    undergone, has preferred this appeal from jail.
    2.           The factual matrix leading to the case of prosecution is that on
    15.11.2009 at about 2.00 PM, while the father and mother of the victim
    girl, who is aged about 5 years, had been to their work, the appellant
    entered the house of the informant and after removing the dress of the
    victim girl, committed sexual intercourse with her forcibly. When she cried,
    the appellant left the house. The parents of the victim girl came back at

                                     -2-
about 2.30 PM and the victim narrated the incident to them. Thereafter,
the father of the victim girl searched for the appellant and finally informed
the police. During investigation by the police, witnesses were examined,
wearing apparels of the victim girls were seized. The police sent the victim
girl and the appellant for their medical examination. Police also sent the
seized property for chemical examination and after completion of the
investigation, charge sheet was submitted.
3.          The plea of the defence is complete denial to his complicity
with the commission of offence and he pleaded innocence.
4.          Learned trial Court, after examining ten witnesses and relying
on the documents exhibited by the prosecution, found the appellant guilty
and convicted him under erstwhile provisions of Section 376(2)(f) of the
IPC with a further direction to undergo R.I. for ten years for that offence
and to pay a fine of Rs.20,000/- in default to undergo further R.I. for one
year. The defence examined none.
5.          Mr.Nayak, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
there are lot of contradictions between the statement of P.Ws.1, 4 and
other witnesses about the occurrence narrated by the victim girl before
them. Most of the witnesses are relatives of the victim girl for which their
evidence should not be relied upon to arrive at a conclusion. According to
him, the medical evidence of the doctor only shows about two abrasions on
the person of the victim girl but the doctor has opined that they are
possible by fall on a surface. Since the medical evidence is not clear
enough to prove the rape committed by the appellant, the same should not
be relied upon to base conviction. Further, he submitted that the chemical

                                     -3-
examination report has not been proved by the prosecution although it is
alleged that the Panty of the victim girl contains the stain. Since there are
so many departures in the prosecution evidence, the case of the
prosecution should not be relied on to record conviction. As such, he prays
to acquit the present appellant by allowing the JCRLA.
6.           Mr.Patra, learned Additional Standing Counsel for the State
submits that the victim girl is only aged about 5 years and in her
examination, she has categorically narrated the occurrence of rape
committed by the present appellant. He further submits that the doctor has
opined that the injuries on the private part of the victim girl are possible
when there is any attempt to commit rape. According to him, since it is a
sexual intercourse committed upon a child, the relatives can only speak
about the truth and there is no bar in law to discard the statement of the
relatives if they are found to be reliable after proper scrutiny. He again
submits that contradictions hither and thither are bound to occur but
cannot be taken as a basis to reject the well proved case of the
prosecution. So, he fully supports the judgment of the learned trial Court
and prays to confirm the sentence passed by dismissing the JCRLA.
7.           DISCUSSIONS
             In the case of State of Punjab –V- Gurmit Singh; (1996) 2
SCC 384, Hon’ble Supreme Court, at paragraph-8 of the judgment, have
held in the following manner:-
             "............The courts   must,    while   evaluating
             evidence, remain alive to the fact that in a case of
             rape, no self-respecting woman would come forward
             in a court just to make a humiliating statement
             against her honour such as is involved in the
             commission of rape on her. In cases involving sexual

                           -4-
molestation, supposed considerations which have no
material effect on the veracity of the prosecution
case or even discrepancies in the statement of the
prosecutrix should not, unless the discrepancies are
such which are of fatal nature, be allowed to throw
out an otherwise reliable prosecution case. The
inherent bashfulness of the females and the
tendency to conceal outrage of sexual aggression are
factors which the courts should not overlook. The
testimony of the victim in such cases is vital and
unless there are compelling reasons which
necessitate looking for corroboration of her
statement, the courts should find no difficulty to act
on the testimony of a victim of sexual assault alone
to convict an accused where her testimony inspires
confidence and is found to be reliable. Seeking
corroboration of her statement before relying upon
the same, as a rule, in such cases amounts to adding
insult to injury. Why should the evidence of a girl or
a woman who complains of rape or sexual
molestation, be viewed with doubt, disbelief or
suspicion? The court while appreciating the evidence
of a prosecutrix may look for some assurance of her
statement to satisfy its judicial conscience, since she
is a witness who is interested in the outcome of the
charge leveled by her, but there is no requirement of
law to insist upon corroboration of her statement to
base conviction of an accused. The evidence of a
victim of sexual assault stands almost on a par with
the evidence of an injured witness and to an extent
is even more reliable. Just as a witness who has
sustained some injury in the occurrence, which is not
found to be self-inflicted, is considered to be a good
witness in the sense that he is least likely to shield
the real culprit, the evidence of a victim of a sexual
offence is entitled to great weight, absence of
corroboration       notwithstanding.      Corroborative
evidence is not an imperative component of judicial
credence in every case of rape. Corroboration as a
condition for judicial reliance on the testimony of the
prosecutrix is not a requirement of law but a
guidance of prudence under given circumstances. It
must not be overlooked that a woman or a girl
subjected to sexual assault is not an accomplice to
the crime but is a victim of another person's lust and
it is improper and undesirable to test her evidence
with a certain amount of suspicion, treating her as if
she were an accomplice. Inferences have to be
drawn from a given set of facts and circumstances
with realistic diversity and not dead uniformity lest

                                       -5-
             that type of rigidity in the shape of rule of law is
             introduced through a new form of testimonial
             tyranny making justice a casualty. Courts cannot
             cling to a fossil formula and insist upon corroboration
             even if, taken as a whole, the case spoken of by the
             victim of sex crime strikes the judicial mind as
             probable...............".
8.           Keeping in mind the above proposition of law decided by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, let the evidence available on record be discussed.
On going through the materials available on record, it appears that out of
ten witnesses, P.W.5 is the victim girl. It appears that the trial Court, for
observing Section 118 of the Evidence Act, posed some questions to the
victim girl and found that she understood the same and accordingly gave
answer of the same. After satisfying about her competency to depose, her
statement was recorded. According to her statement, the appellant
dragged her to the roof and after removing her Chadi (Panty), made
attempt to commit sexual intercourse with her and she got pain. Then the
appellant left the place. When her mother came, she narrated the incident
to her. She stated to have got pain while urinating. She has been cross-
examined vividly and during her cross-examination, she also stated that
the appellant told her not to shout which shows that the appellant had also
intimidated the victim girl, who is aged about 5 years. In her cross-
examination, she fully narrated about the details of occurrence by stating
that the appellant, after taking her to the roof and removing her Chadi
(Panty), put his male organ on her private part. She also shows the
gesture of sexual offence as recorded by the trial Court. Even if she is a
child, but the evidence of child is quite clear, consistent and cogent to
prove the sexual intercourse made by the appellant. It is well settled in law

                                       -6-
that if the evidence of a victim girl, even if a child, is found to be above the
approach and convincing, there is no bar to base conviction on such
statement of the child without being any corroboration sought for from any
other evidence, However, for abundant caution, there is no bar to read
other evidence adduced by the prosecution. Her evidence does not disclose
to have been tutored as in cross-examination her testimony also remained
unshaken.
8.           P.W.4 is the mother of the victim girl (P.W.5). Her statement
shows that after return from work, she found P.W.5 was crying and
complaining pain in her private part. On query, she narrated the incident to
her. She has also been cross-examined, but nothing is found out in her
cross-examination to discard her testimony. The statement of the father of
the victim (P.W.1), who is the informant of the case, shows that after he
returns to the house, P.W.4 narrated the incident to him. They went to the
police station and lodged the FIR. There is nothing revealed from his cross-
examination that he has got any enmity with the appellant although he has
been grilled during cross-examination. The statement of P.W.2, who is the
grandmother of the victim also corroborates the statements of P.Ws.1 and
P.W.4 to the extent that the victim has narrated the incident in her
presence also. The statement of P.W.6, a relative of the victim girl shows
that he has learnt about the occurrence from the father of the victim.
9.           The most crucial witness, in this case, is the doctor (P.W.7),
who stated that he has found two abrasions on her private part of size 1
cm. X 0.5 cm on left side labia majora towards lower end of inner aspect
and another abrasion of size 1 cm X 0.05 cm on right side of labia majora

                                     -7-
towards lower end of inner aspect. He also proved the report vide Ext.7. He
also proved the report of the radiologist, who found the age of the child
would be 2 to 4 years. He further stated that the abrasion as per opinion
No.1 (Ext.7) may be possible if there was any attempt of rape. In his
cross-examination, he stated that injuries as per opinion No.1 can be
possible on the part of the victim if she falls on rough surface and also in
case of itching. The case of the defence has not been suggested as such to
any of the prosecution witnesses including the victim that the injuries are
possible by fall on any rough surface or itching. However, the evidence of
the doctor cannot be wiped out so far as the injuries as found by him on
the genital part of the victim are possible by partial penetration, which
absolutely corroborates victim as to the manner of sexual assault by the
appellant upon the victim girl. The doctor’s opinion is enough to show that
the appellant had committed rape by partial penetration although sexual
intercourse is not completed as victim is only child of 2 to 4 years old
having no proper development of female genetalia. As per Modi’s Medical
Jurisprudence and Toxicology, in small children, hymen, being situated
high up in the canal, is not usually ruptured, but may become red and
congested along with the inflammation and bruising of the labia. In the
case of Aman Kumar –V- State of Haryana; AIR 2004 SC 1497, it is
observed that partial penetration within the labia majora of the vulva or
pudendum with or without emission of semen is sufficient to constitute the
offence of rape.
10.          The evidence of P.Ws.8 and 10 are clear to show that they
have seized the wearing apparels of the victim girl and sent the same for

                                        -8-
chemical examination. But prosecution has not produced the chemical
examination report. Learned trial Court also has not called for the said
report. It is not only the duty of the prosecution to produce the chemical
examination report but also heavy duty is cast on the trial Court to ensure
the report of the chemical examiner is accompanied with the record while
either committed or submitted with final form. Even during trial, the Court
should not forget to call for chemical examination report as it also unveils
the truth where the case is based on circumstantial evidence or case is
based on direct evidence where a doubt is raised in the mind of the Court
as to complicity of a culprit. However, in the case at hand, there are
enough material to find out the truth in the allegations of the prosecution,
non-submission of the chemical examination report, cannot stand as a bar
for the prosecution to prove its case.
11.          In view of the aforesaid analysis, the prosecution has well
proved the offence under Section 376 (2)(f) of the IPC by clear and cogent
evidence and no evidence has been adduced by the defence to prove his
innocence. As per ingredients of Section 376(2)(f) of the IPC before
amendment in 2013, there must be rape and secondly the victim girl must
be below 12 years old.
12.          It is well settled in law that any attempt to commit rape in such
circumstances amounts to penetration, which is otherwise complete offence
under Section 376(2)(f) of the IPC. Hence, the conviction recorded by the
trial Court under Section 376(2)(f) of IPC cannot be said to be faulted with.
After going through the judgment and order of conviction passed by the
trial Court, nothing is found to depart from the conclusion arrived at by the

                                    -9-
Special Judge. Moreover, it is well settled in law that the Court should not
award any sentence below the minimum prescribed. As such, since
minimum ten years sentence is prescribed as minimum sentence for the
offence under Section 376(2)(f) of IPC, this Court does not find any ground
to interfere in the impugned judgment. Thus, the Court hereby confirm the
order of conviction and sentence passed by the learned trial Court.
              In the result, the JCRLA, being devoid of merit, stands
dismissed.
                                                 …………………………
                                                 Dr.D.P.Choudhury,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 14th October, 2017/Nayak


