                                                   1
                    THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
                                    W.P.(C) No.10160 of 2015
             In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
             Constitution of India.
                                            ---------------
             State of Orissa & others                 …                 Petitioners
                                                 -Versus-
             Birendra Nath Sethi & others             …                 Opp. Parties
                           For Petitioners     : Mr. M. Sahoo
                                                  Additional Government Advocate
                           For Opp. Parties    : M/s. A.N. Pattanayak & N. Das
             PRESENT:
                       THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE INDRAJIT MAHANTY
                                                   &
                         THE HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE D.P. CHOUDHURY
             ________________________________________________________
                 Date of hearing: 03.05.2016           Date of Judgment: 21.06.2016
             ________________________________________________________
Dr. D.P. Choudhury, J.     The captioned writ petition came to be filed challenging
             the legality and validity of the order dated 18.8.2014 passed by the
             learned Orissa Administrative Tribunal, Bhubaneswar (in short ‘the
             Tribunal’) in O.A. No.723 of 2013.
             FACTS
             2.            The factual matrix leading to the case of the petitioners is
             that the petitioners are the authorities in employment of opposite
             party No.1 and opposite party No.3. Opposite party No.1 is member of
             the Scheduled Caste community pursuant to the recruitment of

                                     2
Inspector of Commercial Tax (in short ‘ICT’) presently re-designated as
Assistant Commercial Tax Officer (in short ‘ACTO’). In the recruitment
process opposite party No.1 was selected and joined the service on
19.8.1987 as ICT in the district of Bolangir. Later on he was promoted
to Orissa Accounts of Taxation Service in the year 2013 and joined as
Sub-Treasury Officer in Nilagiri.
3.           It is stated that Orissa Finance Service Rules 1979 (in
short “the Rules 1979”) governs the promotion to the post of Orissa
Finance Service Class-II and subsequent promotions thereon. On the
other hand, Rule 3 (1)(b) of the Rules provides for recruitment to the
Orissa Finance Service Class-II. The provision of Rule 6 deals with
recruitment by promotion to OFS Service Class-II.           As per the
provisions contained in Rule 15 (2) of the Orissa Subordinate Finance
(Commercial Tax Branch) Rules, 1988 (hereinabove called “Rules
1988”), all persons appointed to the service shall, unless specifically
exempted by the Government, be required to pass departmental
examination as per the syllabus. In the instant case, it is the case of
the petitioners that the opposite party No.1 was promoted to the cadre
of OFS Class-II which was re-designated as OFS Group-A (Junior
Branch) with effect from 18.4.2007 under the Rules, 1979.
4.           It is alleged, inter alia, that opposite party No.1 in the
Departmental Examination has passed Paper-I (Law) and Paper-II
(Marwari language) as revealed from his Service Book. But opposite
party No.1 has neither attempted to appear in the Departmental

                                    3
Examination in Paper-II (Oriya) nor submitted any representation
requesting the competent authority for exempting him from passing of
the Departmental Examination in Oriya till 21.10.2010 in spite of
issuance of letter dated 22.10.2003. But opposite party No.1 had
applied for exemption from passing the Oriya vide his application
dated 21.1.2010. The Finance Department exempted opposite party
No.1 from appearing in Paper-II (Oriya) on 17.4.2010. It is stated in
the petition that in 2006 for promotion of the eligible candidates to
OFS Class-II, the Commissioner of Commercial Tax was requested by
the Finance Department to furnish the CCRs and Gradation List of
ACTOs (photocopies of the CCRs and Gradation List of ACTOs) and the
departmental proceedings/vigilance case, if any, vide Government
letter dated 21.12.2006. On 9.2.2007 the selection board meeting was
held for filling up of 34 posts in OFS Class-II by way of promotion.
Since   the    opposite party   No.1   had  not  passed   Departmental
Examination as required under Rule 6 of the Rules 1979, he was found
to be ineligible to consider him for promotion to OFS Class-II on the
ground of not passing Departmental Examination in Oriya. So, the
selection board justifiably did not allow the promotion of the opposite
party No.1 to OFS Class-II.
5.             Being aggrieved by the action of the petitioners, the
opposite party No.1 approached the Tribunal and the Tribunal after
hearing both the parties allowed the Original Application of opposite
party No.1 who was petitioner in O.A. No.723 of 2013. The opposite

                                     4
party No.1 was allowed with all consequential financial service benefits
including retiral benefits. Being aggrieved by the order which is
otherwise illegal and invalid, the present petition is filed by the
petitioners.
SUBMISSIONS
6.            Mr. M. Sahoo, learned Additional Government Advocate
appearing for the State submitted that the order of the Tribunal is
illegal and not passed order according to the facts of the case. Learned
Tribunal erred in law by not appreciating the fact that on the date of
DPC the opposite party No.1 had not passed the Departmental
Examination in Oriya Paper-II. The order of the learned Tribunal is also
erroneous because the Tribunal has exceeded its jurisdiction by
allowing the reliefs to the opposite party No.1 beyond the prayers
made in the petition. According to him the decision of the learned
Tribunal also suffers from gross illegality and irregularity for the reason
that the opposite party No.1 has not passed the Departmental
Examination on the date when DPC was convened. Learned Tribunal
has also committed error in law by granting final pension to the
opposite party No.1 without considering the scope and ambit of Rule 7
(2)(b) (ii) of the OCS (Pension) Rules with their proper perspective. It
is also contended by Mr. Sahoo that the order of the Tribunal is
unreasonable and is passed on non-consideration of material facts on
record for which the same should be set aside by interfering with such
order.

                                   5
7.            Mr. A.N. Pattanayak, learned counsel for the opposite
party No.1 submitted that the contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioners is misconceived and suffers from correct presentation of
facts inasmuch as the opposite party No.1 while entered the service
has already passed Oriya for which he was admittedly exempted from
passing the Departmental Examination in Oriya in 2010. He further
submitted that on 9.12.2003 a Gradation List was published placing
the present opposite party No.1 at Sl. No.97 and present opposite
party No.3 at Sl. No.125. On 22.10.2003 petitioner No.2 asked the
opposite party No.1 to submit his H.S.C. pass Certificate for exemption
in Departmental Examination in Paper-II (Oriya). It is submitted that
on 11.12.2003 the       opposite party No.1 sent his       Matriculation
Certificate to the petitioner No.2 showing proof of passing of Oriya
language in High School standard for exempting from appearing
departmental examination in Oriya. On 7.5.2004 petitioner No.2 asked
opposite party No.1 to submit original Matriculation Certificate. On
10.2.2010 on the documents submitted by the opposite party No.1 and
same being forwarded by the petitioner No.2, the Finance Department,
Bhubaneswar exempted the opposite party No.1 from appearing
Departmental language test in Oriya. So, it is submitted by the learned
counsel for the opposite party No.1 that non-consideration of the case
of opposite party no.1 by the DPC convened in 2007 was erroneous
and illegal because the documents filed by present petitioners before
the Tribunal show that during 2003 the opposite party No.1 has

                                       6
submitted     to    his authorities   to  exempt    him   from  appearing
Departmental Examination in Oriya language which was received in
2004. Thus, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the opposite
party No.1 that since the opposite party No.1 has been illegally
deprived of giving promotion, the Tribunal has correctly appreciated
the facts and passed the order in favour of the opposite party No.1.
Hence, it is submitted to reject the writ petition.
8. The points for consideration:-
(i)     Whether the opposite party No.1 has got requisite qualification
to be promoted to OFS Class II on the date the DPC was convened.
(ii)    Whether the order of the Tribunal is wrong and misconceived.
DISCUSSIONS
POINT NO.(i) :
9.             It is admitted fact that the opposite party No.1 entered to
service as Inspector of Commercial Tax on 19.8.1987. It is also
admitted fact that under the Rules 1979 there are four cadres of the
Orissa Finance Service which are follows:-
(i) Orissa Financial Service Class II
(ii) Orissa Finance Service Class I (Junior Branch)
(iii) Orissa Finance Service Class I (Senior Branch)
(iv) Orissa Finance Service in Supertime scale of pay
               It is also admitted fact that there is provision for
promotion to OFS Class-II (re-designated as OFS Group-A (Junior). It
is undisputed fact that DPC was convened on 9.1.2007 when the

                                     7
promotion to OFS Class-II from amongst the cadre of opposite party
No.1 to the post of OFS Class-II was considered and opposite party
No.1 was not given promotion whereas opposite party No.3 was
promoted.
10.           It is revealed from the copy of the original Service Book of
opposite party No.1 that the opposite party No.1 has passed bachelor
of Arts and entered into service as ICT having joined the same on
forenoon of 19.8.1987.
              Rule 2 of the Orissa Finance Service Rules, 1979
prescribes hereunder:-
     “2.   Definitions- In these rules unless the context otherwise
          requires-
     (a)    “Commission” means the Orissa Public Service
            Commission;
     (b)     “Government” means the Government of Orissa;
     (c)     “Service” means the Orissa Finance Service consisting
            of following cadres, namely
            i) Orissa Financial Service Class II
            (ii) Orissa Finance Service Class I (Junior Branch)
            (iii) Orissa Finance Service Class I (Senior Branch)
            (iv) Orissa Finance Service in Super time scale of pay
     (d)    “Subordinate Finance Service” means Orissa
            Subordinate Finance Service’
     (e)    “Year” means financial year.”
              Rule 3 (1)(b) of the Orissa Finance Service Rules, 1979
speaks as follows:-
            “(b) by promotion from among members of the Orissa
            Subordinate Finance Service in accordance with Rule 6;
            and”
              Rule 6 of the aforesaid Rules speaks as follows:-
            “6. Recruitment by promotion to Orissa Finance
            Service Class II- No member of the Orissa Subordinate
            Finance Service shall ordinarily be eligible for promotion to

                                      8
             Orissa Finance Service Class II under Clause (b) of Rule
             3(1) unless-
           (i) he has worked for at least five years in the said service;
           (ii) he has passed the prescribed departmental examination,
                 if any”
11.            In view of the aforesaid provisions, an officer of the Orissa
Subordinate Finance Service can be promoted to OFS Class-II provided
he has worked for at least five years in the said service and has
passed the prescribed Departmental Examination. Learned Additional
Government Advocate drew our attention to the letter dated 17.4.2010
where the State Government in Finance Department exempted the
opposite party No.1 from appearing in paper-II (Oriya) but the DPC
was convened on 9.1.2007 for which the opposite party No.1 was
ineligible for promotion.
12.            Learned counsel for the opposite party No.1 contended
that the opposite party No.1 had already passed H.S.C. in Oriya
language while he entered to service. The Orissa Subordinate Finance
Service Rules, 1951 was repealed in 1988 with the name and style The
Orissa    Subordinate     Finance   Service   (Commercial     Tax   Branch)
Recruitment and Conditions of Service Rules, 1988 and the same was
published on 28.3.1988 in Orissa Gazette.         Rule 19 of Rules 1988
specifically stated that any rules, instructions or orders corresponding
to these rules and in force immediately before the commencement of
these rules relation to method of recruitment etc., to the post
Inspector are hereby repealed. Also there is a proviso to the effect that
save as otherwise provided in these rules anything done or any order

                                    9
made or action taken under the rules, instructions or orders so
repealed shall be deemed to have been done, made or taken under
the corresponding provisions of these rules. Since opposite party No.1
got appointment in 1987, he was governed by Rules 1951. In the
Rules 1951 there was no provision for passing of Oriya in the M.E.
standard in the Departmental Examination whereas Rule 15 (2) of
Rules 1988 prescribes for Departmental Examination and note to the
Appendix under such Rules shows that an officer may be exempted
from passing the departmental examination in Oriya or Marwari on
producing a certificate to the effect that he has passed in language at
the High School Certificate Examination or such other examination as
in the opinion of Government is equal or superior to it. The copy of
Service Book of opposite party No.1 shows that he has passed the First
Half yearly Departmental Examination for the year 1988 held on
18.9.1988 in Paper-I (Law, Book keeping and Accounts) and Paper-II
language (Marwari) vide office order No.88620/CT dated 23.12.88. Not
only this but also it appears that vide Annexure-1 on 9.12.2003 there
was a Gradation List of Inspector of Commercial Taxes whereunder at
Sl. No.97 the name of the opposite party No.1 finds place. It is also
clear that the Departmental Examination consists of Paper-I (Law) and
Paper-II languages where Oriya and Marwari have also been included.
Opposite party No.1 has passed Departmental Examination containing
Paper-I and Paper-II as per the certification made in the Service Book.
It is admitted fact that he has passed Matriculation in mother language

                                    10
Oriya vide Annexure-A filed before the Tribunal. Apart from this, it is
revealed from the impugned order and copies of documents filed
before the Tribunal show that in 2003 the opposite party No.1 has
submitted Matriculation Certificate indicating proof of passing of Oriya
and that has also been sent to the office of the Commissioner in 2004
by the Commercial Tax Officer, Jajpur Road vide letter No.434 dated
6.2.2004    for   exempting  him   from    appearing  in  the  qualifying
examination. When the copy of Certificate has already been submitted
by the opposite party No.1 to the next superior authority, the question
of non-consideration of his promotion to OFS Class-II is surely travesty
of justice and is one of the example of depriving the opposite party
No.1 from receiving his entitlement of promotion under Rules, 1979.
Thus, we hereby observe that on 9.1.2007 when the DPC was held
opposite party No.1 has got requisite qualification for his promotion to
OFS Class-II under Rules, 1979. Point No.(i) is answered accordingly.
POINT NO.(ii)
13.           The relevant portion of the impugned order of the Tribunal
is as follows:-
           After hearing the learned counsel for both sides, I
           note that the applicant has passed the HSC
           examination in Odia medium with M.I.L.(Odia) as a
           subject in September 1975 and he should have been
           exempted     from     passing     the    Departmental
           Examination in P-II Odia language on the ground of
           clearing HSC Examination with M.I.L.(Odia) as a
           subject in Odia medium and his case should have
           been considered in the DPC meeting held on
           09.01.2007 based on which recommendation his

                                   11
          junior, Respondent     No.4  got   the   promotion  on
          18.04.2007.
                    Accordingly, I direct Respondent No.1 to
          consider and issue appropriate order for promotion of
          the applicant to the cadre of OFS Class-II (which has
          been redesignated as OFS Group-A (Junior) with effect
          from 18.04.2007, the date on which his junior
          Respondent No.4 got such promotion and he be given
          all consequential service and financial benefits.
              We have already observed that opposite party No.1 has
already passed Departmental Examination under Rule 15 (2) of Rules
1988 for which he is eligible for promotion to OFS Class-II under Rule
6 of Rules 1979. So, opposite party No.1 is entitled to get promotion
from the date his junior got promotion. So, relevant impugned order is
correct and cannot be said to be wrong. Point No.(ii) is answered
accordingly.
CONCLUSION
14.           We have already observed in the aforesaid paragraphs
that opposite party No.1 has got requisite qualification for his
promotion under Rule 6 of the Rules, 1979 to the post          of  OFS
Class-II. Moreover, we have observed in the aforesaid paragraphs that
on the date of DPC, opposite party No.1 has already passed H.S.C.
Examination in Oriya medium and mere exemption issued by the State
Government latter in spite of submission of Certificate by the opposite
party No.1 much before the DPC held, such delay cannot take away
the right of the opposite party No.1 from his consideration for
promotion to the post of OFS Class-II. When the petitioners are at

                                        12
     fault in not considering the case of the opposite party No.1, the
     opposite party No.1 cannot be allowed to suffer for none of his fault.
     On the other hand, the Tribunal has rightly analyzed the case in the
     aforesaid paragraphs and allowed the opposite party No.1 for his
     promotion to the cadre of OFS Class-II (which was re-designated as
     Group-A cadre) with effect from 18.4.2007 on which date his junior
     opposite party No.3 has got promotion and all such consequential
     service and financial benefits should be made available to the opposite
     party No.1. Besides this we are of the view that ignoring the case of
     the opposite party No.1, has not only deprived to get justice but also
     his fundamental right under Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution
     of India has been seriously violated. Hence, there is no infirmity in the
     impugned order and we find no error in the finding of the learned
     Tribunal. As such the writ petition being devoid of merit stands
     dismissed.
                                                  …………………………….
                                                  Dr. D.P. Choudhury, J.
I. Mahanty, J.    I agree.
                                                  …………………………….
                                                      I. Mahanty, J.
     ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
     Dated 21st June, 2016/Kar


