          IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK.
                        W.P.(C) No. 6118 OF 2016
       An application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
       Constitution of India.
                                -----------------
       Lakshman Kumar Singh and another ..…                  Petitioners
                                   -Versus-
       The District & Sessions Judge, Bhadrak
       and another                               ………         Opp. parties
           For Petitioners      -       M/s. B.S. Tripathy, M.K. Rath
                                               and J. Pati
           For Opp. parties      -      Mr. B. Bhuyan,
                                       Addl. Government Advocate
                                   -------------
       P R E S E N T :-
       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE INDRAJIT MAHANTY
                                       AND
         THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE D.P. CHOUDHURY
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Date of Argument-11.05.2016 : Date of Judgment- 21.06.2016
   -------------------------------------------------------------------
DR. D.P. CHOUDHURY, J.             Challenge has been made to the
       inaction of the opp. Parties in not giving employment to
       the petitioners in spite of their selection to the posts
       applied for.

                                   2
FACTS :
2.             The factual matrix leading to the case of the
petitioners      is   that    opp.    Party   no.1    issued   an
advertisement bearing No.1/13 dated 8.5.2013 inviting
applications from the eligible and intending candidates
for filling up of 15 posts of Junior Clerk-cum-Copyist in
the    Judgeship      of   Bhadrak     vide   Annexure-1.    The
petitioners      being    eligible   for   the   criteria,  made
applications and accordingly they were found selected as
per the merit list prepared for Junior Clerk-cum-Typist
vide     office   order    No.191     dated    14.06.2014    vide
Annexure-2. The petitioners found their place at sl.
Nos.12 and 17 respectively in the merit list. Although
there were 15 posts, but merit list was prepared for 19
posts. When petitioner no.1 being in sl.no.1 did not get
any letter of appointment in spite of vacancies of 15
posts, he made application under R.T.I. Act. According to
the information available to petitioner no.1, he found
that appointment orders were issued to five candidates
and remaining ten posts were left to be filled up after
opening of Grama Nyayalaya at Dhamnagar and other
recruitment.
3.             It is stated that candidates at sl.nos.1,3,6,7
and 11 were issued with appointment letters. Due to
non-joining of sl.no.1, sl.no.2 was issued with the order
of appointment, but sl.no.2 did not join, for which the
candidate at sl.no.4 of the merit list was issued with the
order of appointment and he joined in the post. It is
further stated that when there is selection process

                                 3
started giving vacancies of 15 posts, it is illegal on the
part of the opp. Parties having not filled up all the posts.
The reasons of keeping ten posts vacant after opening of
Grama Nyayalaya at Dhamnagar as revealed from the
information available under the R.T.I. Act are only to
cause     delay    the    appointment     and    depriving    the
petitioners from being appointed. So, the petitioners
having no other efficacious remedy approached this
Court with a prayer for directing the opp. Parties to issue
order of appointment in their favour.
4.            Per contra, the opp. Parties filed counter
affidavit   through      opp.   Party    no.2,   wherein     they
submitted that the writ application is not maintainable on
fact and law. It is the case of the opp. Parties that there
was advertisement for filling up posts vide Annexure-
A/2. The posts were advertised keeping in view the
existing vacancies and the future vacancies to be filled
up   for   the    establishment     of   Grama    Nyayalaya     at
Dhamnagar. For such Grama Nyayalaya, ten vacancies
including    one      Nyayadhikari,     one    post   each     for
Sheristadar, Junior Stenographer, Junior Clerk, Driver,
Process-Server and Peon. Similarly, the Law Department
has    created     two    posts   of   Junior   Clerk   for   the
establishment       of  the   court   of  Civil  Judge    (Junior
Division)-cum-J.M.F.C. at Dhamnagar.
5.            It is also stated in the counter affidavit that
originally vacancies were six i.e. one Junior Clerk-cum-
Typist in the court of Civil Judge (Junior Division)-cum-
J.M.F.C., Chandbali and 5 nos. of Junior Clerk-cum-

                               4
Typists in the establishment of District Judge, Bhadrak. It
is  stated   that   for  existing,  future  vacancies     and
consequential vacancies, vacancies were total 15 in
numbers. In the counter affidavit following has been
detailed as to the vacancies in the Judgeship:-
a)    Civil Judge (Jr. Divn.)-cum-JMFC, Chandbali =01
b)    District Judge Establishment, Bhadrak           =05
                                                  Total:06
Future Vacancy and consequential Vacancy =09
a) Gramya Nyalaya, Dhamnagar created by
    the Govt. of Odisha, in Law Deptt. Letter No.1217/L,
    dtd.02.02.2012 under Annexure-B/2.
                                           Jr. Clerk=02
                                         Head Clerk=01
                                                 Total:03
b) Civil Judge (Jr. Divn)-cum-JMFC, Dhamnagar created
   by   the   Govt.   of  Odisha   in  Law    Deptt.   Letter
   No.11747/L dtd.26.10.2012 under Annexure-C/2.
                                           Heard Clerk=01
                                            Sr. Clerk   =01
                                            Jr. Clerk   =02
                                             Copyist     =01
                                                    Total :05
c) Civil Judge (Sr. Divn), Bhadrak:        Head Clerk =01
                                           Grand Total:09
6.           In subsequent clarification dated 04.05.2016
by learned District Judge, Bhadrak that due to non-
opening of the court of Grama Nyayalaya, Dhamanagar,
three numbers of posts of Junior Clerk could not be
activated. So, there remain 12 posts out of 15 posts of

                              5
Junior Clerk-cum-Typist. So, out of 12 vacancies six
vacancies remained vacant as none of the S.C. & S.T.
candidate could qualify. One candidate was appointed as
Junior    Clerk-cum-Typist     under   the    Rehabilitation
Assistance Rules. So, the total vacancies of unreserved
category came to five. As the merit list was valid for one
year, it has expired on 23.06.2015. When the posts are
lapsed, there is no occasion of adjusting the petitioners
as Junior Clerk-cum-Typist even if they have been
selected in the examination held by the concerned
Authority. Since the Grama Nyayalala at Dhamnagar has
not started functioning and no candidate under S.C./S.T.
have qualified, there is no occasion to fill up the posts
attached to the Grama Nyayalaya and other courts. It is
stated that the petitioners have no basis to challenge the
actions of opp. parties. Since one year has already been
lapsed, there is no post to be claimed by the petitioners.
It is therefore, prayed to dismiss the writ application.
SUBMISSION:
7.           Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted
that the action of the opp. Parties is whimsical, arbitrary
and illegal. He also submitted that once the merit list is
prepared keeping in view of the vacancies existing and
future for the period, same should be filled up when
there is advertisement for filling up of the vacancies,
process of recruitment commences. According to him,
once selection process has started and merit list is
prepared there should not be any departure from the
commitment to the candidate concerned. It is also

                                6
strenuously argued that the inaction on the part of the
opp.    Parties    has  caused    serious  hardship   to   the
petitioners to get in service and in the event of keeping
the posts vacant, the posts will lapse and the selected
persons are deprived of getting their rights addressed.
He further submitted that the posts are lying vacant, but
the State Government is yet to fill up the same by
ignoring the right of the petitioners. Once the petitioners
have got their vested right by placing them in the merit
list, they are to be considered for the future vacancies
also. On the other hand, he submitted that the right to
employment of petitioners through due process of law
has been abridged by the opp. Parties, consequently
filing of this case against the opp. Parties.
8.            It is submitted by learned Addl. Government
Advocate that the detailed analysis of existence of the
posts have been provided in the counter affidavit and
subsequent letter of the learned District Judge. It is also
submitted that there is no post to be filled up by the opp.
Parties. He further submitted that when there is no post
lying vacant, it is difficult to employ both the petitioners,
particularly when one year has already been lapsed after
the first appointment was over. On the other hand, he
totally favoured the action of the opp. Parties and further
submitted to reject the writ application.
POINTS FOR DETERMINATION:
I)     Whether there was any vacancy available for the
       petitioners?
II)    Is the petitioners entitled to the reliefs asked for?

                                7
DISCUSSION
POINT NO.I.
9.           It is the admitted fact that the opp. Parties
have made advertisement No.1/13 dated 08.05.2013 to
fill up the vacancies of Junior Clerk-cum-Typist vide
Annexure-1. Such vacancies were calculated on the basis
of the existing vacancies and future vacancies. It is not
disputed that the opp. Parties after holding necessary
examination prepared a merit list showing names of 19
persons, whereunder petitioners’ names find place at
sl.nos.12 and 17 respectively. It is also a fact that no
candidate under S.C./S.T. quota was qualified. It is the
undisputed fact that sl. No.1 did not join, for which
sl.no.2   was     issued   with   appointment   letter  vide
Annexure-4. When sl.no.2 Sk.Amirullah also did not join,
one Muktikanta Mohapatra (sl.no.4) was issued with
appointment letter.
10.          It is pertinent to quote the necessary Rule for
filling up of the vacancies in the cadre of Junior Clerk-
cum-Typist.     Rule   6.3   of   the  Orissa  District and
Subordinate Courts’ Non-Judicial Staff Services (Method
of Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2008
(hereinafter called “the Rules”) in their amendment in
2010 enshrines in the following manner:-
             “(3) The competitive examination shall be
        conducted      by    the    District  Recruitment
        Committee. The date on which the examination
        is to be held shall be fixed by District
        Recruitment Committee in consultation with the
        High Court and such recruitment committee

                              8
        shall fix the places at which the examination is
        to be held.”
Sub-Rules 3,4 and 6 of Rule-7 of the Rules prescribe in
the following manner:-
             “(3) Considering the marks secured in the
        written test, one merit list for general candidate
        and separated merit list for each of the
        reserved categories shall be prepared and
        candidates upto ten times of vacancy in each
        category shall be called for Computer Science
        test (practical), short-hand and typewriting
        test, as the case may be, and the candidates
        selected in each practical test shall be called for
        viva-voce test.”
        “(4) On the basis of marks secured in the
        written test, practical test as provided in sub-
        rule (3) and the viva-voce test, a merit list of
        all candidates (both general and reserved
        categories) shall be prepared and there after
        separate merit lists for general and reserved
        categories shall be prepared according to the
        descending order of total marks.”
        “(6) The select list in respect of posts
        advertised shall remain valid for a period of one
        year from the date of first appointment from
        such list or till the date notified for next
        recruitment, whichever is earlier.”
11.          After analysis of the aforesaid Rules, it
appears that for recruitment of Junior Clerk-cum-Copyist
as per the aggregate marks secured in written test,
computer test and viva voce, one merit list of all
candidates both general and reserved category shall be
prepared and thereafter separate merit list for general
and reserved category shall be prepared according to
descending order. It is true that the select list remains
valid for one year from the date of first appointment of

                              9
such list or till the date notified for next recruitment.
Now adverting to the present case it appears that a
single merit list has been prepared, but not separate
merit list for the reserved category of SEBC has been
prepared. It is revealed from Annexure-1 that there was
advertisement for the post of Junior Clerk-cum-Typist to
fill up 15 posts with categories unreserved-5, Scheduled
Caste-3, Scheduled Tribe-3, SEBC-4. However, from
Annexure-2 it appears that sl. Nos. 6,7,9,11,17 and 18
were available. As two unreserved category candidates
did not join, obviously it would come to vacancies of two
unreserved category. It is found that one of such post
was filled up by one Muktikanta Mohapatra at sl.no.4.
According to the opp. Parties, total six posts have been
filled up picking up sl. Nos.3,4,6,7 and 11. Out of that
five, it appears that sl.no.3-Suchitra Nayak and sl.no.4-
Muktikanta Mohapatra belong to unreserved category. Sl.
No.6-Amit     Kumar   Lenka,    sl.no.7-Sainarayan  Sahoo
belong to SEBC category and sl. No.11-Madhusmita
Sutar    belong  to  SEBC    category.   There  is nothing
contended by learned Addl. Government Advocate as to
on what basis such vacancies were filled up by picking up
the persons from the merit list.
12.          When there is already notification of the
Government to open Grama Nyayalaya at Dhamnagar, it
is incumbent on the office of the learned District &
Sessions Judge, Bhadrak to prepare man power for
manning such Grama Nyayalaya. Before opening of the
court, it is necessary to find out infrastructure and man
power. The State Government has already created staff

                               10
for the Grama Nyayalaya at Dhamnagar as admitted by
learned Addl. Government Advocate. There was also
advertisement to fill up the vacancies. It is none of the
business of the appointing authority to withhold the
appointment of the staff for the proposed court. It is true
that if staff are appointed and no court is opened, there
may be some sort of problem to be raised for their
salary, but it is well known that whenever there is
creation of post, allotment is made in the budget for the
salary of the newly created staff. We are afraid if the
vacancies are not filled up, the posts may lapse. It is not
unknown that there is dearth of Judicial Officers in the
State. But when the State has created posts and allotted
their salary in the budget and the recruitment process
has already been started for filling up of such posts, it is
not wise to keep the posts lying vacant. Apart from this,
once the petitioners are selected and find their place in
the merit list in accordance with the Rules framed, they
got vested right to get their employment. Be that as it
may, in the present case while calculating the posts as
per the counter affidavit, we are of the opinion that after
filing up of the five posts from the merit list and one post
under Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme, there remain
nine posts to be filled up as advertisement was made for
15    posts.  For   the   court    of  Grama  Nyayalaya   at
Dhamanagar there are two posts of Junior Clerk-cum-
Typist    sanctioned     vide     letter  No.1217/L   dated
02.02.2012. Moreover, for the court of Civil Judge (Junior
Division)-cum-J.M.F.C., two posts of Junior Clerk have
been sanctioned, against which one post has been filled

                              11
up as per the counter affidavit submitted by the opp.
Parties. On going through the merit list it appears that
only the candidates from the reserved category and
SEBC find their place in the merit list. As there is no
separate merit list prepared for SEBC and it is submitted
at bar that in the event of non-fill up of SEBC candidates
the    unreserved     candidates   shall    be  taken   into
consideration for appointment. It is found that the
vacancies for SEBC are still remaining vacant and same
has to be filled up. In Annexure-2 in place of SEBC
vacancy the petitioners can be adjusted even if petitioner
no.1    is  arrayed   as  unreserved     category  and   the
petitioner no. 2 at sl.no.17 is in category of SEBC. We
are also aware that there are other candidates above the
petitioners not being adjusted, but they are all not
petitioners before us. However, in the counter it is
revealed that six posts of S.C./S.T. have not been de-
reserved, but no reason has been assigned. Rule-5 (1)
(v) and (vi) of the Orissa Reservation of Vacancies in
Posts and Services (for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes)    Rules,  1976   [As    amended     by  the  Orissa
Reservation of Vacancies in Posts and Services (for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) (Amendment)
Rules, 1984] stated in the following manner:-
             “5.(1) (v) In case suitable Scheduled
     caste or Scheduled Tribe candidates are not
     available to fill up the reserved vacancies even
     after issue of advertisement, such vacancies
     shall be dereserved in accordance with the
     principles laid down in sub-clause (vi).
             (vi) Dereservation of vacancies shall be
     made by an appointing authority with the prior

                             12
     approval of the authority next above the
     appointing authority. After such dereservation
     has been made the appointing authority shall, in
     case of de-reservation of vacancies in a District
     Office intimate the fact to the District Collector
     concerned and in the case of dereservation of
     vacancies in an office of the Head of a
     Department or a Department of Government to
     the Tribal & Rural Welfare Department along with
     a certificate to the effect that he has followed
     procedure laid down in this connection with
     regard to dereservation.”
13.          Opp. party no.1-District Judge could have
taken steps to send the names from the merit list up to
sl.no.17 (including sl.no.17) for recruiting them after
dereserving such six posts under the aforesaid Rules. In
that event the candidates from the merit list up to
sl.no.17 (including sl.no.17) could have been employed.
Hence, right of the petitioners to assert employment
cannot be denied. Point No.I is answered accordingly.
POINT NO.II.
14.          Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted
to issue orders of appointment in their favour in
pursuance of the merit list. It is an admitted fact the
merit list was valid for one year, but three posts lying
vacant was not taken care of by the opp. Parties to fill up
the same for the reasons which are neither correct nor
legal. Once the names of the petitioners find place in the
merit list, the right accrued to them to get employment
and there is no rational and valid reason to decrease the
number of posts having left out created posts without
being filled in. The question of validity of the merit list

                              13
for one year is also a point raised by the learned Addl.
Government      Advocate.    When     the  names    of  the
petitioners find place in the merit list, the vacancies are
there, no valid reason is there to decrease the numbers
of vacant posts, and there is no reason mentioned in the
counter affidavit how it expired on 30.06.2015 without
having any reason, we are of the view that the merit list
of 2014 can be only valid for the petitioners and similarly
situated candidates who have been deprived of their
employment illegally and without any reason. When the
action is taken bereft of the provisions of law and a
person acquires right to get employment, the stipulation
for one year for such merit list should not be taken into
consideration for such candidates. Moreover, when the
State Judiciary is facing acute shortage of staff to man
the posts, for the larger interest of the public and
litigants the expiry of the merit list shall not be
considered. Hence, the petitioners are entitled to the
reliefs asked for. Point No.II is answered accordingly.
CONCLUSION:
15.         In view of the aforesaid discussion, we are of
the considered view that there are still nine vacancies
before expiry of the merit list and the same were not
filled up by the opp. Parties for no valid reason
whatsoever. We are of the further view that the
petitioners have been deprived of their employment by
the opp. Parties, for which Article 14 read with Article 16
of the Constitution have been violated. Moreover, 6 posts
for S.C./S.T. category should have been de-reserved

                                   14
     under the O.R.V. Act and the Rules read with Orissa
     District and Subordinate Courts Ministerial Service Rules,
     2008 to fill up all the vacancies up to sl.no.17 of the
     merit list. We, therefore, direct that the opp. Parties shall
     take steps to dereserve six vacancies of S.C./S.T.
     candidates due to their non-availability and the State
     Government shall do well to consider the same keeping
     in view of the paucity of staff in Judiciary and thereafter
     opp. Parties shall consider to fill up all the nine posts by
     filling up of the vacancies from the merit list up to
     sl.no.17 except the candidates already appointed. We
     further direct that such exercise shall be completed
     within a period of three months.
                  The    Writ   Application    is   disposed   of
     accordingly.
                                      …………………………….
                                      Dr. D.P. Choudhury, J
I. MAHANTY, J.          I agree.
                                      …………………………….
                                         I. Mahanty, J
     Orissa High Court, Cuttack
     Dated the 21st June, 2016/   DNP

15

