                IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK.
                           W.P.(C) No. 13547 OF 2015
      An application under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
      India.
                                       -----------------
      Principal Secretary to Government
      of Odisha and others                    …..…               Petitioners
                                -Versus-
      Sri Nirakar Rout and another            ………                Opp. parties
          For Petitioners -     Mr. B. Bhuyan,
                                Addl. Government Advocate
          For Opp. parties -    M/s. U.C. Pattnayak, D.K. Panda,
                                     J. Sengupta & G. Sinha
                                   -------------
      P R E S E N T :-
             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE INDRAJIT MAHANTY
                                        AND
             THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE D.P. CHOUDHURY
      --------------------------------------------------------------------------
      Date of Argument-03.05.2016:Date of Judgment-21.06.2016
      --------------------------------------------------------------------------
DR. D.P. CHOUDHURY, J. Challenge has been made to the order dated
      04.03.2015 passed by the learned Odisha Administrative Tribunal,
      Bhubaneswar (hereinafter called “the Tribunal”) in O.A. No.164 of
      2015 by allowing the Original Application filed by opp. Party no.1
      before the Tribunal.

                                   2
FACTS :
2.           The factual matrix leading to the case of the petitioners
is that petitioners are authorities under the State of Odisha and
opposite party No.1 was an employee under the petitioners.
Opposite party No.1 while working as a Senior Geologist in the
office of Senior Geologist, Ground Water Survey and Investigation
Division, Bhawanipatna under the Department of Water Resources,
retired from Government Service w.e.f. 31.01.2002. It is alleged,
inter alia, that on the date of his superannuation, G.A. Vigilance
Department reported that Cuttack (Vigilance) P.S. Case No.19,
dated 16.04.1996 has been registered against opposite party No.1
for possession of disproportionate assets. After submission of
charge    sheet    dated  31.1.2002,    the   concerned   Court   took
cognizance of the offence on 19.4.2002 in T.R. Case No.24/13 of
2012/2002.
3.           It is also stated that another vigilance enquiry was
taken up against opposite party No.1 for showing undue favour to a
private party. The recommendation for Department proceeding is
still awaited in such case. Since the judicial proceeding was pending
on the date of his retirement, the opposite party No.1 is entitled
only to the provisional pension as per Rule 66(2) of the Odisha Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1992 (hereinafter called “the Rules”).
Under such rule no gratuity or the regular pension can be
sanctioned to the opposite party No.1. The opposite party No.1 filed
O.A. No.164 of 2015 before the Tribunal and the Tribunal illegally

                                   3
passed order allowing the application of the opposite party No.1 by
directing the present petitioners to sanction and disburse final
pension along with retiral benefits including the DCRG as due and
admissible to the opposite party No.1 within a period of six months.
The Tribunal also directed to pay the DCRG to the opposite party
No.1 with interest @7% per annum w.e.f. 01.02.2003 till the actual
date of payment. Since the order of the Tribunal is illegal and
erroneous, the petitioners filed the present writ application before
this Court to knockdown the order of the Tribunal.
SUBMISSIONS
4.          Learned Addl. Government Advocate for the State
submitted that the order dated 04.03.2015 passed by the Tribunal
in O.A.No.164 of 2015 is illegal, erroneous and outcome of non-
application of mind and against the settled principle of law. It is
also submitted that the order of the Tribunal is violative against the
principle of natural justice. He further submitted that when the
judicial proceeding was pending in a Vigilance Case against the
opposite party No.1 on the date of his retirement, he is not entitled
to the regular pension under section 7(2) of the Rules but he is
entitled to the provisional pension as per Section 66 (1) of the
Rules. So he submitted to set aside the judgment of the Tribunal.
5.          Per contra, it is submitted by Mr. U.C.Pattnayak, learned
counsel for the opposite party No.1 that as per Rule 7(2) of the
Rules, the judicial proceeding cannot be said to have been pending
unless Court has taken cognizance of the offence on the report is

                                  4
submitted by the police. Since in the instant case after retirement
of the opposite party No.1, cognizance of offence was taken against
the opposite party No.1, the opposite party No.1 is entitled to the
regular pension instead of temporary pension under Rule 66 of the
Rules. As such he submitted that the writ petition should be
dismissed and quashed.
POINT FOR DETERMINATION
6.          The only point emerging in this case, as to whether the
opposite party No.1 is entitled to retirement benefits including
regular pension and DCRG.
DISCUSSION
7.          It is undisputed fact that the opposite party No.1 was
superannuated from Government Service w.e.f. 31.1.2002. It is
also admitted fact that Cuttack (Vigilance) Case No.19, dated
16.4.1996 was registered against the opposite party No.1 for
possession of disproportionate assets and charge sheet was
submitted on 31.1.2002 but the cognizance of offence was taken on
19.4.2002 in T.R. Case No.24/ 13 of 2012/02 by the learned
Special Judge, Special Court, Bhubaneswar. The relevant portion of
the impugned order is extracted below for better appreciation:-
   “ After hearing the learned counsel for both sides, I note that
   Rule-66 of the OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 provides that retiral
   benefits payable to a Govt. servant can be withheld only if
   any Disciplinary proceeding or Criminal case is pending
   against him on the date of his retirement. Cognizance of the

                                      5
   offence was taken against the applicant in BBSR Vigilance
   case on 19.4.2002, i.e., more than two months after his
   retirement. If no other Departmental Proceeding is pending
   against the applicant as on the date of his retirement,
   accordingly his retiral benefits cannot be withheld on the
   ground of pendency of such Vigilance Proceeding.
              In view of the settled position of law, and as per
   Rule-66 of OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992, I direct respondent
   nos.1 and 2 to sanction and disburse the final pension along
   with retiral benefits including the DCRG as due and admissible
   to the applicant within a period six months from the date of
   receipt of a copy of this order, provided if there is no other
   legal impediment in terms of pendency of any Disciplinary
   Proceeding against the applicant. It is also directed that the
   DCRG payable to the applicant shall carry @7% interest per
   annum with effect from 01.02.2003 till the date of actual
   payment.
8.            From     the  impugned     order  it appears    that   since
cognizance of offence was taken against the opposite party No.1
(applicant before the Tribunal) in Bhubaneswar Vigilance case on
19.04.2002, i.e., more than two months after from his retirement
and no other Departmental proceeding was pending against the
applicant (opposite party No.1) on the date of his retirement, the
Tribunal allowed the application and directed the present petitioners
to sanction pension, DCRG and other retiral benefits. Rule 7(2) of
the OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 prescribes as hereunder:-
              “2(a) Such departmental proceedings referred to in Sub-
     rule(1),if instituted while the Government servant was in service,
     whether before his retirement or during his re-employment, shall,
     after the final retirement of the Government servant, be deemed
     to be a proceeding under this rule and shall be continued and
     concluded by the authority by which they were commenced in the
     same manner as if the Government servant had continued in
     service:

                                  6
         Provided that when the departmental proceedings are
instituted by an authority, subordinate to Government that
authority shall submit a report recording its findings to the
Government.
         (b) Such departmental proceedings as referred to in Sub-
rule (1) if not instituted while the Government servant was in
service, whether before his retirement or during his re-
employment-
         (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of
Government;
         (ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place
more than four years before such institution; and
         (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such
place as the Government may direct and in accordance with the
procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which an
order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to the
Government servant during his service.
         (c)    No judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the
Government servant was in service, whether before his
retirement or during his re-employment, shall be instituted in
respect of a cause of action which arose or in respect of an event
which took place, more than four years before such institution.
         (d) In the case of Government servant who has retired on
attaining the age of superannuation or judicial proceedings are
instituted or where departmental proceedings are continued
under Clauses (a) and (b), a provisional pension as provided in
Rule 66 shall be sanctioned.
         (e) Where the Government decided not to withhold or
withdraw pension but order recovery of pecuniary loss from
pension, the recovery shall not ordinarily be made at a rate
exceeding one-third of the pension admissible on the date of
retirement of a Government servant.
Explanation-For the purpose of this rule-
         (a) Departmental proceedings shall be deemed to be
instituted on the date on which the statement of charges are
issued to the Government servant or pensioner, or if the

                                       7
     Government servant has been placed under suspension from the
     date of his suspension; and
       (b) judicial proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted-
              (i) in the case of criminal proceedings, on the date on
     which the complaint or report of a police officer, of which the
     Magistrate takes cognizance, is made; and
              (ii) in the case of Civil proceedings, on the date of
     presentation of the plaint in the Court.”
9.            From the aforesaid provisions, it appears that in case of
judicial proceeding, the same shall be deemed to have been
instituted on the date on which complaint or report of police officer
of which Magistrate takes cognizance is made. Similarly, in case of
the Departmental proceeding, the same shall be deemed to have
been instituted on the date on which the statement of charges are
issued to the Government Servant or pensioner or in the event of
the suspension, same will be taken as instituted from the date of
his suspension. In the instant case, it is reiterated that the
cognizance of the offence on the charge sheet of the Vigilance
Department was taken two months after the retirement of the
opposite party No.1. So, we are of the view that judicial proceeding
cannot be deemed to have been instituted on the date of retirement
of   the   opposite     party  No.1.     Admittedly,  in   this   case, no
Departmental proceeding is pending on the date of retirement as
the pendency of the Departmental proceeding is yet to be
confirmed. Be that as it may, we are of the view that the case of
opposite party No.1 is not covered under Rule 7(2) so as to
withhold or withdraw pension to which the opposite party No.1 is
entitled after his retirement on 31.01.2002.

                                    8
             The point emerging in this case is answered accordingly.
CONCLUSION
 10.          We have already observed in the aforesaid paragraph
that no vigilance case is deemed to have been pending against the
opposite party No.1 on the date of his retirement. Question of
pendency of Departmental proceeding on the date of his retirement
is non-est. Rule 66(1) and (2) of the Rules prescribes in following
manner:-
       “Rule-66 (1) Where departmental or judicial proceedings are
pending in respect of Government servant on the date of his
retirement, referred to in, he shall be paid a provisional pension not
exceeding the maximum pension which would have been admissible
on the basis of qualifying service up to the date of retirement of the
Government servant; or if he was under suspension on the date of
retirement up to the date immediately preceding the date on which
he was placed under suspension.
        (2)- No gratuity shall be paid to the Government servant
until the conclusion of the Departmental or judicial proceedings and
issue of final order thereon;
       Provided that where departmental proceedings have been
instituted under Rule 16 of the Orissa Civil Services (Classification,
Control and Appeal)Rules, 1962 for imposing any of the penalties
specified in Clauses (i),(ii), and (iii-A) of Rule 13 of the said rules,
the payment of gratuity shall be authorized to be paid to the
Government servant.”
             In view of the aforesaid provision read with the Rule 7
of the Rules in the instant case the opposite party No.1 is entitled
to the final pension instead of provisional pension as we have
already observed that on the date of retirement of opposite party

                                         9
    No.1   neither   the   judicial   proceeding   nor  the Departmental
    proceeding was pending against him. Similarly, he is also entitled to
    DCRG as per the order of the Tribunal. On the whole, we find no
    ground to interfere with the impugned order passed by the Tribunal.
    So, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of merit.
                                           …………………………….
                                            Dr. D.P. Choudhury, J
I. Mahanty, J.               I agree.
                                            …………………………….
                                                I. Mahanty, J
    Orissa High Court, Cuttack
    Dated the 21st June, 2016/     JM

10

