                                                                               1
              IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                        FAO NO.28 OF 2010
      1. SHRI GHANSHYAM DAS DHIMAN
         PROPRIETOR OF M/S GD ENGINEERING
         CONSTRUCTION P.O HALESWAR
         TEZPUR, DISTRICT – SONITPUR,
         ASSAM
                                 -Versus-
                                                 ……..Appellant
      1. THE UNION OF INDIA
         REPRESENTED BY THE SECRETARY
         TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA,
         MINISTRY OF DEFENCE,
         KASHMIR HOUSE, NEW DELHI
      2. THE GARRISON ENGINEER, M.P.S. TEZPUR,
         DEKARGAON,
         TEZPUR,
         DISTRICT SONITPUR,
         ASSAM
                                                       ….. respondent/ applicant
                             B E F O R E
            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
      For the appellant                        : Mr. S Ali
      For respondents                          : None appeared
      Date of hearing & Judgment & Order       : 27-07-2017

                                                                                 2
                  JUDGMENT & ORDER(ORAL)
1.         Heard Mr. S Ali, learned counsel for the appellant. None appeared
for the respondents.
2.          This appeal has been filed under Order 43 CPC against the order
dated 18-08-2007 passed in Misc (J) Case No.11/2006 by the learned Civil
Judge, Tezpur, Sonitpur rejecting the petition for condonation of delay and
consequently dismissing the petition under Order 9 Rule 9 CPC for setting
aside the order dated 25-03-2004 passed in T.S (Arb) No. 3/99 dismissing the
suit for default.
3.        Learned counsel submits that the appellant herein filed T.S (Arb)
No.3/99 in the Court of learned Civil Judge, Tezpur, Spnitpur. The case record
of M.S.(Arb) No.13/94 which was necessary for disposal of the suit was called
for. However, the said record could not be traced out, as a result of which the
trial in T.S. 3/1999 was delayed. Ultimately, the T.S (Arb) No.3/99 was
dismissed for default on 25-03-2004.
4.         The appellant filed an application under Order 9 Rule 9 CPC
alongwith petition under Section 5 of the Limitation Act praying for setting
aside the order of dismissal of the suit for default.
5.         The learned Civil Judge by impugned order dated 18-08-2007
rejected the petition holding that the petitioner failed to show sufficient cause.
Aggrieved, the appellant has preferred this instant appeal.
6.           Learned counsel Mr. S Ali, relying on the decision of the Apex Court
in Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag and Another Vs. M st. K atiji and
Others reported in (1987) 2 SCC 107 submits that sufficient cause should be
construed liberally so as to subserve the ends of justice. The appellant had to
leave for Chandigarh to attend his ailing parents and could not come back in
time and therefore the delay was caused and there was no negligence or
malafide in delayed filing of the petition, submits Mr. Ali.
7.     The Apex Court in the case of Collector, Land Acquisition, Anantnag
& Anr. Vs. M st. K atiji & Ors. reported in (1987) 2 SCC 107 , enunciating

                                                                                    3
the principle and approach, how the “sufficient cause” has to be construed
liberally, so that ends of justice does not suffer, observed as under:
                “The legislature has conferred the power to condone delay by
                enacting Section 5 (Any appeal or any application, other than an
                application under any of the provisions of Order XXI of the CPC,
                1908, may be admitted after the prescribed period if the
                appellant or the applicant satisfies the court that he had sufficient
                cause for not preferring the apepal or making the application
                within such period) of the Indian Limitation Act of 1963 in order
                to enable the Courts to do substantial justice to parties by
                disposing of matters on 'merits'. The expression "sufficient cause"
                employed by the legislature is adequately elastic to enable the
                courts to apply the law in a meaningful manner which subserves
                the ends of justice--that being the life-purpose for the existence
                of the institution of Courts. It is common knowledge that this
                Court has been making a justifiably liberal approach in matters
                instituted in this Court. But the message does not appear to have
                percolated down to all the other Courts in the hierarchy. And
                such a liberal approach is adopted on principle as it is realized
                that:-
                1. Ordinarily a litigant does not stand to benefit by lodging an
                appeal late.
                2. Refusing to condone delay can result in a meritorious matter
                being thrown out at the very threshold and cause of justice being
                defeated. As against this when delay is condoned the highest
                that can happen is that a cause would be decided on merits after
                hearing the parties.
                3. "Every day's delay must be explained" does not mean that a
                pedantic approach should be made. Why not every hour's delay,
                every second's delay? The doctrine must be applied in a rational
                common sense pragmatic manner.
                4. When substantial justice and technical considerations are
                pitted against each other, cause of substantial justice deserves to
                be preferred for the other side cannot claim to have vested right
                in injustice being done because of a non-deliberate delay.
                5. There is no presumption that delay is occasioned deliberately,
                or on account of culpable negligence, or on account of mala
                fides. A litigant does not stand to benefit by resorting to delay. In
                fact he runs a serious risk.
                6. It must be grasped that judiciary is respected not on account
                of its power to legalize injustice on technical grounds but
                because it is capable of removing injustice and is expected to do
                so.”

                                                                                4
8.     No doubt, the expression ‘sufficient cause’ is required to be construed
liberally, so that cause of substantial justice does not get defeated. In the
instant case, the cause shown by the appellant, as revealed from the
impugned order and also from the petition is that, an important record which
was necessary for disposal of the suit was called for, but the said record was
not traceable and therefore, the matter was pending for long time and
because of illness and death of the parents, the appellant had to leave for
Chandigarh. After coming back from Chandigarh, the petitioner could file the
petition under Order 9 Rule 9 CPC accompanied with the petition for
condonation of delay. It is common knowledge, that in case of all delay some
amount of laches always may be there, which may not be intentional. Since an
appellant does not get benefited by filing an appeal late, it would not be
proper to attribute negligence on a party, for such laches. Be that as it may,
considering the totality of the matter, the cause shown by the appellant, in my
view, can reasonably be construed as sufficient causes, taking a pragmatic
view, otherwise there remains a danger of substantial justice being defeated
for mere procedural technicality.
9.         In that view of the matter, the appeal is allowed and the order of
dismissal of the suit dated 18.08.2007 is set aside, However, the delay has
certainly caused some inconvenience to the other side, which is also required
to be taken care of, for ends of justice. Keeping in view the above aspect, the
petitioner is directed to pay a cost of Rs. 5,000/-. The learned Trial Court shall
proceed with the suit subject to payment of the said cost.
10.       The appeal is accordingly allowed.
11.       Send back the LCR.
                                                                JUDGE
Smita


