                         IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
                       Writ Petition (Civil) No. 2774/2008
                                               Date of decision: 4th April, 2008.
           Agra Tourist Guide Welfare Assn. & Ors.            ... Petitioner
                    through: Ms. Anjana Gosain and Ms. S. Fatima, Adv.
                                        VERSUS
            Union of India & Ors.                         ....Respondents
                    through: Mr. Suresh Kait, Advocate
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
                     1.Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
                     Judgment?
                     2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
                     3.Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J(Oral)
1.     Issue notice to the respondents to show cause why rule nisi be not issued.
       Mr. Suresh Kait, Advocate accepts notice. Mr. Kait, learned standing counsel for
the respondent submits that no reply is necessary inasmuch as the issues raised by the
petitioner have been the subject matter of adjudication in prior writ petitions.
       Accordingly, with the consent of both parties the writ petition is taken up for
disposal.
                                      -2-
2.     The writ petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking a direction to the
respondent to permit the petitioners, who have duly appeared in the examination
conducted as back as on 26th August, 2007, to work as temporary tourist guides till the

results are declared and the selection process completed.
3.     The petitioners had applied in terms of the advertisement and also appeared for
the Tourist Guide Training Examination which was held on 26th August, 2007 and
was conducted by the Respondent. Because the results were not declared, some of the
candidates approached the court by way of writ petition on 20th September, 2007 for
the declaration of result.     This writ petition was disposed of on the statement of
counsel for Government that result would be declared shortly. As the result has not
been declared, the petitioners have sought relief to pursue their vacation till the final
selection process is concluded.
4.     Ms. Anjana Gosain, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, submits that
the petitioners are at the verge of starvation on account of deprivation of only source of
livelihood. It is further urged that apart from the interests of the petitioners, grave
prejudice is resulting to the facilities which are made available as tourist guides to
national monuments and monuments of importance for want of tourist guides for
persons visiting the same. I find that this matter is pending for finalisation of the
                                        -3-
examination result since August, 2007. It is pointed out that these petitioners were
permitted to take the examination conducted by the respondent pursuant to orders
dated 4th November, 2007 by the High Court of Rajasthan, Jaipur Bench.
5.     Ms. Anjana Gosain, learned counsel for the petitioner, places reliance on the
judgment dated 7th March, 2005 passed by this court in WP (C) No.4366/2001 Anuj
Johari Vs. Union of India & Ors. It is pointed out that along with this writ
petition, a batch of several hundred writ petitions were disposed of by the court. So far

as the petitioners were concerned, the court had approved the guidelines laid down by
the respondents so as to regulate the appointment and functioning of tourist guides.
The respondents were given liberty to conduct eligibility examinations in order to
assess the suitability of tourist guides. However, if they take the screening test and
annual examination which is to be conducted by the respondent, pending declaration
of result and finalisation of the issuance of licences, the court had granted interim
protection to the petitioners. This judgment was assailed before the Apex Court and
challenge thereto has been rejected.
6.     I find that by an order passed on 9th January, 2007, several other writ petitions
including WP (C) No.11378-425/2006 and connected matters seeking the same relief
have been allowed by this court.
                                        -4-
7.     The present writ petition has been necessitated on the sole ground that despite
the respondent's having held the examination as back as on 26 th August, 2007 in terms
of the judgment in Anuj Johari Vs. Union of India & Orgs. (Supra), the result thereof
has not been declared.       As a result, thirty-seven petitioners whose name and
particulars have been detailed in annexure A at page 18 of the paper book, have been
deprived of their only source of livelihood.
8.     The petitioners have had to consequently file the present writ petition seeking a
direction to the respondent to permit the petitioners who have duly appeared in the
examination to be granted temporary licence to work as tourist guides as an interim
measure till declaration of the result.
9.     The respondents have contended that they are unable to finalise the process of

declaration of result on account of certain interim orders which have been passed by
the High Court of Rajasthan.        The respondents have submitted that even their
application seeking vacation of the interim orders have not been considered so far.
10.    Pursuant to the detailed directions made by this court as back as on 7th March,
2005, the respondents actually having taken steps to implement the same by holding
the examination. It is an admitted position that a large number of persons have
participated and undertaken the examination conducted by the respondents.
                                       -5-
11.    The petitioners have contended that they were working as tourist guides. They
have abided by the judgments of this court and taken the examination. However, for
want of declaration of result and finalisation thereof, they are unable to provide
services as tourist guides. These persons have stated that they have been working as
tourist guides for a long period even prior to December, 2005 when the earlier writ
petitions were decided.
12.    In view of the above discussions, I find substance in the submission made by Ms.
Anjana Gosain, learned counsel for the petitioner, with regard to the fact that public
interest is being severely impaired inasmuch as tourist guides with knowledge and
eligibility to discharge the function of tourist guides, are not available at the national
monuments and other monuments of importance. As a result, not only the interests of
the petitioners who seek the issuance of licences to earn their living, are deprived of
the same but the interests and rights of the millions of tourists, both national and
international, who visit these monuments, are adversely impacted as they are deprived
of knowledgeable and experienced tourist guides to guide them around these

monuments and provide valuable information to them. Lack of such facilities must be
irreparably denying the impression of such tourists with regard to availability of such
an essential facility.
                                       -6-
13.    It has been pointed out that in all the petitions which were pending prior
hitherto, this court has been consistently granting interim protection to the petitioners
pending their undertaking the examination and finalisation of the results and licences.
On a consideration of the rival contentions, I am of the view that this writ petition
deserves to be disposed of at this stage with the following directions:-
(i)    The respondent shall issue temporary permits to the petitioners who have been
detailed at pages 17 and 18 after verification of the fact that they have participated in
the examination which were held on 26th August, 2007 or 4th November, 2007.
(ii)   Temporary licences which may be issued by the respondent, shall continue till
such time the respondents finalise the results of the examination held by them.
(iii)  Such scrutiny and issuance of the temporary licence shall be completed by the
respondent within a period of four weeks from today.
       It is directed accordingly.
       This writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
       Copy of this order be given dasti to counsel for the parties.
                                              (GITA MITTAL)
                                                  JUDGE
April 04, 2008kr


