                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
        CA No. 466/2008 in Company Petition No. 50/2003
                       Judgment reserved on : 9th September, 2009
                               Date of decision:        December, 2009
      Delhi Towers Ltd.                     ... Petitioner
                 through: Mr. P.V. Kapur, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Deepak
                 Diwan, Mr. Sumit Garg and Ms. Chetna Gulati,
                 Advocate
                                VERSUS
          G.N.C.T. Of Delhi                            ....Respondents
                 through: Mr. Rohit Madan and Mr. Aditya Madan,
                 Advocates
      CORAM:
      HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL
      1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the
         Judgment?
      2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
      3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
GITA MITTAL, J
1.          By this judgment I propose to decide an application being
CA No. 466/2008 filed by the Delhi Towers Ltd.            The applicant is
aggrieved by refusal of the authorities of the Government of NCT of
Delhi to accept the scheme of amalgamation approved by this court
in exercise of jurisdiction under section 394 of the Companies Act,
1956 without payment of stamp duty.
2.          Factual narration
2.1         The essential facts, necessary for the adjudication are
noticed hereafter. Fifteen transferor companies incorporated under
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, engaged in the business
of real estate, proposed to merge with the “Delhi Towers Limited”,
also incorporated under the same statute (hereafter referred to as
                                   1

the transferee company/applicant). These transferor companies are
stated to be hundred per cent subsidiaries of Delhi Towers Limited,
the transferee company and were stated to be engaged in the same
line of business.
2.2         In  order to  reap    benefits  from  the  integration  of
management activities ; reduction of overall administrative costs ;
synergy of operations; improvement of business prospects and
economies of scale with reduction of costs in the overall interest of
business, these companies proposed a scheme of amalgamation
whereby the undertakings of the transferor companies, would with
effect from the transfer date, be transferred to and vest in the
transferee company, pursuant to the provisions of section 394 of the
Companies Act, 1956.
2.3   Delhi Towers Limited (the transferee company) and Suraj
Construction & Estates Pvt. Ltd. and one of the 15 transferor
companies, were registered at Delhi and having their registered
offices at Delhi.
            Consequently,  these   sixteen   companies   had  filed  a
Company Petition No.50/2003 under sections 391 and 394 of the
Companies Act, 1951 seeking approval of a proposed scheme of merger
of the transferor companies with the transferee company. The proposed
scheme of amalgamation was approved by the court by an order passed
on 19th March, 2003 after recording the statutory compliances.
2.4         The scheme of amalgamation is stated to have become
effective on 28th March, 2003 on filing of the certified copy of the
                                   2

order with the Registrar of Companies, NCT of Delhi and Haryana.
           In terms of para 2.1 of the Scheme of Amalgamation, all
the “undertakings” of Suraj Construction & Estates Pvt. Ltd. and
other 14-the Transferor Company, without further act, deed or thing,
stood transferred to and vested in or are deemed to be transferred or
vested in the Transferee Company with effect from the Transfer
Date/appointed date i.e. w.e.f. 15th November, 2002 and the estate
and interest of the transferor companies stood deemed to have been
merged/amalgamated with the Delhi Towers Ltd.             Para 2.2 of the
Scheme    defines    the   term    “undertakings(s)   of   the  Transferor
Companies” to include :
“(i)       All the properties, movable or immoveable, real and
personal, corporate and incorporeal, in possession, present and
contingent of whatsoever nature and all rights, powers, licenses,
quota rights, trade marks, cash and bank balances, benefits and
privileges of the Transferor Companies as on the Transfer date.
(ii)       All the liabilities, duties and obligations, including charges,
liens and mortgages of the Transferor Companies as on the Transfer
Date.”
2.5        A prayer of the applicant for substituting a revised
schedule relating to four of the transferor companies was granted on
19th March, 2008 whereby a correction of the order dated 26 th March,
2003 was allowed and the corrected revised schedules were taken on
record.
2.6        The applicant contends that upon the scheme becoming
                                      3

effective, it made an application to the Tehsildar, Vasant Vihar,
Kapashera, New Delhi having jurisdiction over the properties of
company, on 19th May, 2007 to effect mutation of the same in its
records in favour of the transferee/applicant company.
           Despite    repeated   requests,   the  Tehsildar    of  the
Government of NCT of Delhi has not effected the mutation of the
properties in favour of the transferee company under the Scheme of
Amalgamation.     It is urged, that the stamping authorities are not
accepting the scheme of amalgamation without payment of stamp
duty thereon.
           The present application has been filed at the instance of
the Delhi Towers Limited – the transferee company for this reason
           Rival contentions
3.         Contentions of the applicant
3.1        The   primary    contention   of  the  applicant-transferee
company is, that upon an order being passed by the company court
approving the scheme of amalgamation/merger, the assets of the
transferor companies vested in the transferee company by operation
of law and that nothing further is required to be done. It has been
urged at great length, that a scheme which is sanctioned in exercise
of power under Sections 391 to 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 is
not in the nature of an order accepting a compromise under Order 23
of the Code of Civil Procedure, but having regard to the statutory
scheme, is something beyond. In this behalf, reliance is placed on
the provisions of Section 394(4) of the Companies Act, 1956.       The
                                   4

submission is that such scheme of amalgamation is not covered under
the definition of “conveyance” under sub-section 10 of section 2 of
the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 and therefore is not exigible to stamp
duty.
           In support of these submissions, Mr. P.V. Kapoor, learned
senior counsel appearing for the applicant has placed reliance on the
pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at AIR 1970 SC 1051 J.K.
(Bombay) Private Limited Vs. M/s New Kaiser-I-Hind Spinning &
Weaving Company Limited       & Ors. and the pronouncement of this
court reported at (1983) 53 Comp.Cas. 926 (Delhi) In Re: Telesound
India Limited (Para 12).        Reliance is also placed on judicial
pronouncement reported at (2004) 9 SCC 438 Hindustan Lever &
Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr.; AIR 1970 SC 1041 J.K.
(Bombay) Private Limited Vs. M/s New Kaiser-I-Hind Spinning &
Weaving Company Limited        & Ors.; AIR 2005 SC 2206 Bharat
Petroleum Corporation Limited Vs. P. Kesavan & Another; (1983) 53
Company Cases 926 (Delhi) In re: Telesound India Limited; AIR 1999
SC 3335 T.K. Lathika Vs. Seth Karsandas Jamnadas; AIR 1968 SC 623
Income Tax Officer, Tuticorn vs. J.S. Devinatha Nadar etc.; (2008) 4
SCC 720 at 735 Government of Andhra Pradesh vs. P. Laxmi Devi;
AIR 2005 SC 2520 Administration of the Specified Undertaking of the
Unit Trust of India   Vs. Garware Polyster Limited; 112 (2004) DLT
627 Hotline Hol Celdings Private Limited & Ors.; 2001 (1) Bom CR
261 Sadanand S. Varde & Ors. Vs. State of Maharashtra & Ors.; AIR
1956 Andhra Pradesh 161 In Reg. Putta Ranganayakullu & Ors.; AIR
                                  5

1955 SC 25 Edward Mills Co. Ltd., Beawar & Ors. vs. State of Ajmer
& Anr.; AIR 1960 SC 1312 M.G. Desai & Anr. vs. State of Bombay;
(1948) 18 Company Cases (1) (Cal) entitled Sailendra Kumar Ray Vs.
Bank of Calcutta Limited; (2006) 130 ComCas 510 (Cal) Madhu Intra
Limited & Anr. Vs. Registrar of Companies & Ors.
3.2         A further submission is, that the legislative intent is
apparent from the fact that Maharashtra, Gujarat, Karnataka,
Rajasthan, Chattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh are the
only seven states which have included the order approving a scheme
of amalgamation passed under section 394 of the Companies Act,
1956 in the definition of “conveyance”.
3.3         It is pointed out, that under sub section 15 of Section 2 of
the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, the legislature has specifically included a
final order effecting a partition passed by the revenue authority or by
the civil court and an award passed by the civil court directing
partition under the definition of “instrument of partition”. However,
there is no mention of transfer of rights under a scheme of
amalgamation propounded and approved under the provisions of
Sections 391 to 394 of the Companies Act, 1956.
3.4         The primary submission on behalf of the petitioner is that
the legislation has not included a transfer by an approved scheme of
amalgamation under section 391-394 of the Companies Act under the
definition of either 'conveyance' or 'instrument' unlike the specific
amendments including the same by some other states.                 The
legislative intent therefore is to exclude them from the purview of
                                     6

stamping.
             The contention of the applicant is that such an order has
not been included in the definition of “Conveyance” in the Indian
Stamp Act(applicable to the state of Delhi), and therefore is not
chargeable to stamp duty for this reason as well.
3.5          It is urged on behalf of the petitioner, that the provisions
of the Bombay Stamp Act have been amended to incorporate clause
(iv) in its sub-section (g) of Section 2 whereby an approved scheme of
amalgamation have been covered under the definition of conveyance.
Consequently, the pronouncements relied upon by the respondents of
the Supreme Court in Hindustan Lever & Anr. vs. The State of
Maharashtra & Anr. and Ruby Sales & Services Pvt. Ltd. concerned
with construing the provisions of the 'Bombay Act' can not even
guide, let alone bind, adjudication in the present case.
3.6          The petitioner also places reliance on two notifications
dated 16th January, 1937 and 25th December, 1937 to contend that an
approved scheme of amalgamation would stand exempted from levy
of stamp duty because of the remission granted by both these
notifications.
4.           Respondents contentions
4.1          It is contended that no amendment to the statutory
provision is necessary and that the transfer of property upon
approval of a scheme of amalgamation is covered under the existing
definition of conveyance under the Indian Stamp Act and chargeable
to stamp duty.
                                      7

4.2         The Government of NCT of Delhi has filed a reply on
record    contending   that   the   mutation   proceedings   cannot   be
proceeded with for the reason that the applicable stamp duty on the
scheme of amalgamation has not yet been deposited. It has further
been submitted that in similar cases, appropriate stamp duty has
been charged from the incumbents seeking such transfer in the
revenue records and that mutation can be effected only upon the
applicant depositing stamp duty in accordance with law.
4.3         Mr. Aditya Madan, learned counsel for the respondents
has placed reliance on the pronouncements reported at (2004) 9 SCC
438 Hindustan Lever & Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr.; 1992
(1) Bom.C.R. 568 : MANU/MH/04531992 State of Maharashtra vs.
M.S. Builders (Pvt.) Ltd. & Ors.; AIR 1997 Bom 7 Li Taka
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.; AIR 1973 Mad.
1 : MANU/TN/0308/1973 entitled the Chief Controlling Revenue
Authority, Board of Revenue, Madras vs. R. Thirthalu; C.I.T., A.P. vs.
Taj Mahal Hotel Secunderabad reported at (1971) 3 SCC 550: AIR
1972 SC 168 in support of his contentions.
4.4         An objection based on legislative competence of the
Parliament to legislate on the issue is taken. It is contended that in
view of constitutional scheme of separation of powers, only the
legislative assembly of Delhi is competent to legislate on the issue.
For this reason the notification of 1937 have no application.
5.          Statutory provisions
5.1         So far as the legislation in Delhi is concerned, there is no
                                     8

special enactment relating to stamp duty.       The Indian Stamp Act,
1899 continues to hold the field.
5.2         “Conveyance” is statutorily defined under sub-section 10
of section 2 of the Indian Stamp Duty Act as follows:-
         “2(10)“conveyance” includes a conveyance on sale
         and every instrument by which property, whether
         movable or immovable, is transferred inter vivos
         and which is not otherwise specifically provided for
         by Schedule I .”
            The expression “instrument” is defined under sub section
14 of Section 2 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 in the following
manner:-
              “instrument” includes every document by which any
              right or liability is, or purports to be, created,
              transferred, limited, extended, extinguished or
              recorded”
5.3         It is noteworthy that the definition of 'conveyance' under
section 2(g) of the Bombay Stamp Act came to be amended by a
Maharashtra Act No. 27/1985 which was brought into force on 10th
December, 1985.
5.4         Inasmuch as the several judicial pronouncements relied
upon by both parties are in context of the statutory position under
the Bombay Stamp Act, the unamended definition of the expression
'conveyance' as against the amended definition thereunder deserves
to be adverted to and reads as follows:-
                                     9

 Unamended provision                  Amended provision
 "2(g) "Conveyance" includes a           "(g) 'conveyance' includes,
 conveyance on sale and every            -
 instrument by which property,
 whether       moveable      or          (i) a conveyance on sale,
       immoveable, is transferred
 inter vivos and which is not            (ii) every instrument,
 otherwise specifically provided for
 by Schedule 1;"                         (iii) every decree or final
                                         order of any civil court,
                                         (iv) every order made by
                                         the High Court under
                                         section 394 of the
                                         Companies Act, in respect
                                         of amalgamation of
                                         companies;
                                         by which property, whether
                                         movable or immovable, or
                                         any estate or interest in
                                         any property is transferred
                                         to, or vested in, any
                                         person, inter vivos, and
                                         which is not otherwise
                                         specifically provided for by
                                         Schedule I."
           Section 2(g)(iv) of the Bombay Stamp Act thus specifically
includes every order made under section 394 of the Companies Act,
1956 in the definition of conveyance under section 2(g) which
thereupon is chargeable to stamp duty.
6.         Nature and impact of an order approving a proposed
scheme of amalgamation under section 394 of the Companies Act
6.1        The first question which arises for consideration before
this court, is as to whether an order passed by the company court in
exercise of jurisdiction under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956
approving a scheme of amalgamation proposed by the parties, is
                                     10

covered under the definition of “conveyance” under sub section 10 of
section 2 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 and therefore exigible to
stamp duty.
6.2        In order to answer this question, a fundamental issue has
been raised, that an order sanctioning a proposed scheme of
amalgamation or arrangement under section 394 of the Companies
Act is not a conveyance or a transfer of property by an act of parties
and that such an order of a sanction of the scheme results in the
transfer of the property by operation of law. Mr. P.V. Kapur, learned
senior counsel for the petitioner, submits that therefore such scheme
would not be chargeable to stamp duty under the provisions of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899.
            It is therefore first necessary to examine the nature and
impact of an order passed under section 394 of the Companies Act.
6.3        Sanction of the scheme of amalgamation is effected under
Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 which provides as follows:-
      “394. Provisions for facilitating reconstruction and
      amalgamation of companies
    (1) Where an application is made to the [Tribunal] under
    section 391 for the sanctioning of a compromise or
    arrangement proposed between a company and any such
    persons as are mentioned in that section, and it is shown to
    the [Tribunal]-
         (a) that the compromise or arrangement has been
         proposed for the purposes of, or in connection with,
         a scheme for the reconstruction of any company or
         companies, or the amalgamation of any two or more
         companies;                                        and
         (b) that under the scheme the whole or any part of
         the undertaking, property or liabilities of any
                                    11

     company concerned in the scheme (in this section
     referred to as a "transferor company") is to be
     transferred to another company (in this section
     referred to as "the transferee company");
the [Tribunal] may, either by the order sanctioning the
compromise or arrangement or by a subsequent order, make
provision for all or any of the following matters:-
     (i) the transfer to the transferee company of the
     whole or any part of the undertaking, property or
     liabilities     of    any      transferor    company;
     (ii) the allotment or appropriation by the transferee
     company of any shares, debentures policies, or other
     like interests in that company which, under the
     compromise or arrangement, are to be allotted or
     appropriated by that company to or for any person;
     (iii) the continuation by or against the transferee
     company of any legal proceedings pending by or
     against          any        transferor       company;
     (iv) the dissolution, without winding up, of any
     transferor                                   company;
     (v) the provision to be made for any persons who,
     within such time and in such manner as the Court
     directs     dissent   from     the    compromise    or
     arrangement;                                      and
     (vi) such incidental, consequential and supplemental
     matters as are necessary to secure that the
     reconstruction or amalgamation shall be fully and
     effectively carried out:
(2) Where an order under this section provides for the
transfer of any property or liabilities, then, by virtue of the
order; that property shall be transferred to and vest in and
those liabilities shall be transferred to and become the
liabilities of the transferee company and in the case of any
property, if the order so directs, freed from any charge
which is, by virtue of the compromise or arrangement, to
cease                  to              have              effect.
(3) Within [thirty] days after the making of an order under
this section, every company in relation to which the order is
made shall cause a certified copy thereof to be filed with the
                                12

    Registrar                    for                   registration.
    If default is made in complying with this sub-section, the
    company, and every officer of the company who is in default,
    shall be punishable with fine which may extend to [five
    hundred                                                rupees].
    (4) In this section-
                 (a) "property" includes property rights and
                 powers of every description; and "liabilities"
                 includes duties of every description; and
                 (b) "Transferee company" does not include any
                 company other than a company within the
                 meaning of this Act; but "transferor company"
                 includes any body corporate, whether a company
                 within the meaning of this Act or not.”
6.4         The nature of the proceedings for approval of a scheme of
amalgamation under the Companies Act, 1956 are best described in a
judgment of this court reported at (1983) 53 Company Cases 926
(Delhi) In re: Telesound India Limited in the following terms:-
                 “12. Amalgamation of a company with another or
                 an amalgamation of two companies to form a
                 third is brought about by two parallel schemes of
                 arrangements     entered    into   between     one
                 company and its members and the other
                 company and its members and the two separate
                 arrangements bind all the members of the
                 companies and the companies when sanctioned
                 by the court. Amalgamation is, therefore, an
                 absorption of one company into another or
                 merger of both to form a third, which is not a
                 mere act of the two companies or their members
                 but is brought about by virtue of a statutory
                 instrument and to that extent has statutory
                 genesis and character, and to that extent it is
                 distinguishable     from    a    mere     bilateral
                 arrangement to merge or join in a common
                 endeavor, an undertaking or enterprise [J. K.
                 (Bombay) P. Ltd. v. New Kaiser-i-Hind Spg. &
                 Wvg. Co. Ltd. [1970] 40 Comp Case 689 (SC)].
                 Once the court sanctions the amalgamation, the
                 amalgamation is made effective and binding by
                                   13

virtue of statutory power, inter alia, by the
transferor to the transferee-company of the
whole or any part of the undertaking, property
rights and liabilities of the transferor-company
by virtue of the provisions of s. 394 of the Act,
which are intended to facilitate the process of
amalgamation : Sailendra Kumar Ray v. Bank of
Calcutta Ltd. [1948] 18 Comp Case 1 (Cal). The
expression "property" and "liabilities", which can
be transferred on amalgamation, under s. 394(1)
have been defined in very wide terms by sub-s.
(4)(a) of that section, so as to include "rights and
powers of every description" and "duties of every
description"     respectively.     The    expression
"property" would, therefore, be wide enough to
include rights under a contract, including a
contract of tenancy. These are co-extensive with
the property and right which the transferor-
company has in relation to its assets, but could
not be wider than what the transferor-company
was entitled to enjoy. The rights, property, as
indeed the liabilities of the transferor-company,
become the rights, property and liabilities of the
transferee-company by virtue of the order of
vesting made by the court consequent on
amalgamation. It is neither an assignment of
right or property, nor an assignment of property
by the company. It is the transfer of rights,
property and liabilities along with the company
itself and it is only as a result of confusion of
thought that it could be described as an
assignment by the company to another person,
which is independent and distinct from the
company. Such a notion ignores the peculiar
position of amalgamation in company law and its
true legal incident. It is for historical reasons
that the device of amalgamation was built into
the company law for facilitating the merger of
companies, inter alia, with a view to help
restoration of sick units to health, better, more
effective and economical management of the
corporate sector to ensure continued production,
increased employment avenues and generation
of revenues. Section 72A of the I.T. Act is one of
the incentives for this kind of absorption of one
company into another. On amalgamation the
transferor-company merges into the transferee-
company shedding its corporate shell, but for all
purposes remaining alive and thriving as part of
                    14

               the larger whole. In that sense the transferor-
               company does not die either on amalgamation or
               on dissolution without winding-up under sub-s.
               (1) of s. 394. It is not wound up because it has
               merged into another. Winding-up is unnecessary.
               It is dissolved not because it has died, or ceased
               to exist, but because for all practical purposes, it
               has merged into another forming part of one
               corporate shell. The dissolution is the death of its
               independent corporate shell, because a company
               cannot have two shells. It is, therefore, dissolved
               because the independent shell or corporate name
               is superfluous. The company in its essence
               means its members, who compose it, the assets,
               property and rights that it had, its liabilities, its
               undertaking, business or other activity. It is not
               synonymous with the shell or name. On
               amalgamation and consequential dissolution all
               these attributes continue to live as part of a
               larger entity. The only part that dies is the shell
               and the name. It is unlike the death of a natural
               person and yet in a larger and deeper sense the
               same. It is unlike it, because a natural person, as
               ordinarily understood, does not survive the death
               in any physical form. The transferor-company,
               however, does survive, in that there is a
               continuity even after dissolution of its members,
               its assets, undertaking, etc. The estate of a
               natural person continues in the hands of the
               successor for a limited period. In a larger and a
               deeper sense even a natural person survives his
               physical death in the continuation of a being,
               which is supposed to merge in the wider cosmic
               whole. That, however, is an area of study of life
               after death, or what is sometimes described as
               life after life, where the process is of a different
               dimension and defies description and is, in any
               event, too deep and wide for the narrow compass
               of this judgment. The analogy, therefore,
               between the death of a natural person and
               dissolution without winding-up is inappropriate.”
6.5       These observations were relied on by this court in a recent
judgment reported at 112 (2004) DLT 627 Hotline Hol Celdings
Private Limited & Ors. wherein it was held as follows:-
                                   15

                 "Amalgamation is, therefore, an absorption of
                 one company into another or merger of both to
                 form a third, which is not a mere act of the two
                 companies or their members but is brought
                 about by virtue of a statutory instrument and to
                 that extent has statutory genesis and character,
                 and to that extent it is distinguishable from a
                 mere bilateral arrangement to merge or join in
                 a common endeavor, an undertaking or
                 enterprise." (p.942)”
6.6        Placing reliance on these judicial pronouncements it is
urged that the transfer of property is by operation of law and the
respondents have no jurisdiction to claim stamp duty on such scheme
of amalgamation approved by the company court.
6.7        It is urged that by virtue of the order sanctioning the
scheme for amalgamation, nothing further is required to be done for
the property to stand transferred to and vested in the transferee
company.     Learned senior counsel for the petitioner places strong
reliance on the Division Bench pronouncement of the Calcutta High
Court reported at (2006) 130 ComCas 510 (Cal) Madhu Intra
Limited & Anr. Vs. Registrar of Companies & Ors. The Calcutta
High Court was concerned with a challenge to an order directing
payment of stamp duty on an order sanctioning the scheme of
amalgamation under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956. In this
behalf, the court had distinguished the judgments on the same issue
of the Bombay High Court on the ground that they were based on the
Bombay Stamp Act.          This Stamp Act had been amended vide
Maharashtra Act No. 27/1985 to include a scheme for amalgamation
                                   16

under the definition of 'conveyance'. It was further held that in any
case such scheme would not be liable for stamp duty for the reason
that transfer of assets was effected by the operation of law. In this
regard, the Calcutta High Court had held that :-
                “51. In the case of Bombay, the law has been
                amended so as to include orders made under
                Section 394 of the aforesaid Act within the
                definition of 'conveyance' in the Bombay Stamp
                Act. The ratio of the decision in the Ruby Sales
                and Services Pvt. Ltd. (supra) case, cannot,
                also, in our view, be generally applied to all
                orders under Section 394 of the Companies Act,
                since the said decision was based on the
                consideration that the parties had themselves
                agreed on the basis of the consent decree that
                the order under Section 394 was to operate as a
                'conveyance' for transfer of the assets and
                liabilities of the transferor company to the
                transferee company. It should not be lost sight
                of that in the case of Ruby Sales and Services
                Pvt. Ltd. (supra), the learned Single Judge of
                the Bombay High Court, following a Full Bench
                decision of the same Court had come to the
                conclusion that an order under Section 394 was
                not liable to stamp- duty. The Division Bench
                took a contrary view on account of the fact that
                in the consent decree itself it had been
                indicated that the same was to operate as a
                'conveyance'. It is in the said special facts of the
                case that the decision in Ruby Sales and
                Services Pvt. Ltd. (supra) was rendered by the
                Hon'ble Supreme Court.
                52.         xxx           xxx             xxx
                Even if the order under Section 394 is to be
                taken to be a 'conveyance' or an 'instrument'
                the transfer of assets and liabilities effected
                thereby is purely by operation of law which on
                account of Section 2(d) of the Transfer of
                Property Act also excludes the operation of
                Section 6(e) thereto. Notwithstanding the
                definition of the expression 'instrument' in
                Section 2(14) of the Indian Stamp Act, the
                unamended provisions of the Indian Stamp Act
                in relation to such definition and the definition
                                   17

                 of 'conveyance' and/or 'instrument' does not
                 apply to an order under Section 394 of the
                 Companies Act for the purpose of stamp-duty.
                 We agree with the view expressed by the
                 Division Bench of this Court in New Central Jute
                 Mills Co. Ltd. (supra), that the transfer of assets
                 and liabilities from the transferor company to
                 the transferee company takes place by virtue of
                 subsection(2) of Section 394, without any
                 further act or deed.
                 53. We are, therefore, inclined to agree with the
                 submissions made on behalf of the appellants in
                 these appeals that the learned Company Judge
                 erred in importing the concept of transfer as
                 explained in the case of Ruby Sales and
                 Services Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and Li Taka
                 Pharmaceutical Ltd. (supra) to the case of
                 amalgamation and/or compromise governed
                 simply by the provisions of Sub-section (2) of
                 Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956. In our
                 view, the transfer of assets and liabilities of the
                 transferor company to the transferee company
                 takes place on an order being made under Sub-
                 section (1) of Section 394 by operation of Sub-
                 section (2) thereof.”
6.8         The petitioner places reliance on the observations of the
Calcutta High Court in (1948) 18 Company Cases (1) (Cal)
entitled Sailendra Kumar Ray Vs. Bank of Calcutta Limited
wherein it was held by the court, that in a situation of amalgamation,
even if it can be said that there was a transfer of assets, the transfer
was not by way of assignment but by the order of the court backed up
by force of statutory provision and by operation of law.
6.9         Learned senior counsel for the petitioner has pointed out
that a question arose in several cases before different courts in the
context of the applicability of Chapter XX (C) of the Income Tax Act,
1961 to a transfer of assets taking place by virtue of operation of a
                                    18

scheme of amalgamation approved under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956.       In 2001 (1) Bom CR 261 Sadanand S.
Varde & Ors. Vs. State of Maharashtra & Ors., a public interest
litigation was filed by the petitioners who claimed to be deeply
interested     in  environmental  issues  assailing  construction  and
developmental activity being undertaken on the Bandra Land End on
several issues. The petitioners assailed the amalgamation of the 6th
and 9th respondent under section 391 and 394 of the Companies Act
pursuant to the sanction of the scheme of amalgamation vide
company petition no. 442/1992 and 443/1992 by an order made on 3rd
February, 1993 by the learned Company Judge of the Bombay High
Court.    The petitioner also contested application of Chapter XX
(C) of the      Income Tax    to the   amalgamation.    Several earlier
pronouncements including the decision of the Full Bench of the
Madras High Court in Sahayanidhi Case reported at (1959) 20
Company Cases 214; Tele Sound case (Supra); J.K. (Bombay) Private
Limited (supra) inter alia were relied upon by the bench and it was
finally held as follows :-
         “..... A scrutiny of the definitions of "apparent
         consideration" given in Clause (b) and "transfer"
         given in Clause (f) would unmistakably indicate that
         the transfers to which the provisions of Chapter XX-C
         are intended to apply, are only transfers under
         agreements or contractual transfers and not
         statutory transfers or transfers effected by orders of
         the court or by operation of law. In a situation of
         amalgamation, the transfer is not by way of sale,
         exchange, lease or rent so as to fall within Section
         269UA. Further, the process by which the land in
         question stood vested in the transferee-company by
         virtue of the amalgamation order, would not answer
                                    19

         the description of "immovable property" within the
         meaning of Clause (d)(ii), nor does it answer the
         description of "transfer" as defined in Clause (f)(ii) of
         Section 269UA of the Income-tax Act.”
6.10       In view of the argument that approval of the scheme
amounts to transfer by operation of law, it is also essential to
understand the scope of enquiry and jurisdiction of the company
court.    In this regard, my attention has been drawn to the
pronouncement of the Apex Court in (1997) 1 SCC 579 : (1996) 4
Com.L.J. 124 (SC) entitled Miheer. H. Mafatlal vs. Mafatlal
Industries Ltd. wherein the court had laid down the broad contours
of the jurisdiction of the Company Court and the permissible nature
and extent of its enquiry before granting sanction to the scheme
under section 391 of the Companies Act as follows :-
                 “1. The sanctioning court has to see to it that all
                 the requisite statutory procedure for supporting
                 such a scheme has been complied with and that
                 the requisite meetings as contemplated by
                 Section 391(1)(a) have been held.
                 2. That the scheme put up for sanction of the
                 Court is backed up by the requisite majority vote
                 as required by Section 391 Sub-section (2).
                 3. That the meetings concerned of the creditors
                 or members or any class of them had the relevant
                 material to enable the voters to arrive at an
                 informed decision for approving the scheme in
                 question. That the majority decision of the
                 concerned class of voters is just and fair to the
                 class as a whole so as to legitimately bind even
                 the dissenting members of that class.
                 4. That all necessary material indicated by
                 Section 393(1)(a) is placed before the voters at
                 the meetings concerned as contemplated by
                 Section 391 Sub-section (1).
                                    20

5. That all the requisite material contemplated by
the proviso of Sub-section (2) of Section 391 of
the Act is placed before the Court by the
applicant concerned seeking sanction for such a
scheme and the Court gets satisfied about the
same.
6. That the proposed scheme of compromise and
arrangement is not found to be violative of any
provision of law and is not unconscionable, nor
contrary to public policy. For ascertaining the
real purpose underlying the scheme with a view
to be satisfied on this aspect, the Court, if
necessary, can pierce the veil of apparent
corporate purpose underlying the scheme and
can judiciously X-ray the same.
7. That the Company Court has also to satisfy
itself that members or class of members or
creditors or class of creditors, as the case may be
were acting bona fide and in good faith and were
not coercing the minority in order to promote
any interest adverse to that of the latter
comprising the same class whom they purported
to represent.
8. That the scheme as a whole is also found to be
just, fair and reasonable from the point of view of
prudent men of business taking a commercial
decision beneficial to the class represented by
them for whom the scheme is meant
9. Once the aforesaid broad parameters about
the requirements of a scheme for getting
sanction of the Court are found to have been met
the Court will have no further jurisdiction to sit
in appeal over the commercial wisdom of the
majority of the class of persons who with their
open eyes have given their approval to the
scheme even if in the view of the Court there
would be a better scheme for the company and
its members or creditors for whom the scheme is
framed. The Court cannot refuse to sanction such
a scheme on that ground as it would otherwise
amount to the Court exercising appellate
jurisdiction over the scheme rather than its
supervisory jurisdiction. It is the commercial
wisdom of the parties to the scheme who have
taken an informed decision about the usefulness
                   21

                and propriety of the scheme by supporting it by
                the requisite, majority vote that has to be kept in
                view by the Court. The Court has neither the
                expertise nor the jurisdiction to delve deep into
                the commercial wisdom exercised by the
                creditors and members of the company who have
                ratified the scheme by the requisite majority.
                Consequently the Company Court's jurisdiction
                to that extent is peripheral and supervisory and
                not appellate. The Court acts like an umpire in a
                game of cricket who has to see that both the
                teams play their game according to the rules and
                do not overstep the limits. But subject to that
                how best the game is to be played is left to the
                players and not to the umpire. The supervisory
                jurisdiction of the Company Court can also be
                culled out from the provisions of Section 392. Of
                course this section deals with post-sanction
                supervision. But the said provision itself clearly
                earmarks the field in which the sanction of the
                Court operates. The supervisor cannot ever be
                treated as the author or a policy-maker.
                Consequently the propriety and the merits of the
                compromise or arrangement have to be judged
                by the parties who as sui juris with their open
                eyes and fully informed about the pros and cons
                of the scheme arrive at their own reasoned
                judgment and agree to be bound by such
                compromise or arrangement.”
                                 (Underlying supplied)
6.11      In (2004) 9 SCC 438 Hindustan Lever & Anr. vs State
of Maharashtra, a similar objection was raised by the appellants
before the Supreme Court that stamp duty can be levied only on
'documents' or 'instrument' and that the scheme of amalgamation
sanctioned by an order made by the court after judicial scrutiny
would not be liable to be stamped in accordance with the provisions
of the Bombay Stamp Act in its application in the state of
Maharashtra. In this case, a challenge was also laid to the legislative
                                   22

competence of the State legislature to impose stamp duty on the
order of amalgamation approved under the Companies Act, 1956.
The court considered the principles underlying approval of a scheme
of amalgamation brought out in the earlier pronouncement in Miheer
H. Mafatlal (supra) and summed up as follows :-
        “12. Two broad principles underlying a scheme of
        amalgamation which have been brought out in this
        judgment are:
        1. That the order passed by the Court amalgamating the
        company is based on a compromise or arrangement
        arrived at between the parties; and
        2. That the jurisdiction of the company court while
        sanctioning the scheme is supervisory only, i.e., to
        observe that the procedure set out in the Act is met and
        complied with and that the proposed scheme of
        compromise or arrangement is not violative of any
        provision of law, unconscionable or contrary to public
        policy.”
6.12       On the question being considered, the court held as
follows :-
        “18. It is difficult to subscribe the view propounded by
        the learned counsels for the appellants. As stated
        earlier, the order of amalgamation is based on a
        compromise or an arrangement arrived at between the
        two companies. No individual living being owns the
        company. Each shareholder is the owner of the
        company to the extent of his share holding. By enacting
        Sections 391 to 394 a method has been devised to give
        effect to the will of the prescribed majority of
        shareholders/ creditors. Even in the absence of
        individual agreement by all the shareholders and
        creditors the decision of the majority prescribed in
        Section 391(2) binds all the creditors and the
        shareholders. The Scheme after being sanctioned by
        the Court binds all its creditors, members and
        shareholders including even those who were opposed
        to the scheme being sanctioned. It binds the company
        as well. While exercising its power in sanctioning the
                                    23

        scheme of amalgamation, the Court is to satisfy itself
        that the provisions of statute have been complied with.
        That the class was fairly represented by those who
        attended the meeting and that the statutory majority
        was acting bona-fide and not in an oppressive manner.
        That the arrangement is such as which a prudent,
        intelligent or honest man or a member of class
        concerned and acting in respect of the interest might
        reasonably would take. While examining as to whether
        the majority was acting bona-fide the Court would
        satisfy itself to the effect that the affairs of the
        company were not being conducted in the manner
        prejudicial to the interest of its members or to public
        interest. The basic principle underlying such a situation
        is none other than the broad and general principle
        inherent in any compromise or settlement entered into
        between the parties the same being that it should not
        be unfair, contrary to public policy and unconscionable
        or against the law.
6.13       On this issue, in Hindustan Lever & Anr. (supra) also
placed reliance on an earlier decision reported at 1995 Supp. (1)
SCC 499 : 1994 (4) Co.L.J. 267 (SC) entitled Hindustan Lever
Employees Union vs. Hindustan Lever Ltd. wherein it had been
held that section 394 of the Companies Act casts an obligation on the
court to be satisfied that the scheme of amalgamation or merger was
not contrary to public interest; the basic principle of such satisfaction
is none other than the broad and general principle inherent in any
compromise or settlement entered into between the parties that it
should not be unfair or contrary to public policy or unconscionable or
that the scheme should not be a device to evade the law.
6.14       In para 9, the Apex Court clearly held as follows :-
         “9. Section 394 provides that application and order of
         amalgamation under Section 394 is based on
                                   24

        compromise or arrangement which has been
        proposed for the purpose of amalgamation of two or
        more companies. The amalgamation scheme, which is
        an agreement between the companies is presented
        before the Court and the Court passes an appropriate
        order sanctioning the compromise or arrangement.
        The foundation or the basis for passing an order of
        amalgamation is agreement between two or more
        companies. Under the Scheme of amalgamation, the
        whole or any part of the undertaking, properties or
        liability of any company concerned in the scheme is to
        be transferred to the other company. The company
        whose property is transferred would be the transferor
        company and the company to whom property is
        transferred would be considered as the transferee
        company. The scheme of amalgamation has its
        genesis in an agreement between the prescribed
        majority of shareholders and creditors of the
        transferor company with the prescribed majority of
        shareholders and creditors of the transferee
        company. The intended transfer is a voluntary act of
        the contracting parties. The transfer has all the
        trappings of a sale. The transfer is effected by an
        order of the Court. The proposed compromise or
        arrangement is subject to verification by the Court as
        provided therein. First is that the scheme of
        compromise or arrangement proposed for the
        purposes of amalgamation or in connection therewith,
        shall not be sanctioned unless the Court has received
        a report from the Company Law Board or the
        Registrar that the affairs of the company have not
        been conducted in a manner prejudicial to the
        interest of its Members or to public interest and;
        secondly that the order of resolution of transfer of
        company shall not be made unless official liquidator
        on scrutiny of the books and papers of the Company
        makes a report to the Court that the affairs of the
        company had not been conducted in a manner
        prejudicial to the interest of its members or to public
        interest.”
6.15       My attention is also drawn by learned senior counsel for
the petitioner to the provisions of Section 18 (6A) of the Sick
Industrial Company (Special Provision) Act, 1985 (`SICA' for brevity)
which is in pari materia with the provisions of Section 391 of the
                                   25

Companies Act, 1956. Section 18(6A) is to the following effect:-
                 “18 (6A) Where a sanctioned scheme provides
                 for the transfer of any property or liability of
                 the sick industrial company in favour of any
                 other company or person or where such scheme
                 provides for the transfer of any property or
                 liability of any other company or person in
                 favour of the sick industrial company, then, by
                 virtue of, and to the extent provided in, the
                 scheme, on and from the date of coming into
                 operation of the sanctioned scheme or any
                 provision thereof, the property shall be
                 transferred to, and vest in, and the liability
                 shall become the liability of, such other
                 company or person or, as the case may be, the
                 sick industrial company.”
           Thus the Board of Industrial & Financial Reconstruction is
empowered to pass an order approving a scheme for transfer of
property or liability of any company or passing in favour of the sick
industrial company. The statutory provision stipulates that from the
date of coming into operation of the sanctioned scheme           or any
provision thereof, the property shall be transferred to and vested in
and the liability shall become the liability of such other company or
person or as the case may be.
6.16       This statutory provision has fallen for consideration before
the High Court of Madras in the pronouncement reported at (2008)
144 Company Cases 708 (Madras) T.T. Krishnamachari & Co.
Vs. Joint Sub-Registrar-I & Anr.        It was held by the court that
there is automatic transfer and vestiture of title in favour of the said
company and so no more document or deed is required to be
executed. The court also observed that the SICA does not provide for
                                    26

execution of any such deed, chargeable with stamp duty.        Placing
reliance on the pronouncement of the Division Bench of the Calcutta
High Court reported at (2006) 130 Com.Cas. 510 (Cal) Madhu Intra
Limited Vs. Registrar of Companies & Others,         the Madras High
Court held as follows:-
       “14. Section 18(6A) of the Sick Industrial Companies
       (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 reads as follows:
       Where a sanctioned scheme provides for the transfer
       of any property or liability of the sick industrial
       company in favour of any other company or person or
       where such scheme provides for the transfer of any
       property or liability of any other company or person in
       favour of the sick industrial company, then, by virtue
       of, and to the extent provided in, the scheme on and
       from the date of coming into operation of the
       sanctioned scheme or any provision thereof, the
       property shall be transferred to, and vest in and the
       liability shall become the liability of such other
       company or person or, as the case may be, the sick
       industrial company.
       15. A close reading of the above provision would go to
       indicate that the BIFR has got such power to pass an
       order approving the scheme and as soon as such an
       order is passed by the BIFR, the property shall stand
       transferred and vested in the company in whose
       favour the scheme provides for such transfer. Thus,
       transfer of title in favour of TTK Prestige Ltd., has
       been effected, by operation of law as per Section
       18(6A) of the SICA. There is automatic transfer and
       vestiture of title in favour of the said company and so
       there is no more document or deed required to be
       executed. The SICA does not provide for execution of
       any such deed chargeable with stamp duty.
       16. While dealing with Section 394(1) and (2) of the
       Companies Act and Section 2(14) of the Indian Stamp
       Act, a Division Bench of the Kolkatta High Court in
       Madhu Intra Ltd. v. Registrar of Co.'s [2006] 130
       Comp Cas 510, has held that any transfer of assets
       and liabilities of the transferor company to the
       transferee company made under Section 394(1) and
       (2) of the Companies Act, by means of an
       amalgamation is not chargeable with any stamp duty
                                    27

       as the said transaction does not fall within the ambit
       of Section 2(14) of the Indian Stamp Act.
       xxx xxx
       20. Both in the case of amalgamation under the
       Companies Act, as well as in the case of any scheme
       under the BIFR, the transfer is not effected on the act
       of parties, but it is by operation of law. It is an
       involuntary transfer which takes place as soon as the
       statutory authority, namely, the BIFR passes the
       order.”
6.17       As noted by the Madras High Court, on this aspect the
Bombay High Court had taken a different view. The scheme of the
Companies Act, 1956 also shows transfer of assets and liabilities on
effectuation of a scheme of amalgamation consequent upon its
approval has no element of compulsion.      The scheme is proposed
voluntarily. It is based on the consent and wishes of the majority of
the members and creditors.      The objection and intendment of the
provisions of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act,
1985 has no parity with purpose of section 392-394 the Companies
Act, 1956.
           As noticed above, the Supreme Court has in clear terms
held that the scheme for amalgamation involves no adjudication and
is based on consent without any nuance or element of compulsion.
The principles laid down by the Apex Court as noticed above would
bind the adjudication by this court.
6.18       Mr. P.V. Kapoor, learned senior counsel appearing for the
petitioners has urged at great length that the judgment of the Apex
Court in Hindustan Lever (supra) has not taken into consideration
                                   28

the principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court in its earlier
pronouncement in J.K. (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. vs. M/s New Kaiser-I-Hind
Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd. which was by a larger Bench.
6.19       In this pronouncement of the Apex Court reported at AIR
1970 SC 1041 as J.K. (Bombay) Private Limited Vs. M/s New
Kaiser-I-Hind Spinning & Weaving Company Limited               & Ors.
the Apex Court laid down the applicable principles thus:
                “35.       xxx        xxx       xxx
                The principle is that a scheme sanctioned by the
                court does not operate as a mere agreement
                between the parties; it becomes binding on the
                company, the creditors and the shareholders
                and has statutory force, and therefore, the joint-
                debtor could not invoke the principle of accord
                and satisfaction. By virtue of the provisions of
                Section 391 of the Act, a scheme is statutorily
                binding even on creditors and shareholders who
                dissented from or are opposed to its being
                sanctioned. It has statutory force in that sense
                and therefore cannot be altered except with the
                sanction of the court even if the shareholders
                and the creditors acquiesce in such alteration
                (cf. Premila Devi v. Peoples Bank). The effect of
                the scheme is " to supply by recourse to the
                procedure thereby prescribed the absence of
                that individual agreement by every member of
                the class to be bound by the scheme which
                would otherwise be necessary to give it validity "
                (Palmer's Company Law, 20th Ed., page 664).
                Sub-section (2) of Section 391 of the Act allows
                the decision of the majority prescribed therein
                to bind the minority of creditors and
                shareholders and it is for that reason that a
                scheme is said to have statutory operation and
                cannot be varied by the shareholders or the
                creditors unless such variation is sanctioned by
                the court.”
6.20       I find that in J.K. (Bombay) Pvt. Ltd. vs. M/s New
                                   29

Kaiser-I-Hind Spinning & Weaving Co. Ltd. (supra), also it was
held that a scheme is statutorily binding even on creditors and
shareholders who dissented from or oppose the same being
sanctioned and that it had statutory force only in that sense. It was
also observed that the scheme could not be altered except with the
sanction of the court even if the shareholders and creditors acquiesce
in such alteration.     It was for this limited reason that the court
observed that the scheme would be said to have statutory operation.
6.21        Placing reliance on the principles laid down in the above
case on the scope of the proceedings under Section 391 of the
Companies Act, 1956, in para 32 of the pronouncement reported at
AIR    2005     SC     2520    Administration    of    the    Specified
Undertaking of the Unit Trust of India Vs. Garware Polyster
Limited, the Supreme Court held that the court, would not grant
sanction to a proposed scheme only because the same reflects the
will of the majority of the creditors or a class of them but it must
consider all aspects of the matter so as to arrive at a finding that the
scheme is fair, just and reasonable and does not contravene public
policy or any statutory provision. The Supreme Court held that such
care and caution is required to be exercised by all courts including
the civil courts in terms of Rule 1 of the Order XXIII, of the Code of
Civil   Procedure     (hereafter  referred   to   as   `CPC').      This
pronouncement also does not state that there is any adjudication by
the court on the merits or demerits of the proposed scheme and only
emphasises the limited scope of the enquiry by the court.
                                   30

6.22       I am unable to find any conflict between the consideration
by the Apex Court in the Hindustan Lever case and the prior
judgments so far as the scope and ambit of the consideration by a
court of a scheme for amalgamation or arrangement between the two
companies under section 391 and 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 is
concerned.     The clear principles which emerge from the judicial
precedents cited before me are that the proposed scheme is a
voluntary act of the parties (companies) without any compulsion,
statutory or otherwise at all.   The scheme when approved by the
majority of members and creditors, binds the minority dissenters as
well.   The court exercises only a supervisory jurisdiction while
examining the same. No element of adjudication is involved in the
order of approval.
6.23       Despite a close scrutiny of the case law before this court, I
do not find any judicial precedents that have held that the court is
empowered to consider the merits of the terms on which the scheme
for amalgamation has been proposed by the consenting parties. On
the contrary statutory provisions mandate and judicial precedents
have held that even a modification suggested by the court is required
to have the approval of the shareholders and the creditors before it
can be incorporated in the scheme. No adjudication is involved. The
role of the court is merely supervisory within the contours of the
broad parameters noticed hereinabove without ruling on the merits
of the schemes placed before the court and its consideration is
confined to the issue that the scheme was not violative of the
                                  31

principles of law, public policy and, was not opposed to public
interest.
            There is nothing to denigrate from the basic and primary
fact that the order of the court is based on the consent of the parties.
The most relevant factor is the undisputable reality that the transfer
of property is not an involuntary act of the parties, i.e. the companies
involved.     The   order   of approval   of  the  scheme      results  in
amalgamation and absorption of the assets and liabilities of the
transferor company with those of the transferee company which
includes immoveable property.
7.          Whether transfer of property by an order of the court or
by operation of law is exigible to stamp duty?
7.1         Even if the contention of the petitioner were to be
accepted and it were to be held that the order of approval of a
scheme of amalgamation under section 394 is not an order
simplicitor of transfer of property by an act of parties but is an order
after judicial scrutiny and that it bears the imprimatur of the court;
the moot question is whether such approved scheme stands on a
special footing, is exempted from the legal consequences of transfer
of property and that it cannot be subjected to stamp duty.             The
applicants' submission is that an order of a court cannot be subjected
to scrutiny or interference by the revenue authorities.
7.2          In (1986) 2 SCC 656 : 1986 2 Com.L.J. 249 General
Radio & Appliances Co. Ltd. & Ors. vs. M.A. Khader (dead) by
LRs the court was concerned with a petition by a landlord seeking
                                    32

eviction of a tenant company on the ground of subletting.          The
question raised was as to whether the amalgamation amounted to a
transfer of the tenant company's rights under the lease by way of
subletting.   The court came to a conclusion that the order of
amalgamation had been made on the basis of a petition filed by the
transferor company and therefore was not involuntary. It was held to
be a voluntary act by agreement between the parties.
           The Apex Court therefore held that it had to be concluded
that there was a transfer of tenancy interest on account of the
scheme of amalgamation in utter contravention of the provisions of
the Rent Act and the terms and conditions of the rent agreement
between the landlord and the General Radio and Appliances Pvt. Ltd.
7.3        Mr. Aditya Madan, learned counsel representing the
Government of NCT of Delhi has placed reliance on several
judgments wherein the same principle has been reiterated.
           My attention is drawn to the judgment reported at 2005
(64) SCL 529 (Mad.) E.L. Forge Ltd. vs State Industries
Promotion Corpn. of Tamilnadu Ltd. wherein the Madras High
Court rejected the petitioner's contention that the amalgamation of
two companies by the court's order had merely merged the assets of
the two companies and hence there was no transfer of any right in
land in favour of the petitioner's company.
7.4        The question of chargeability of stamp duty also stands
squarely answered.     It is noteworthy, that in its discussion in the
Hindustan Lever (supra), the Apex Court observed in para 19 that
                                    33

orders passed by courts have been subjected to levy of stamp duty in
several situations. The court considered its earlier pronouncement in
(1966) 2 SCR 353 Purshottam H. Jadye vs. V.B. Potdar wherein
it was held that the expression 'instrument' would include an award
made by the Industrial Tribunal.         Reliance was also placed on
(1891) XXIII QBD 579, The Commissioner of Inland Revenue v.
G. Angus & Co. & Anr. wherein it was held that the term
'conveyance on sale' includes every instrument and every decree or
order of any court or of any commissioners, whereby any property
upon the sale thereof is legally or equitably transferred to or vested
in the purchaser or any other person on his behalf or on his
directions. It was further held herein that the thing which is liable to
stamp duty is the 'instrument' and it is not a transaction of purchase
and sale which is struck at.
7.5         The Apex Court also referred to (1971) 1 All.E.R. 135
Sun Alliance Insurance Ltd. vs. Inland Revenue Commissioners
wherein it was held that an order of the court was liable to stamp
duty as it resulted in transferring the property and that the order
passed by any court which results in transfer of property would be an
instrument as it includes every document.              Upon a detailed
consideration of the law on this issue,the Court held thus :-
        “19. Orders passed by the Court resulting in transferring
        the rights in property have been subjected to levy of
        stamp duty in several situations. It is there from the date
        of the inception of the Indian Stamp Act 1899. Section
        2(m) of the Indian Stamp Act 1899 defines "instrument
        of partition" to mean any instrument whereby co-owners
        of any property divide or agree to divide such property
                                   34

in severalty, and includes also a final order for effecting
a partition passed by any revenue authority or any Civil
Court and an award by an arbitrator directing a
partition. This provision specifically provide that any
final order effecting partition by any Court, Revenue
Authority or award made by the Arbitrator directing
partition would be an instrument of partition.
xxx
27. Section 394(2) of the Companies Act 1956 provides
that the properties and liabilities of the transferor
company stand transferred to the transferee company by
virtue of an order of court. .......
xxx
30. A document creating or transferring a right is an
instrument. Can it be said that an order effectuating the
transfer is a document? The answer has been given in
the affirmative by this in Court in Haji Sk. Subhan v.
Madhorao, AIR1962SC1230 , wherein it was held that
the question is whether the word "document" includes a
decree of the Court. It was held that there was no good
reason why a decree of the court when it affects the
proprietary rights and is in relation to them should not
be included in this expression. This question more
pointedly arose before this Court in Ruby Sales and
services (P) Ltd., (supra) . In that case in a suit for
specific performance the property was conveyed to the
vendee by a consent decree. The question arose whether
the consent decree is an instrument and liable to be
stamped. The consent decree contained a recital to the
effect that "this decree does operate as the conveyance
from the defendants in favour of the plaintiffs in respect
of the said property more particularly described in
exhibit A to the plaint." The Court held that :
      "11. there is no particular pleasure in merely
going by the label but which is decisive is by the terms
of the document. It is clear from the terms of the
consent decree that it is also an "instrument" under
which      title has      been     passed   over    to   the
appellant/plaintiffs. It is a live document transferring the
property in dispute from the defendants to the
plaintiffs."
      The aforesaid decree was based on an agreement
between the parties. So is the case with an order under
Section 394 of the Companies Act which is also based on
an agreement between the transferor company and the
transferee company.
                               35

        xxx
        32. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold that
        the order passed by the Court under Section 394 of the
        Companies Act is based upon the compromise between
        two or more companies. Function of the Court while
        sanctioning the compromise or arrangement is limited to
        oversee that the compromise or arrangement arrived at
        is lawful and that the affairs of the company were not
        conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interest of its
        members or to public interest that is to say it should not
        be unfair or contrary to public policy or unconscionable.
        Once these things are satisfied the scheme has to be
        sanctioned as per the compromise arrived at between
        the parties. It is an instrument which transfers the
        properties and would fall within the definition of Section
        2(1) of the Bombay Stamp Act which includes every
        document by which any right or liability is transferred.
        The State Legislature would have the jurisdiction to levy
        stamp duty under Entry 44, List III of the seventh
        Schedule of the Constitution of India and prescribe rates
        of stamp duty under Entry 63, List II.”
7.6         Mr. P.V. Kapur, learned counsel for the petitioner, has
sought to draw a distinction before this court that the judgment in
Hindustan Lever's case was rendered in its peculiar facts and legal
situation having regard to the applicable statute in Maharashtra or
other states and cannot govern adjudication in the instant case. It is
contended that there are no statutory provisions in the Indian Stamp
Act, 1899 applicable to Delhi which are in pari materia to section
2(g)(iv) of the Bombay Stamp Act.       It is also emphasised that the
Bombay Stamp Act, 1985 is not in pari materia and therefore the
judgments which decide issues relating to this enactment would have
no application to the instant case.
7.7         There can be no dispute with the well settled principle that
                                    36

a judicial precedent requires to be considered in the light of the
issues which were before the court passing the judgment.           It also
needs no elaboration that statutes which are not in pari-materia
cannot be compared.
8.         Inclusive definition clauses- interpretation
8.1        In view of the distinction being drawn on behalf of the
petitioners, it become essential to consider the statutory definitions
before proceeding further .
8.2        Section 2(10) of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 contains an
inclusive definition of 'conveyance'.     Interpretation of an inclusive
definition clause in statutes has fallen for consideration in several
cases before the courts. In the instant case, these can usefully be
adverted to for construing the effect of the amendment to include a
scheme of amalgamation under the definition in the Bombay Stamp
Act.
8.3        The    expression    “includes”    appearing    in   statutory
provisions has come up for interpretation repeatedly.        It has been
explained that the word “included” is generally used in the
interpretation clause to enlarge the meaning of the words so as to
make them to comprehend not only such things as they signify
according to their natural import but also the things they are
declared in the interpretation clause to be included.      (Ref: (1899)
AC 99, 105 Dilworth vs. Commission of Stamps).
8.4        In AIR 1934 Calcutta 580 Amin Shariff vs. Emperor, it
was stated that the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words is to
                                    37

be adhered to, unless that would lead to some absurdity, or
repugnance or inconsistency with the rest of the statute, in which
case, the grammatical and ordinary sense of the words may be
modified,    so   as   to  avoid   that   absurdity,  repugnance   and
inconsistency, but no further.        (Beal's Cardinal Rules of Legal
Interpretation, 3rd Edn., p.343, et. Seq.)
8.5         The decision of the Supreme Court in C.I.T., A.P. vs. Taj
Mahal Hotel Secunderabad reported at (1971) 3 SCC 550: AIR
1972 SC 168 rendered in the context of Sub-section 2 of section
10(5) of the Income Tax provides another instance of an inclusive
definition of the word 'plant'.    On this provision, in para 6 of the
judgment, the Supreme Court observed the impact of the use of the
expression “includes” in a definition clause by the legislature as
follows :-
                     “The word “includes” is often used in
               interpretation clauses in order to enlarge the
               meaning of the words or phrases must be
               construed as comprehending not only such
               things as they signify according to their
               nature and import but also those things which
               the interpretation clause declares that they
               shall include.    The word 'include' is also
               susceptible of other constructions which it is
               unnecessary to go into.”
                                     (Emphasis supplied)
8.6         Explaining the reason and the implication of inclusive
definition, the Apex Court thus was of the view that the word 'include'
is used to amplify the meaning while removing a possible doubt.
                                    38

8.7         In the decision of the Supreme Court reported at
MANU/SC/0427/1996 entitled Thirumanickam and Co. vs. The
State of Tamilnadu, it was held that an amendment which is by way
of a clarification of an earlier ambiguous provision, can be a useful
aid in construing the earlier provision, even though such an
amendment is not given a retrospective effect.
8.8         The legal position was summarized by the Supreme Court
in AIR 2009 SC 1905 (para 13) Karnataka Power Transmission
Corporation & Anr. vs. Ashok Iron Works Pvt. Ltd. and it was
stated that the inclusive definition by the legislation is used for the
following purpose :-
                           “...........(one)  to   enlarge   the
                meaning of words or phrases so as to take in
                the ordinary popular and natural sense of the
                words and also the sense which the statute
                wishes to attribute to it; (two) to include
                meaning about which there might be some
                dispute;    (three)       to bring   under   one
                nomenclature all transactions possessing
                certain similar features but going under
                different names.”
8.9         From the above, it is evident that a legislative omission to
mention a subject or item in an inclusive definition does not
tantamount to legislative exclusion or exemption from applicability of
the statutory provisions.
8.10        So far as the amendment and inclusion of clause (iv) in
Section 2(g) of the Bombay Stamp Act is concerned, the impact of the
                                        39

specific inclusion of the scheme of amalgamation in the Act has been
considered in several judicial precedents.           The principles noticed
heretofore with regard to the effect of the word “inclusive” have been
applied.     The principles laid down in these pronouncements usefully
deserve to be adverted to before proceeding further.
8.11          A question arose before the court in the judgment of the
Bombay High Court reported at 1992 (1) Bom.C.R. 568 :
MANU/MH/04531992 State of Maharashtra vs. M.S. Builders
(Pvt.) Ltd. & Ors. as to whether a consent decree whereby title to
immoveable property is conveyed, falls under the definition of
'conveyance' under section 2(g) of the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958 or
such consent decree falls outside the ambit and scope of the
definition of 'conveyance' under the Act.
       The argument on behalf of the writ petitioner was that the
amendment had introduced new provisions by substitution.
8.12          In para 15 of its pronouncement, the Division Bench of the
Bombay High Court has clearly held that the amendment introduced
to section 2(g) of the Bombay Stamp Act was merely declaratory and
not a remedial one. It was also held that the consent decree which
fulfills all requisites of transferring right, title and interest under it in
favour of the respondents, is an instrument under section 2(g) of the
Act which would be chargeable to stamp duty under entry 25 of
Schedule 1 of the Act.
                                      40

            On such interpretation of the amendment, it was held that
consent decrees which had been passed prior to coming into force of
the amendment, were covered under the unamended section 2(g)
and were chargeable to stamp duty.
8.13        The Division Bench of the Bombay High Court placed
reliance on two pronouncements of the Supreme Court reported at
CIT, A.P. vs. Taj Mahal Hotel, Secundarabad 1971 (3) SCC 550
and State of Tamil Nadu v. Pyare Lal Malhotra, (1976)1 S.C.C.
834 on interpretation of inclusive or explanatory statutory provisions
and accepted the submission that the amendment incorporated by
the Maharashtra Act No. 27/1985 to the definition of “conveyance” in
section 2(g) is by way of a clarification and effectuated only in order
to clarify what was accepted in the provisions as they existed prior to
the amendment.         The amendment therefore was by way of
clarification of an ambiguous provision.
8.14        There is yet another aspect of this matter. Section 2(g) of
the Bombay Stamp Act defines the expression “conveyance” as
including an instrument by which there is transfer of right, title and
interest in immoveable property. 'Instrument' stands defined under
section 2(i) of the Act which is another inclusive definition and opens
with the words that 'instrument includes every document ........”
8.15        In M.S. Builders Pvt. Ltd. (supra), an argument was laid
before the court by the respondents that the decree put a seal of the
court on the position existing in law as to the legal status of the
respondents; that it formally expresses such rights; that wherever the
                                    41

legislature intended to include a final order of the civil court to be
covered under the provisions of the act, it had specifically provided
so.   In this behalf, it was argued that 'instrument of partition' in
section 2(m) of the Bombay Stamp Act was specifically included by
the legislature; and that there was no statutory provision including a
consent decree within the scope of 'conveyance' as defined under
section 2(g) of the Act or by the definition of the word 'instrument'. It
is noteworthy that the Division Bench rejected all these contentions
after a detailed consideration.
8.16        In the judgment reported at (1994) 1 SCC 531 entitled
Ruby     Sales   &   Services    Pvt.    Ltd. &    Anr.  vs.   State   of
Maharashtra, the Supreme Court was considering the inclusion of a
consent decree within the definition of the 'conveyance' under section
2(g) or within the definition of 'instrument' as defined under section
2(l) of the Bombay Stamp Act. The court observed that clause (iii) of
section 2(g) which included every decree or final order of any civil
court within the definition of 'conveyance', had been introduced only
out of abundant caution and it does not mean that the consent decree
was not otherwise covered by the definition in section 2(g) or section
2(l) of the Stamp Act. It was held by the Supreme Court that it was
clear from the consent decree that it also falls within the definition of
'instrument'    under    which     title  has   passed    over   to   the
appellants/plaintiffs. It is a live document transferring the property
in dispute from the defendants to the plaintiffs. It was observed by
the Apex Court that the position became clear that the consent
                                      42

decree   falls   under   the  definition   of  both  “conveyance”    and
“instrument”.     Such position was held to exist even prior to the
statutory amendment to the Bombay Stamp Act.
8.17        It was observed by the Apex Court that that the statutory
amendment was made out of abundant caution and it did not mean
that a consent decree was not otherwise covered.        In paras 11, 14
and 15 of the judgment, the court noticed the submission on behalf of
the appellant and observed thereon as follows :-
            “11. There is no particular pleasure in merely going
            by the label but what is decisive is by the terms of
            the document. It is clear from the terms of the
            consent decree that it is also an “instrument” under
            which title has been passed over to the
            appellants/plaintiffs.     It is a live document
            transferring the property in dispute from the
            defendants to the plaintiffs.
            xxx
            14. Mr. Ganesh, learned counsel for the appellant,
            submitted that it is only by the amendment that with
            effect from December, 10, 1985 the decree passed by
            the court has been for the first time introduced in
            the definition of       “conveyance” and the said
            amendment does not refer to be by way of
            clarification or declaration of that position. It was
            thus submitted that prior to amendment the consent
            decree was not included in the definitions of
            “conveyance” and “instrument”. The High Court
            proceeded on the footing that he 1985 Amendment
            was clarificatory and declaratory.
               15.      As we have noticed earlier the definitions
               of “conveyance” and “instrument” start with the
               expression “includes” which shows that the
               definitions are very wide. It appears to us that
               the amendment was made out of abundant caution
               and it does not mean that the consent decree was
               not otherwise covered by the definitions given in
               Section 2(g) or 2(l) of the Act. As stated earlier it
               depends on the terms thereof. Merely because an
               agreement is put in the shape of a consent decree
               it does not change the contents of the document.
               It remains an agreement and it is subject to all
                                    43

             rights and liabilities which any agreement may
             suffer. Having a stamp of court affixed will not
             change the nature of the document. A compromise
             decree does not stand on a higher footing than the
             agreement which preceded it. A consent decree is
             a mere creature of the agreement on which it is
             founded and is liable to be set aside on any of the
             grounds which will invalidate the agreement.
8.18      In AIR 1997 Bom 7 Li Taka Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v.
State of Maharashtra & Ors. on this very aspect the Bombay High
Court had ruled as follows :-
                   “4. Clause (g)(iii), which is added by the
                   Maharashtra Act No. 27 of 1985 which has
                   come into operation from December 10,
                   1985, provides that conveyance includes
                   every decree or final order of any civil court.
                   Clause (g)(iv) is added by the Maharashtra
                   Act No. 17 of 1993 which has come into
                   operation from April 1, 1993. Before
                   appreciating the contentions raised, it would
                   be appropriate to state that even prior to
                   amendment, a conveyance would include
                   every instrument by which the property is
                   transferred to or vested in any other person
                   inter vivos. Under clause (g)(ii), conveyance
                   included every instrument by which whether
                   movable or immovable property or asset or
                   interest in any property is transferred to or
                   vested in any other person, inter vivos, and
                   which is not otherwise specifically provided.
                   By adding section 2(g)(iii), it is made clear
                   that "every instrument" would include a
                   consent decree or final order of any civil
                   court.”
8.19      The Supreme Court and High Court of Bombay have held
that the amendment to the Bombay Stamp Act by the Maharashtra
Act No. 27/1985 was only with a view to set at rest any doubts and to
clarify and explicitly state what was already included in the
unamended definition of conveyance.     The definition of 'conveyance'
                                  44

in the Act was an inclusive definition.  The amendments were held to
be merely declaratory and by way of a clarification and that the same
were not any new statutory provision.
           There can therefore be no manner of doubt, that even if
the legislature had not effected the amendment and included the
clause in sub-section (g) of Section 2 of the Bombay Stamp Act, it
made no difference to the legal issue at all.              A scheme of
amalgamation approved by a court in exercise of jurisdiction under
the Companies Act, 1956 and given effect to thereafter, whereunder
property is conveyed from one company to another, is covered within
the unamended definition of the term 'conveyance' in the Bombay
Stamp Act as well.
           The same would therefore be exigible to stamp duty under
section 3 of the Indian Stamp Act.
8.20       I have noticed hereinabove, the construction placed by the
Supreme Court of India as well as the Bombay High Court. It has
authoritatively held that the amendment to the inclusive definition of
'conveyance' in the Bombay Stamp Act by virtue of the Maharashtra
Act No. 27/1985 (Amendment), made no impact to the substantive
provisions and was really in the nature of a clarification to the
existing provisions.   This being the legal position, it certainly cannot
be contended that merely because some of the judicial precedents
cited before this court arise out of the Bombay Stamp Act, 1985, the
clear legal principles laid in such pronouncements would have no
application to the instant case.
                                   45

8.21        The very reasoning noticed hereinabove applies to the
present consideration.      Merely because the legislature has not
amended the existing statutory provision as applicable to Delhi to
specifically include transfer of property under an order approving a
scheme of amalgamation in the definition of conveyance, it is of no
consequence at all.     The same does not amount to exclusion from
applicability of the Indian Stamp Act and chargeability to stamp duty
thereon. The statutory definition of “conveyance” under sub-section
10 of Section 2 is an inclusive definition of wide import which cannot
be confined to specific instruments mentioned in the statute.
8.22        The contention on behalf of the petitioner that the failure
of the legislature to specifically include the order sanctioning a
scheme of amalgamation in the definition of “instrument” or
“conveyance” in the Indian Stamp Act manifests an intent to exclude
it from applicability of the statutory provisions, is therefore devoid of
legal merit and has to be rejected.
8.23        The salutary principle pressed into service by learned
senior counsel appearing for the petitioner to the effect that fiscal
statutes have to be strictly construed needs no elaboration. Placing
reliance on the principles laid down in AIR 1968 SC 623 Income
Tax Officer, Tuticorn vs. J.S. Devinatha Nadar etc. it was urged
that the language of a statute imposing a tax duty or charge has to
receive a strict construction in the sense that there is no room for any
intendment and regard must be had to the clear meaning of the
words.   Where the meaning of the statute is in doubt, it must be
                                    46

construed in favour of the subject, however much within the spirit of
the law, the case might otherwise appear to be; but a fair and
reasonable construction must be given to the language used without
leaning to one side or the other.      If the interpretation of a fiscal
enactment is in doubt, the subject cannot be taxed unless he comes
within the later of the law and the argument that he falls within the
spirit of the law cannot avail the department.
8.24        Placing reliance on the principles in (2008) 4 SCC 720 at
735 Government of Andhra Pradesh vs. P. Laxmi Devi (para 19
at 735) has been urged that there can be no dispute that the stamp
duty is a tax and that hardship is not relevant in construing taxing
statutes which are to be considered strictly. As often said, there is no
equity in a tax.
            There can be no dispute with these propositions. However
no issue of hardship arises in the present case.
8.25        So far as the definition clauses are concerned, there is
another reason why an approved scheme of amalgamation would be
exigible to stamp duty.      It is noteworthy, that the definition of
instrument under section 2(l) of the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958 was
not amended by the Maharashtra Act 17 of 1993 and is similar to the
definition under Section 2(14) of the Indian Stamp Act.
8.26        In its judgment reported at AIR 1997 Bom 7 Li Taka
Pharmaceuticals Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors.                  the
Bombay High Court had answered the issue in the following manner:-
        “8. Further, under section 2(l) of the Bombay Stamp Act,
                                    47

the word "instrument" is defined to mean every
document by which any right or liability is, or purports to
be, created, transferred, limited, extended, extinguished
or recorded, but does not include a bill of exchange,
cheque, promissory note, bill of lading, letter of credit,
policy of insurance, transfer of shares, debenture, proxy
and receipt. Therefore, the amalgamation scheme
sanctioned by the court would be an instrument within
the meaning of section 2(l). The said instrument is on the
basis of agreement or arrangement between two or more
companies. By the said instrument, properties are
transferred.
xxx
10. Re : Contention (a) :
Mr. Andhyarujina vehemently submitted that if court
decrees and instruments are included and considered as
conveyances, then, the result would be a startling one
and that every order passed by this court or the Supreme
Court or the civil court would be subject to interference
by the Revenue authorities and would not be admissible
under section 34 of the Bombay Stamps Act unless it is
duly stamped. The consequence would be that there will
be inroads in judicial orders passed by the courts. He
contended that once the court passes an order or a
decree, it is required to be implemented or executed and
its execution or implementation cannot be subjected to
payment of duty. He further pointed out that this would
be in direct violation of article 142 of the Constitution
which provides that every decree or order passed by the
Supreme Court shall be enforceable throughout the
territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed
by or under any law made by Parliament.
11. In our view, it is difficult to accept the contention
that inclusion of a court's order or compromise decree or
amalgamation scheme for subjecting it to the stamp duty
would lead to startling results. It should be noted that
this is not for the first time that orders passed by the
court are subjected to levy of stamp duty. It is there from
the date of the inception of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899.
Section 2(m) defines "instrument of partition" to mean
any instrument whereby co-owners of any property
divide or agree to divide such property in severalty, and
includes also a final order for effecting a partition passed
by any revenue authority or any civil court and an award
by an arbitrator directing partition. This section
specifically provides that any final order effecting
partition passed by the civil court, revenue authority and
                             48

an award passed by the arbitrator directing a partition
would be an instrument of partition. Further, similar
contentions were considered by the Queen's Bench
Division in the case of IRC v. G. Angus and Co. [1889] 23
QBD 579, 582 with regard to section 70 of the Stamp
Act, 1870, which gives the interpretation to be placed
upon the expression "conveyance on sale", in the
following language :
     "The term 'conveyance on sale' includes
     every instrument and every decree or order
     of any court or of any Commissioners,
     whereby any property upon the sale thereof
     is legally or equitably transferred to or
     vested in the purchaser or any other person
     on his behalf or by his direction."
 12. In that case, the court observed that the first thing to
 be noticed is, that the thing which is made liable to the
 duty is an "instrument". If a contract of purchase and
 sale, or a conveyance by way of purchase and sale, can
 be, or is, carried out without an instrument, the case is
 not within the section, and no tax is imposed. It is not the
 transaction of purchase and sale which is struck at; it is
 the instrument whereby the purchase and sale are
 effected which is struck at. The court further observed
 that it is the instrument whereby any property upon the
 sale thereof is legally or equitably transferred and the
 taxation is confined to the instrument whereby the
 property is transferred.
 xxx         xxx
Xxx
15. Learned counsel further contended that the
jurisdiction of levy stamp duty is in respect of a
document or an instrument and, therefore, an order or
decree of the court cannot be termed an instrument or a
document unless it ratifies the act of the parties. As
discussed above, the foundation of an order section 394
of the Companies Act is a compromise or arrangement
between two or more companies and it involves transfer
of assets and liabilities of one company to the other
company. The proviso to sub-section (1) of section 394
provides that the court can sanction the scheme if the
affairs of the company have not been conducted in a
manner prejudicial to the interests of its members or to
public interest. The transfer of the assets of a transferor-
company is based upon the compromise and while
sanctioning the scheme the court is not substituting or
                              49

       changing the compromise or arrangement. It only
       verifies whether it is a lawful act and is in accordance
       with the prescribed procedure.
       xxx
       20.    xxxx The Legislature is not making any direct or
       indirect inroads into the judicial powers. It has only
       provided that if an instrument including an order passed
       by the court transfers movable or immovable property,
       then on the same instrument, stamp duty as provided
       under the Act is required to be paid. This cannot be
       stated to be in any manner making direct inroads into
       the judicial function of this court or of the Supreme
       Court. It cannot be said that article 261(3) of the
       Constitution, which provides that final judgments or
       orders delivered or passed by civil courts in any part of
       the territory of India shall be capable of execution
       anywhere within that territory according to law, is
       violated. This article itself provides that it could be
       executed anywhere within the territory according to law
       and law includes law which prescribes payment of stamp
       duty on such instrument if it transfers or conveys
       movable or immovable property.”
8.27         The issue of chargeability of the approved scheme of
amalgamation to stamp duty in the light of the statutory scheme,
provisions and amendments and the definition of the expression
'instrument' under section 2(l) of the Bombay Stamp Act, 1958 was
also considered in Hindustan Lever (supra). The principles laid down
by the Apex Court int his regard read as follows :-
       “15. This definition of 'instrument' is not amended by
       the Maharashtra Act of 17 of 1993. The word
       "instrument" is defined to mean, every document by
       which any right or liability is or purports to be created
       transferred,   limited,    extended,    extinguished      or
       recorded, but does not include bill of exchange, cheque,
       promissory note, bill of lading, letter of credit, policy of
       insurance, transfer of shares, debenture proxy and
       receipt. The recital in the scheme of amalgamation as
       well as the order of the High Court under Section 394 of
       the Companies Act, declares, that upon such order of
       High Court the undertaking of the transferor company
                                   50

        shall stand transferred to the transferee company with
        all its movable, immovable and tangible assets to the
        transferee company without any further act or deed.
        Sub-section 3 of Section 394 provides that the certified
        copy of the Order of the Court has to be presented
        before the Registrar of companies within 30 days for
        registration. And in default any officer of the company,
        who is in default, becomes liable to be punished and
        fined, which may extend up to Rs. 500/-. Section 391(3)
        provides that an order made by the court under Sub-
        section (2) of Section 391 shall not have effect till a
        certified copy of the order has been filed with the
        Registrar. On presentation of the certified copy of order,
        the Registrar of the Company certifies that the
        transferor company stands amalgamated with the
        transferee company along with all its assets and
        liabilities. Thus the amalgamation scheme sanctioned by
        the Court would be an "instrument" within the meaning
        of Section 2(i). By the said ''instrument" the properties
        are transferred from the transferor company to the
        transferee company, the basis of which is the
        compromise or arrangement arrived at between the two
        companies.”
8.28        It is well settled, that a document creating or transferring
a right in immoveable property is an 'instrument'. Before this court,
it was stated by Mr. P.V. Kapoor, learned senior counsel for the
petitioner, that he does not dispute that a scheme of amalgamation
which was placed before the court and stands approved under
section 391 to 394 of the Companies Act, 1956 would be covered
under the definition of 'instrument' as contained in sub-section 14 of
section 2.
            For this reason as well it would be chargeable to stamp
duty.
8.29        In Hindustan Lever & Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra &
Anr., the Apex Court observed that in Ruby Sales & Services Pvt.
                                      51

Ltd. (supra) the court was of the opinion that the consent decree
which purports to convey the title in the property was an instrument
liable for stamp duty at all times and it was only by way of abundant
caution that the legislature had included the consent decree in the
definition of the word 'conveyance' under the Bombay Stamp Act.
8.30        A distinction is drawn by the learned counsel for the
petitioners to the effect that Ruby Sales & Services Pvt. Ltd. (supra)
related to a consent decree where the terms of settlement stated that
the same would be treated as the conveyance.           This aspect also
stands considered in Hindustan Lever & Anr. vs. State of
Maharashtra        &   Anr.       Placing   reliance   on    its  earlier
pronouncements on this very issue in the context of consent decrees,
the Apex Court answered the question as follows :-
              “30. A document creating or transferring a right
              is an instrument. Can it be said that an order
              effectuating the transfer is a document? The
              answer has been given in the affirmative by this in
              Court in Haji Sk. Subhan v. Madhorao, AIR
              1962 SC 1230, wherein it was held that the
              question is whether the word "document" includes
              a decree of the Court. It was held that there was
              no good reason why a decree of the court when it
              affects the proprietary rights and is in relation to
              them should not be included in this expression.
              This question more pointedly arose before this
              Court in Ruby Sales and services (P) Ltd.,
              (supra) . In that case in a suit for specific
              performance the property was conveyed to the
              vendee by a consent decree. The question arose
              whether the consent decree is an instrument and
              liable to be stamped. The consent decree
              contained a recital to the effect that "this decree
              does operate as the conveyance from the
              defendants in favour of the plaintiffs in respect of
              the said property more particularly described in
              exhibit A to the plaint." The Court held that "there
                                    52

              is no particular pleasure in merely going by the
              label but which is decisive is by the terms of the
              document. It is clear from the terms of the consent
              decree that it is also an "instrument" under which
              title   has     been      passed   over    to   the
              appellant/plaintiffs. It is a live document
              transferring the property in dispute from the
              defendants to the plaintiffs." The aforesaid decree
              was based on an agreement between the parties.
              So is the case with an order under Section 394 of
              the Companies Act which is also based on an
              agreement between the transferor company and
              the transferee company.”
8.31        In Hindustan Lever (supra), it was further held that an
order passed by the court under section 394 of the Companies Act is
based upon a compromise between two or more companies.             The
scheme has to be sanctioned by the court as per the compromise
arrived at between the parties if the same is lawful and the Company
Court is satisfied that the affairs of the company were not conducted
in a manner prejudicial to the interests of its members or to public
interest, that is to say, it should not be unfair or contrary to public
policy or unconscionable.      It has been unequivocally held that the
same is an instrument which transfers the properties.
9.          To conclude
9.1         The pronouncement of the Apex Court in Hindustan
Lever & Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr. (supra) was not
placed before the Calcutta High Court which considered Madhu Intra
Limited & Anr. Vs. Registrar of Companies & Ors.            In addition
thereto, the discussion of the impact of the amendment to the
definition of the term 'conveyance' in the Bombay Stamp Act in
                                     53

Hindustan Lever & Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr.; Li Taka
Pharmaceutical Ltd. and Ruby Sales & Services Pvt. Ltd. (supra) was
also not brought to the notice of the court. The Apex Court has held
that amendment to the Bombay Stamp Act was merely on account of
abundant caution.
9.2        The consistent view of the Supreme Court is that the
scheme of amalgamation was already covered under the definition of
conveyance under the unamended Act.          Such submission was not
made before the learned Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Madhu
Intra (supra) and unfortunately the findings of the courts oo the same
also not placed before the Bench in Madhu Intra Limited.           The
pronouncements of the Apex Court on these aspects bind this court
and would guide the adjudication in the present case.
9.3        From a bare reading of the statutory provisions and the
judicial pronouncements noticed above, it is apparent that it is the
“instrument whereby property is legally and equitably transferred”
which is made liable for payment of stamp duty. Section 394(2) of
the Companies Act, 1956 provides that the properties and liabilities
of the transferor company stand transferred to the transferee
company by virtue of the order of the court. The statute does not
provide   any    exception  to  the   definition  of  “instrument”  or
“conveyance”. Orders passed by the court resulting in transferring
the right of the property have been subjected to levy of stamp duty in
several situations noted hereinabove.
9.4        It is noteworthy that there would be several instances of
                                   54

transfer of interest in immoveable property by operation of law.
Grants and transfer of land or of any interest therein are effected
under   the   Government    Grants    Act, 1895     on   behalf   of  the
Government.     There is allotment and conveyance of immoveable
property by lease as well as sale by the Delhi Development Authority
under the Delhi Development Act, 1957.        Transfer of property on
effectuation of a scheme of amalgamation after its acceptance by the
approval by the court is not a transfer by any statutory prescription.
If the contention on behalf of the applicant was to be accepted, the
result would be that the instruments by which conveyances in such
instances were effected would not be chargeable to stamp duty.
9.5        From the above discussion, it is evident that every
contention raised by the applicants herein was similar in terms of the
contentions raised before the Apex Court in Hindustan Lever &
another vs. State of Maharashtra is rejected.      The Apex Court has
pointed out that merely because a scheme for amalgamation requires
approval by court, it makes no difference at all to its real nature. It is
nothing better than and remains a compromise or settlement. From
the above discussion, the most important principle which emerges is
that it would be immaterial for chargeability to stamp duty that
approval and effectuation of the scheme or arrangement required
court intervention by way of the necessary approval.
9.6        Thus for the purposes of imposition of stamp duty, it would
immaterial as to whether the conveyance was by operation of law,
statutory operation, or by virtue of a private contract between
                                   55

parties. Exemption has to be by specific statutory provision.
9.7          The order approving the scheme for amalgamation passed
by the Company Court in exercise of jurisdiction under sub-section 2
of Section 394 which have the impact of transferring of all assets and
liabilities including the property of the transferor company to the
transferee company would be therefore exigible to stamp duty under
the Indian Stamp Duty Act.
10.    Transfer   of   property   under    an  approved    scheme    of
amalgamation is not an inter vivos transfer of interest under section
5 of the Transfer of Property Act and therefore not covered under the
sub-section 10 of section 2 of the Stamp Duty Act defining
conveyance?
10.1         Mr. P.V. Kapoor, learned senior counsel for the petitioner
has laid great emphasis on the submission that in order to be covered
under the definition of conveyance under sub-section 10 of section 2
of the Indian Stamp Act, the transfer of interest has to be 'inter-
vivos'. It has been extensively urged that inter-vivos is restricted to
only 'living persons'.
             Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submits that so
far as the transaction involving transfer of assets from one company
to another on an amalgamation of the assets and liabilities of one
company with another under Section 394 of the Companies Act, 1956
is concerned, the same is not a transfer between living persons and
therefore is not a transfer “inter vivos”.
10.2         In order to buttress the abovenoted submissions,       Mr.
                                    56

Kapur, learned senior counsel has also placed reliance on the
amendment effected to section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act,
1882 which was amended by Section 6 of Act 20 of 1929.
10.3       By virtue of Section 6 of the Amending Act 20 of 1929, the
description of a “living person” in Section 5 was specifically amended
to include a company and the legislature also clearly stipulated that
the provisions of Section 5 as amended should not effect any law for
the time being     in force relating to transfer of property to or by
companies, associations or body of individuals. Upon amendment the
provision reads thus :-
                 “5.   Transfer of property defined
                 In the following sections "transfer of property"
                 means an act by which a living person conveys
                 property, in present or in future, to one or more
                 other living persons, or to himself and one or
                 more other living persons; and "to transfer
                 property" is to perform such act. In this section
                 "living person includes a company or association
                 or body of individuals, whether incorporated or
                 not, but nothing herein contained shall affect any
                 law for the time being in force relating to transfer
                 of property to or by companies, associations or
                 bodies of individuals.”
10.4        Learned senior counsel for the applicant has submitted
that as a result of the legislative prescription, the special law in force
relating to transfer of property by companies under the Companies
Act, 1956 is not impacted by the provisions of the general law in
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 and a transfer of assets and liabilities,
by virtue of the sanction of a scheme under Section 394 of the
Companies Act, 1956 would therefore not attract the applicability of
                                     57

the provisions of Transfer of Property Act, 1882.
10.5       It is noteworthy, that the expression “inter vivos” is not
statutorily defined in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 or in any other
statutory provision.      This expression would therefore derive its
meaning from the meaning given to it in common parlance which is to
be found in several dictionaries.
10.6       Learned senior counsel for the applicant has pointed out in
the judgment reported at AIR 1999 SC 3335 T.K. Lathika Vs. Seth
Karsandas Jamnadas. In para 16, the Supreme Court has placed
reliance on the definition of the expression “inter vivos” given in the
Black's Law Dictionary while deciding on the question as to whether
a moratorium of one year on filing of an eviction petition by a
transferee landlord would apply to a tenanted premises which were
gifted by the original landlord to his daughter who was thereby a
transferee landlord. It was held that:-
                 “16. Assuming that Ext. A.1 has created a new
                 lease after terminating the erstwhile lease, the
                 difficulty is that the grip of the ban contained in
                 the third proviso would still continue to
                 foreclose the landlord from filing the petition for
                 a period of one year from the new lease deed.
                 This is because “the landlord's right to recover
                 possession” would then arise under that
                 instrument of lease, which would also be a
                 transfer inter vivos as envisaged in the third
                 proviso.       In Black's Law Dictionary the
                 expression inter vivos is given the following
                 meaning:
                       “Between the living; from one living
                 person to another. Where property passes by
                 conveyance, the transaction is said to be inter
                 vivos, to distinguish it from a case of succession
                 or devise.”
                                      58

10.7        My attention has been drawn to the pronouncement of a
Full Bench of the Madras High Court reported at AIR 1973 Mad. 1 :
MANU/TN/0308/1973 entitled the Chief Controlling Revenue
Authority, Board of Revenue, Madras vs. R. Thirthalu in support
of the contention that the expression 'conveyance' under sub-section
10 of section 2 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 includes a conveyance
on sale and every instrument by which property, whether movable or
immoveable, is transferred inter-vivos and which is not otherwise
specifically provided for in Schedule 1. It was held that though the
definition is an inclusive one, it was clear that the essence of
conveyance is transfer of property or an interest therein, whether
movable or immoveable, and the transfer should be inter-vivos. It is
not necessary that a document should always use the word 'transfer
or assign' in order to constitute such a transaction. Whether there is
a transfer will depend upon the words of a disposition. If a person
says in a document that he had delivered possession of the property
and thereby also he constituted the property delivered as the
property of the other person, and at the same time, he also declares
that in view of it, he had divested himself of his title and he would no
longer be entitled to the property, the process of transfer is
complete. Transfer means vesting of title in one and divesting title
from the other who gives up the title. Whether there is a transfer,
will have to be inferred from the intention expressed by the words
used in the document.
                                   59

            In this case, mere affidavits conveying title to properties in
favour of the company and divesting title in the deponents were held
to constitute a transfer and a conveyance within the meaning of sub-
section 10 of section 2 and hence chargeable to stamp duty under
Entry 23 of Schedule 1 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899.
10.8        A similar submission arose for consideration before the
Bombay     High    Court   in  1992     (1) Bom.C.R.     568   State   of
Maharashtra & Ors. vs. M.S. Builders Pvt. Ltd. and Anr.            In this
pronouncement, it was observed that a consent decree is a document
by which right or liability is purported to be created and transferred
in the praesenti.    It takes effect instantaneously and its operation is
not postponed to a later point in time and has been held to be
covered under the definition of instrument under section 2(l) of the
Bombay Stamp Act.        So far as the persons between whom it takes
effect is concerned, in para 14 of the judgment, it was held that it is
a live document and taking effect between persons who may be
natural or artificial, who are alive at the relevant time, which would
make the transaction or transfer 'inter-vivos'.     It was held that this
would be well within the inclusive part of the definition of
'conveyance' and 'instrument' as they existed prior to 1985 and are
sufficient and substantial enough, to take in its form and forceful grip
the 'consent decree', albeit brought about by a use, or even abuse of
the process of law.
10.9        In para 45 of the pronouncement in Hindustan Lever's
case (supra), on this issue the court clearly observed as follows :-
                                     60

                  “45. It was contended that since the
                  transaction was not between the 'living
                  beings', the same was not "inter vivos" as the
                  transfer of property had not taken place
                  between the living beings. We do not agree.
                  "Transfer of Property" has been defined in
                  Section 5 of the Transfer of Property Act 1882
                  to mean an act by which a living person
                  conveys property, in present or in future to one
                  more other living persons. Company or
                  association or body of individual, whether
                  incorporated or not, have been included
                  amongst the "living person" in this Section. It
                  clearly brings out that a company can effect
                  transfer of property. The word "inter vivos" in
                  the context of Section 394 of the Companies
                  Act would include within its meaning also a
                  transfer between two "juristic persons" or a
                  transfer to which a 'juristic person' is one of
                  the parties. The transaction between a minor
                  or a person of unsound mind with the other
                  person would not be recognised in law, though
                  the same is between two living beings, as they
                  are not juristic persons in the eyes of law who
                  can by mutual consent enter in a contract or
                  transfer the property. The company would be
                  juristic person created artificially in the eyes of
                  law capable of owning and transferring the
                  property. Method of transfer is provided in law.
                  One of the methods prescribed is dissolution of
                  the transferor company by merger in the
                  transferee company along with all its assets
                  and liabilities. Where any property passes by
                  conveyance, the transaction would be said to
                  be inter vivos as distinguished from a case of
                  succession or device.”
                                   (Emphasis supplied)
10.10      It is necessary to bear in mind that transfer of property
can be by several modes. It includes transfer of property by way of a
sale, lease, gift which are between living persons and takes place in
praesenti.   There may also be a testamentary bequest resulting in
transfer of rights in property which takes place after the demise of a
person. Thus, the words 'inter vivos' as occurring in sub-section 10
                                     61

of Section 2 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 refer to a transfer of
properties other than those which may be in the nature of a bequest
by a deceased.      Such a transfer would include one between two
juristic persons or a transfer to which 'the juristic person is one of the
parties'.
10.11       I find that so far as the expression inter-vivos and the
interpretation of the definition of 'conveyance' in sub-section 10 of
section 2 is concerned, the reference is to a 'living person'. There is
nothing in any dictionary or in any judicial pronouncement or legal
literature whereby such living person has to be restricted to only a
natural person and would not include a juristic entity or an artificial
person.
10.12       It therefore has to be held that a transfer inter-vivos would
include a transfer in praesenti between persons who are in existence
at the time of the transfer. Such person would take into its ambit not
only natural persons but artificial persons including juristic persons.
A company incorporated under the provisions of the Companies Act,
1956 is a juristic person created artificially in the eyes of law which
admittedly is owning and transferring the property.
10.13       Accordingly, it is held that an approved scheme of
amalgamation amounts to a transfer inter-vivos between two
companies who were juristic persons in existence at the time of
passing of the order and sanctioning of the scheme whereby right,
title and interest in the immoveable property of the transferor
company are transferred to the transferee company.           The transfer
                                    62

takes place in the present and is not postponed to any later date and
is covered under the definition of conveyance under sub-section 10 of
section 2 of the Stamp Act
11.         No valuation of property transferred and basis for
assessment
11.1        Learned    senior  counsel   for the  petitioner  has   also
contended that that even if it were to be held that there is a transfer
of right, title and interest in immoveable property, there is no basis
for arriving at a valuation of the same for the purposes of assessment
of the amount of stamp duty payable.
11.2        So far as the valuation of the scheme of amalgamation is
concerned,     this  issue  has   also  been  considered   and   stands
authoritatively decided.    In Li Taka Pharmaceutical Ltd. (supra)
reliance was placed on a pronouncement of the Bombay High Court
reported at Hanuman Vitamin Foods Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of
Maharashtra, 1992 (1) Bom CR 568 wherein a division Bench of
the court considered an instrument under which there was a transfer
of 5 shares of a cooperative society by which one of the incidents of
membership of the said society was to occupy a specific office
premises in the same building.          The court had held that this
document of transfer of shares was a conveyance of property
chargeable with stamp duty under Article 25(b)(i) of the Bombay
Stamp Act as amended in 1985 on the basis of the market value of
the said property. The court observed that in effect, along with the
transfer of shares, the document incorporated a conveyance of
                                     63

property. On the aspect of what stamp duty would be payable on an
amalgamation scheme, the Court held as follows ;-
      “32. In our view, it would be a question of fact what
      stamp duty would be payable by the party on an
      amalgamation scheme. It is not to be forgotten that by
      the amalgamation scheme, what is transferred is a going
      concern and not assets and liabilities separately. As a
      going concern, what is the value of the property is to be
      taken into consideration. Normally, that would be
      reflected in an amalgamation scheme by the shares
      allotted to the shareholders of the transferor-company. It
      cannot be said that the assets are separately transferred
      and liabilities are separately transferred by the
      amalgamation scheme. As such, by an amalgamation
      scheme, virtually a transferee-company in effect
      purchases the transferor-company for a specified sum
      which is paid in terms of the shares of the transferee-
      company to the shareholders of the transferor-company.
      For this purpose, what is to be kept in mind is that by
      sanctioning the amalgamation scheme, the court is
      sanctioning not a transfer of the assets or liabilities
      separately but the going concern is transferred which is
      valued at a particular amount and that valuation would be
      on the basis of share exchange ratio. ....
      33. ...........In this view of the matter, we hold that
      normally in a case of amalgamation of a scheme
      sanctioned by the High Court, its consideration under
      article 25(1) of Schedule I to the Stamp Act should be
      based on its valuation arrived at on the basis of shares
      allotted by the transferee-company to the transferor-
      company. In the case of Hindustan Lever Employee's
      Union v. Hindustan Lever Ltd. [1995] 83 Comp Cas 30
      (SC) at the time of making valuation of the share
      exchange ratio, the court itself took into consideration
      the valuation report based on three well-known methods,
      viz., (i) the net worth method, (ii) the market value
      method, and (iii) the earning method. It is also
      established that the quotation of shares in the share
      market provides a larger reliable index of the assets of
      the company.
      34. Hence, we accept the contention of learned counsel
      for the petitioners that valuation under article 25(1) of
      Schedule I on the instrument of the amalgamation
      scheme sanctioned by the court, after due verification, is
      to be determined by the stamp authority only on the basis
      of the price of the shares allotted to the transferor-
      company or other consideration, if paid, but not by
                                  64

        separately valuing the assets and the liabilities.”
11.3        On the aspect of valuation, in Hindustan Lever vs. State
of Maharashtra (supra), the Apex Court held thus :-
          “28. The transfer of assets and liabilities takes effect
          by an order of the Court. The order also provides for
          passing of consideration from the transferee company
          to the shareholders of the transferor company. The
          consideration for sale in a transaction like this is the
          shares. The share exchange ratio is decided on the
          basis of number of factors including the value of net
          assets of the transferor and transferee company. To
          arrive at this figure of net assets the liabilities have to
          be set off against the gross value of the assets. The
          share value is fixed. The properties belong to the
          company and the company belongs to the
          shareholders. Once the shareholders of the transferee
          company receive the consideration it would be
          deemed as if the owner has received the
          consideration.”
            In view of the above discussion, the submission that
conveyance of property under a scheme of amalgamation is not
capable of valuation is unacceptable.
12.         Notification no. 1 dated 16th of January, 1937 and the
notification no. 13 dated the 25th of December, 1937.
12.1        During the course of hearings, learned senior counsel
appearing for the petitioner has placed reliance on two notifications
bearing no. 1 dated 16th January, 1937 and the notification no. 13
dated 25th of December, 1937.           Placing reliance on these two
notifications and the provisions of the Constitution of India as
enacted, as well as the Indian Independence Act, 1947, it is urged
that these notifications are applicable even on date and that the
                                     65

applicant would, by virtue of the benefit available under these
notifications, be entitled to remission of stamp duty on the transfer of
the property which takes place by virtue of the approval of the
scheme of amalgamation.
12.2        On the other hand, Mr. Aditya Madan, learned counsel
representing the Government of NCT of Delhi, has submitted that
the two notifications not having been accepted by the legislative
assembly of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
would stand repealed. It is further contended that the notifications
do not apply to an amalgamation effected under section 394 of the
Companies Act, 1956 whereby the transferor company ceases to
exist after the transfer of property.
12.3        The first notification placed before this court reads as
follows :-
                  “Notification no. 1 dated the 16th January,
                        1937.
            No. 1 – In exercise of the powers conferred by
            clause (a) of section 9 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899
            (II of 1899), the Governor General in Council is
            pleased to remit the stamp duty chargeable under
            articles 23 and 62 of Schedule I to the said Act on
            instruments evidencing transfer of property
            between companies limited by shares as defined in
            the Indian Companies Act, 1913, in cases -
                  (i)   where at least 90 per cent of the issued
            share capital of the transferee company is in the
            beneficial ownership of the transferor company, or,
                  (ii) where the transfer takes place between a
            parent company and a subsidiary company one of
            which is the beneficial owner of not less than 90 per
            cent of the issued share capital of the other, or
                  (iii) where the transfer takes place between
            two subsidiary companies of each of which not less
            than 90 per cent of the share capital is in the
            beneficial ownership of a common parent company.
                                     66

                 Provided that in each case a certificate is
           obtained by the parties from the officer appointed in
           this behalf by the local Government concerned that
           the conditions above prescribed are fulfilled.”
12.4       This notification is stated to have been superseded by a
subsequent notification bearing no. 13 which is dated 25th of
December, 1937. The copy of the notification placed before the court
reads as follows :-
      “No. 13. dated the 25th of December, 1937
            - In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (a) of
      section 9 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (II of 1899), and in
      supersession of all previous notifications issued from time to
      time under the said clause of the said section in so far as
      they relate to the Province of Delhi (hereinafter referred to
      as the said Province) except the notification of the
      Government of India in the Finance Department (Central
      Revenue) No. 6 – Stamps, dated the 14th August, 1937, the
      Central Government is pleased to reduce, to the extent set
      forth in each case, the duties chargeable in the said
      Province under the said Act in respect of the instruments
      hereinafter described under Nos. 4, 15, 30, 39, 40 [43, 49,
      56 and 57] and to remit the duties so chargeable in respect
      of instruments of the other classes hereinafter described:-
      xxx                                                       xxx
                       K.OTHER DOCUMENTS
      xxx                                                       xxx
      55. Instrument evidencing transfer of property between
      companies limited by shares as defined in the Indian
      Companies Act, 1913, in a case where (i) at least 90 per
      cent. F the issues share capital of the transferee company is
      in the beneficial ownership of the transferor company, or,
      (ii) where the transfer takes place between a parent
      company and a subsidiary company one of which is the
      beneficial owner of not less than 90 per cent. Of the issued
      share capital of the other, or (iii) where the transfer takes
      place between two subsidiary companies of each of which
      not less than 90 per cent of the share capital is in the
      beneficial ownership of a common parent company:
      Provided that a certificate is obtained by the parties to the
                                   67

       instrument from the officer appointed in this behalf by the
       Chief Commissioner of Delhi that the conditions above
       prescribed are fulfilled.”
                                   (Emphasis supplied)
            It is noteworthy that this notification relates specifically to
the then province of Delhi.
12.5        Delhi occupies a unique position and was one among the
union territories listed in the Constitution.         Part VIII of the
Constitution is concerned with the provisions regarding union
territories.   Special provisions for some of the union territories
have been made in Article 239.        By virtue of the amendment of
1991, Article 239AA was incorporated to make special provisions
with regard to Delhi which was renamed as the National Capital
Territory as a result thereof.
12.6         By virtue of the Constitution (Sixty Ninth Amendment) Act,
1991 (w.e.f. 1st of February, 1992) a special provision by way of
Article 239AA was incorporated in Part VIII of the Constitution
whereby, special provisions with respect to Delhi were made. Delhi
was renamed as the National Capital Territory as a result thereof.
The relevant portion thereof reads as follows :-
            “239AA : Special Provisions with respect to Delhi-
            (1)          As from the date of commencement of
            the Constitution (Sixty-ninth Amendment) Act,
            1991 the Union Territory of Delhi shall be called
            the    National    Capital    Territory)    and   the
            administrator thereof appointed under article 239
            shall be designated as the Lieutenant Governor.
            (2)     (a)       There shall be a Legislative
            Assembly for the National Capital Territory of
            Delhi and the seats in such Assembly shall be filled
                                     68

            by members chosen by direct election from
            territorial constituencies in the National Capital
            Territory.
            xxx   xxxx
            (3) (a)         Subject to the provisions of the
            Constitution, the Legislative Assembly shall have
            power to make laws for the whole or any part of
            the National Capital Territory with respect to any
            of the matters enumerated in the State of List or
            in the Concurrent List in so far as any such matter
            is applicable to Union territories except matters
            with respect to Entries 1,2, and 18 of the State List
            and Entries 44, 65 and 66 of that List in so far as
            they relate to the said Entries 1,2,and 18.
            (b)            Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall
            derogate from the powers of Parliament under this
            constitution to make laws with respect to any
            matter for a Union Territory or any part thereof.
12.7        Article 239AA specifically states that it is subject to other
constitutional provisions.     So far as the conferment of legislative
power is concerned, the same is to be found in Article 239AA(3).
While Sub-clause 3(a) is concerned with the conferment of power on
the legislative assembly, sub clause (b) specifically states that the
powers of the legislative assembly shall not derogate from the
powers of the Parliament to make laws with respect to any matter for
a union territory or part thereof.
12.8        The    constitutionally   recognised   superiority    of  the
legislative competence of the Parliament is also set out in sub-clause
(c) of Article 239AA(3) which provides that, if any provision of law
made by the legislative assembly with respect to any matter is
repugnant to any provision of a law made by the Parliament with
respect to that matter, whether passed before or after the law made
                                     69

by the legislative assembly, or of an earlier law, then the law made
by the Parliament or such earlier law shall prevail and the law made
by the Legislative Assembly shall, to the extent of the repugnancy, be
void.   The second proviso to sub-clause (3) of Article 239AA also
provides that nothing in the sub-clause shall prevent the Parliament
from enacting at any time any law with respect to the same matter
including a law adding to, amending, varying or repealing the law so
made by the legislative assembly.
12.9        It is also necessary to examine Art. 246 of the Constitution
so far as the legislative competence of the Parliament is concerned
which reads as follows :-
       “246. Subject matter of laws made by Parliament and
       by the Legislatures of States
       (1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses ( 2 ) and ( 3 ),
       Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with
       respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in
       the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to
       as the Union List)
       (2) Notwithstanding anything in clause ( 3 ),
       Parliament, and, subject to clause ( 1 ), the Legislature
       of any State also, have power to make laws with
       respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III in
       the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to
       as the Concurrent List)
       (4) Parliament has power to make laws with respect to
       any matter for any part of the territory of India not
       included (in a State) notwithstanding that such matter
       is a matter enumerated in the State List”
            Sub-clause 4 of Article 246 of the Constitution of India,
therefore empowers the parliament to make laws with respect to any
matter for any part of the territory of India not included in a state,
notwithstanding that such matter is enumerated in the state list.
                                     70

Legislation in respect of the Union Territory would be such matter.
These constitutional provisions thus set out in clear terms the
legislative competence of the Parliament to legislate with respect to
Delhi.
12.10       In exercise of powers under Article 239 AA of the
Constitution, the Parliament passed the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991 which also took effect from the
1st of February, 1992.      This by itself would show that the Delhi
Legislature is subordinate to the Parliament.
12.11       The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act,
1991 was enacted to supplement the provisions of the Constitution
relating to the legislative assembly and council of ministers for the
National Capital Territory of Delhi and for matters connected
therewith or     incidental thereto.   The statement of objects and
reasons for the Bill which was proposed makes a reference to the
then proposed Article 239AA and stated that under the new Article
239-AA proposed to be inserted by the Constitution (Seventy-Fourth
Amendment) Bill, 1991, a legislative Assembly and Council of
Ministers will be established for the National Territory. Clause (7)(a)
of the said article provides that the Parliament may by law make
provisions for giving effect to, or supplementing the provisions
contained    in that   article, and   for  all matters   incidental  or
consequential thereto.     In pursuance of the said clause, this Bill
sought to make necessary provisions in respect of the Legislative
Assembly and its functioning on the lines of the provisions made in
                                   71

respect   of  a   Legislative  Assembly    of  a  State  with   suitable
modifications.
            The bill received    the assent of the President     on 2nd
January, 1992 and made provisions for constitution of the Legislative
assembly and its procedure; the exemption of property of the Union
from taxation; restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly;
special provisions as to financial bills and other bills, sanctions,
financial statements, accounts, rules of procedure etc. It provides for
delimitation of constituencies and also contains provisions relating
to Lieutenant Governors and Ministers.
12.12       An issue as to the supremacy of the Legislative Assembly
of Delhi over the Parliament and the impact of the aforenoticed
constitutional    provisions   fell   for  consideration   before    the
Constitution Bench of nine Judges of the Supreme Court.      In       its
judgment reported at (1997) 7 SCC 339 New Delhi Municipal
Council vs. State of Punjab & Ors., the court held that the
Parliament would be in a position of superiority in hierarchy qua the
Delhi Legislative Assembly.        In this regard, in para 10 of its
judgment, the Constitution Bench had construed the implication of
provisions of Section 239AA vis-a-vis the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi Act in some detail and held as follows :-
      “By the Constitution Sixty-Ninth (Amendment) Act,
      1991, Article 239-AA was introduced in Part VIII of the
      Constitution. This article renamed the Union Territory of
      Delhi as the "National Capital Territory of Delhi" and
      provided that there shall be a Legislative Assembly for
      such National Capital Territory. The Legislative
      Assembly so created was empowered by Clause (3) of
                                     72

       the said article
       “to make laws for the whole or any part of the National
       Capital Territory with respect to any of the matters
       enumerated in the State List or in the Concurrent List
       insofar as any such matter is applicable to Union
       Territories except matters with respect to Entries 1, 2
       and 18 of the State List and Entries 64, 65 and 66 of
       that List insofar as they relate to the said Entries 1, 2
       and 18.”
       Clause (3) further provided that the power conferred
       upon the Legislative Assembly of Delhi by the said
       article shall not derogate from the powers of Parliament
       "to make laws with respect to any matter for a Union
       Territory or any part thereof". It further provided that in
       the case of repugnancy, the law made by Parliament
       shall prevail, whether the parliamentary law is earlier or
       later to the law made by the Delhi Legislative Assembly.
       Parliament is also empowered to amend, vary or repeal
       any law made by the Legislative Assembly. Article 239-
       AA came into force with effect from 1.2.1992. Pursuant
       to the article, Parliament enacted the Government of
       National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991. It is not
       only provided for constitution of a Legislative Assembly
       but also its powers as contemplated by Article 239-AA.
       This Act too came into force on 1.2.1992. The
       subordinate status of the Delhi Legislature is too
       obvious to merit any emphasis.”
12.13      A question with regard to the competence of the Lieutenant
Governor to issue a notification in exercise of powers conferred
under sub-section 1 of Section 19 of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 as
extended to the National Capital Territory of Delhi relating to
division of the national capital territory into different civil districts
without such notification being deliberated upon by the Legislative
Assembly of Delhi was raised before the Apex Court. By a judgment
reported at AIR 2009 SC 693 Delhi Bar Association vs. UOI &
Ors., the Apex Court was called upon to consider the impact of
                                    73

enactment of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
Act, 1991 with regard to the continuing application of the Punjab
Courts Act, 1919 to Delhi. The notification which was issued by the
Lieutenant Governor specified that it was issued in exercise of the
powers conferred under sub-section 1 of Section 19 of the Punjab
Courts Act, 1918 as extended to the National Capital Territory of
Delhi, dividing it into nine civil districts. The Apex Court held that
the enforcement of the Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi Act, 1991 from 1st February, 1992 does not hinder the
continuing application of the Punjab Courts Act, 1918 to Delhi. The
notification issued on 28th June, 2000 itself mentioned that the Punjab
Courts Act, 1918 was extended to the National Capital Territory of
Delhi.   It was held that in the absence of any provisions in the
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act or in the
absence of any other notification, order or legislation, the Punjab
Courts Act, 1918 had continuous application to Delhi alongwith the
laws made by the Delhi Legislative Assembly. Placing reliance on the
principles laid down in AIR 1958 SC 682 Mithan Lal vs. State of
Delhi, it was held that though the Punjab Courts Act was only
extended to Delhi, it has the status of a central legislation specifically
enacted for Delhi.    The Apex Court held that on extension of the
applicability of the Act of 1918 to the Union Territory of Delhi, it
becomes a Central enactment or an Act of the Parliament as it is
made in exercise of powers of the Parliament to legislate for the
Union Territory of Delhi by virtue of clause 4 of Article 246 of the
                                    74

Constitution. Therefore, this Act of 1918 assumes the position of a
central legislation enacted specifically for Delhi and is the law
operative in the National Capital Territory ('NCT' of Delhi hereafter).
The Apex Court further held that any legislation passed by the State
Legislative Assembly is always subordinate to the laws of the
Parliament, whether passed prior to or after the enactment of the
Central legislation and that Article 239AA(3b) and (c) limited the
power of the state legislature. In this regard, it was held as follows :-
      “52. The power to legislate to the Legislative Assembly
      of Delhi shall not supersede the powers of Parliament
      to make laws with respect to any matter for Union
      Territory or any part thereof. If any provision made by
      the Legislative Assembly with respect to any matter is
      repugnant to any provision of a law made by
      Parliament with respect to that matter, whether
      passed before or after the law made by the Legislative
      Assembly, or of an earlier law, other than a law made
      by the Legislative Assembly, then, in either case the
      law made by Parliament or such earlier law shall
      prevail and the law made by the Legislative Assembly
      shall, to the extent of repugnancy, be void. The Punjab
      Courts Act, 1918, being the central legislation, will
      have the primacy over any legislation made by the
      Delhi Legislative Assembly on the subject and even if
      the Delhi Legislative Assembly has a power to make
      law on the subject which is covered under the
      impugned notification, Section 19 of the Punjab Courts
      Act, 1918 shall prevail on the subject and a notification
      issued thereunder shall not be invalidated merely
      because the subject matter also falls within the
      Concurrent List.”
12.14      From the above, it is apparent that the power of the
Parliament to legislate under Article 245 of the Constitution in
respect of Union Territories is not denuded or derogated by the
provisions   of   Article 239AA    or  any  other   provisions   of  the
                                    75

Constitution, and the Parliament has the legislative competency to
legislate with regard to any subject so far as the National Capital
Territory of Delhi is concerned.
            I therefore find force in the submission that by virtue of
the powers conferred in Article 239AA (3)b) and 246(4), the
Parliament has the legislative competence to enact laws applicable to
Delhi.
12.15       An objection is also raised on behalf of the respondents
with   regard     to  the  legislative  competency   of the  Central
Government to legislate on the issue based on the separation of
powers by virtue of the lists under the 7th Schedule of the
Constitution of India.
12.16       A submission has been made by learned counsel for the
Government of NCT of Delhi that the notification not having been
adapted by the appropriate Government does not have any legal
force or binding.     Mr. Madan, learned counsel for the respondent
has placed strong reliance on the Adaptation of Laws Order 1950,
the relevant portion provides as follows :-
              “Adaptation of existing Central Laws.
              3.     As from the appointed day, the existing
        Central laws mentioned in the Schedule to this order
        shall, until repealed or amended by a competent
        legislature or other competent authority, have effect
        subject to the adaptation and modifications directed
        by those Schedules on if it is so directed shall stand
        repealed.....”
12.17       It is further contended that after the coming into force of
the Constitution of India, amendments have been effected to Section
                                     76

9(1) of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (vide A.O. 1950) which reads as
follows :-
         “9. Power to reduce, remit or compound duties – [(1)]
         [The Government] may, by rule, or order published in
         the Official Gazette, -
               (a) reduce or remit, whether prospectively or
         retrospectively, in the whole or any part of [the
         territories under its administration], the duties with
         which any instruments or any particular class of
         instruments, or any of the instruments belonging to
         such class, or any instruments when executed by or in
         favour of any particular class of persons, by or in
         favour of any members of such class, are chargeable,
         and
         (b) provide for the composition or consolidation of
         duties [of policies of insurance and] in the case of
         issues by any incorporated company or other body
         corporate [or of transfers (where there is a single
         transferee, whether incorporated or not)] of
         debentures, bonds or other marketable securities.
         [(2) In this section, the expression ”the Government”
         means, -
               (a) in relation to stamp-duty in respect of bills
         of exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills of lading,
         letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of
         shares, debentures, proxies and receipts, and in
         relation to any other stamp-duty chargeable under this
         Act and falling within entry 96 of List I in the Seventh
         Schedule to the Constitution, the Central Government;
         (b) save as aforesaid, the State Government.]”
12.18       The argument is that in view of Section 9 of the Indian
Stamp Act, 1899 as amended after the Adaptation of Laws Order of
1950, the Central Government has the authority to reduce or remit
stamp duty only in respect of the documents mentioned in clause (a)
of sub-section 2 of Section 9 and that a Scheme of Amalgamation
sanctioned by the court does not fall within its purview. Reliance is
placed on the observations of the Supreme Court in Hindustan Lever
& Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr.(supra) and it is urged by the
                                   77

respondents that only the state legislature would have the power to
reduce or remit the stamp duty. The further submission is that in
view of the amendments to Section 9 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899,
so far as the reduction or remission, of the stamp duty chargeable on
any    instrument    whether      prospectively   or  retrospectively  is
concerned, it rests in the Government who may do so by a rule or
order published in the official gazette. Mr. Madan has urged that the
power of the Central Government to so reduce or remit is confined to
the instruments mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section 2 of section 9
and is confined to a particular class of instruments, or any of the
instruments belonging to such class, or any instruments when
executed by or in favour of any particular class of persons, by or in
favour of any members of such class.
            A scheme of amalgamation sanctioned by the court is not
covered under clause (a) of sub-section 2 of section 9. As such, the
jurisdiction to reduce or remit stamp duties in respect of such an
instrument     and  document      is specifically  vested  in the   State
Government under sub-clause (b) of sub-section 2 of section 9.
12.19       It would be useful also to consider the three entries
referred to during the course of arguments. Learned counsel for
the respondents has relied on Entry 91 of List I and Entry 63 of list
II,  while learned senior counsel for the petitioner has placed
reliance on Entry 44 of List III. These entries read as follows :-
              “Entry 91 of List I
              91. Rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of
        exchange, cheques, promissory notes, bills of lading,
                                     78

       letters of credit, policies of insurance, transfer of shares,
       debentures, proxies and receipts.
             Entry 63 of List II
             63. Rates of stamp duty in respect of documents
       other than those specified in the provisions of List I with
       regard to rates of stamp duty.
             Entry 44 of List III
             44. Stamp duties other than duties or fees
       collected by means of judicial stamps, but not including
       rates of stamp duty.”
12.20       The power to prescribe the rate of stamp duty is thus
divided between the exclusive jurisdiction of the Union, as specified
in Entry 91 of List I and the State Government stands empowered to
legislate with regard to other instruments under Entry 63 of List II.
            Entry 91 of List I confines the power of the Centre to
legislate rates of stamp duty in respect of bills of exchange,
promissory notes, cheques etc. (Ref : (2004) 9 SCC 438 (para 38 at
page 459) Hindustan Lever & Anr. vs. State of Maharashtra ).
Entry 63 of List II empowers the state legislature to prescribe rates
of stamp duty in respect of documents other than those specified in
the provisions of List I.
            Entry 44 of List III empowers the State legislature to
provide for stamp duties other than duties or fees collected by means
of judicial stamps. Stamp duty under Entry 44 of List III is levied on
the instruments and the measure is the valuation of the property
transferred.
12.21       In Hindustan Lever vs. State of Maharashtra & Ors.
(supra), a question was raised with regard to the legislative
                                     79

competence of the Maharashtra legislature to effect the amendment
to the Bombay Stamp Act and considered by the Apex Court.
            The observations of the Apex Court while rejecting the
challenge    to  the   legislative competence   of  the   Maharashtra
legislature to amend the definition of 'conveyance' and include sub-
clause (iv) to sub-section (g) of section 2 are also important and
deserve to be considered in extenso and reads as follows :-
               “43. It was next contended that provisions of
         Section 2(g)(iv) read with Section 34 of the Bombay
         Stamp Act which provides that the instrument not
         duly stamped would be inadmissible in evidence are
         repugnant to Section 394 of the Companies Act and
         that the State Legislation cannot be prevail over the
         provisions of the Companies Act. It was also
         contended that in the guise of the stamp duty the
         State Legislature is in reality imposing a tax on the
         amalgamation of the companies and has therefore
         encroached on the field of the Parliament under Entry
         43, List I of the Constitution. We do not find any
         substance in this submission as well. Stamp duty is
         levied on the instrument and the measure is the
         valuation of the property transferred. There is no
         question of encroachment on the field of Parliament
         under Entry 43. List I of the Constitution which
         empowers the Union to make laws re: incorporation,
         regulation winding up of trading corporation
         including banks insurances and finance corporations
         but not including corporative societies. The follow up
         legislation under Entry 43 List I is totally different
         from the levy of stamp duty and of prescribing rate of
         stamp duty on such documents. The Bombay Stamp
         Act does not provide for any Legislation with regard
         to incorporation, regulation and winding up of
         corporations. It only levies the stamp duty and
         prescribes the rate of stamp duty in respect of
         documents by compromise or arrangement.”
12.22       The   submissions    made  by  learned   counsel  for the
respondent fail to consider the material distinction between the
                                    80

legislative competence of the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Maharashtra viz a viz the position of the Delhi Legislative Assembly.
It also fails to consider the constitutional conferrment of a special
status upon the National Capital Region of Delhi and the supremacy
of the Parliament under Article 239AA(3b) and Article 246(4) to
legislate on all matters concerning Delhi. These two factors render
the observations of the Apex Court in Hindustan Lever (supra) on the
issue of the legislative competency of the state government with
regard to the subject matter inapplicable to the issue under
examination in the present case.
12.23       Section 3(60)(c) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 also lays
down, that so far as Union Territories are concerned, the expression
'State Government' means the 'Central Government'. The expression
so occurring in Section 9 of the Stamp Act, in the context of union
territories including Delhi, has also to be so construed and would
mean the Central Government.
12.24       The notification dated 16th of January, 1937 was enacted
by the Governor General in Council. Sub-section 8 of Section 3 of the
General    Clauses    Act,  1897    defines   the  expression   'Central
Government' in relation to anything done before the commencement
of the Constitution, to mean the Governor General or the Governor
General in Council.
            The notification dated 16th of January, 1937 would thus be
covered by this definition and is to be treated as a notification issued
by the Central Government.
                                    81

12.25      This notification stands superseded by the notification no.
13 dated the 25th of December, 1937 which has been issued by the
Central Government.
13.        Pre-Constitution notification – whether still applicable and
binding
13.1       The issue which now remains to be considered, is whether
this notification of 1937 being a pre-constitution notification is
applicable and binding.
13.2       Article 372 of the Constitution of India is concerned with
continuance in force of existing laws and their adaptation as on the
date of the coming into force of the Constitution.     Sub-clause 1 of
Article 372 provides, that notwithstanding the repeal by the
Constitution of the enactments referred to in Article 395, but subject
to the other provisions of the Constitution, all laws in force in the
territory of India, immediately after the commencement of the
Constitution shall continue to be in force therein, until altered or
repealed or amended by a competent legislature or any other
competent authority. Sub-clause 2 provides that for the purposes of
bringing the provision of any law in force in the Territory of India
into accord with the provisions of the Constitution, the President may
by order make such adaptations and modifications in such law,
whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or
expedient and provide that the law shall, from such date as may be
specified in the order, have effect subject to the adaptations and
modifications so made and any such adaptation or modification shall
                                   82

not be questioned in any court of law.
13.3       In this behalf, the observations of the Apex Court in John
Vallamattom & Anr. vs. UOI AIR 2003 SC 2902 can usefully be
adverted to and reproduced as follows :-
          “18. It is neither in doubt nor in dispute that Clause 1
          of Article 13 of the Constitution of India in no
          uncertain terms states that all laws in force in the
          territory    of    India   immediately     before     the
          commencement of the Constitution, in so far as they
          are inconsistent with the provisions of Part III there,
          shall, to the extent of such inconsistency, be void.
          Keeping in view the fact that the Act is a pre-
          constitution enactment, the question as regards its
          constitutionality will, therefore, have to be judged as
          being law in force at the commencement of the
          Constitution of India [See Keshavan Madhava Menon
          v. The State of Bombay - MANU/SC/0020/1951 :
          1951CriLJ 680. By reason of Clause 1 of Article 13 of
          the Constitution of India, in the event, it be held that
          the provision is unconstitutional the same having
          regard to the prospective nature would be void only
          with effect from the commencement of the
          Constitution. Article 372 of the Constitution of India
          per force does not make a pre-constitution statutory
          provision to be constitutional. It merely makes a
          provision for the applicability and enforceability of
          pre-constitution laws subject of course to the
          provisions of the Constitution and until they are
          altered, repealed or amended by a competent
          legislature or other competent authorities.”
13.4       In view of the provisions of Article 372, this notification of
1937 would be a law in force as on the date of the Constitution
coming into force.
13.5       It is an admitted position that the notification of 1937 has
not been superseded by any law made either by the Parliament or by
the state government. Learned counsel for the Government of NCT
                                    83

of Delhi has not pointed out any amendment to the provisions of the
Stamp Act which would have the impact of amending/revoking or
repealing the notification of 1937.
13.6       The question thus which is required to be considered is as
to whether the notification dated 25th of December, 1937 would lapse
on the coming into force of the constitutional provisions unless
specific legislation was enacted adopting or adapting the same. This
issue is not res integra and stands authoritatively answered by the
Apex Court in several judicial pronouncements.         In the judgment
reported at AIR 1955 SC 25 Edward Mills Co. Ltd., Beawar &
Ors. vs. State of Ajmer & Anr., the Apex Court has occasion to
consider a similar contention and on the effect of Article 372, had
held thus :-
           “13. The contention does not appear to us to be
           sound. A complete reply to this argument is
           furnished, in our opinion, by the provisions of
           clauses (1) and (2) of article 372 of the Constitution.
           Article 372 runs as follows :
           "372. (1) Notwithstanding the repeal by this
           Constitution of the enactments referred to in article
           395 but subject to the other provisions of this
           Constitution, all the law in force in the territory of
           India immediately before the commencement of this
           Constitution shall continue in force therein until
           altered or repealed or amended by a competent
           Legislature or other competent authority.
           (2) For the purpose of bringing the provisions of
           any law in force in the territory of India into accord
           with the provisions of this Constitution, the
           President may by order make such adaptations and
           modifications of such law, whether by way of repeal
           or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient,
           and provide that the law shall, as from such date as
           may be specified in the order, have effect subject to
           the adaptations and modifications so made, and any
                                    84

such adaptation or modification         shall not  be
questioned in any court of law."
Thus clause (1) of the article provides for
continuance, in force, of the existing laws
notwithstanding the repeal by the Constitution of
the enactments mentioned in article 395 and clause
(2) provides for their adaptation with a view to
bring them into accord with the provisions of the
Constitution. The Government of India Act, 1935,
undoubtedly stands repealed by article 395 of the
Constitution, but laws made thereunder which were
in existence immediately before the commencement
of the Constitution would continue under article
372(1) and could be adapted under the second
clause of that article. Mr. Chatterjee argues that
article 372 has no application to the present case
inasmuch as the order made by the Central
Government under section 94(3) of the Government
of India Act could not be regarded as "a law in
force" within the meaning of article 372. A
distinction is sought to be made by the learned
counsel between an "existing law" as defined in
article 366(10) and a "law in force" and it is argued
that though an "order" can come within the
definition of "existing law", it cannot be included
within the expression "law in force" as used in
article 372. It is argued next that even if the word
"law" is wide enough to include an order, that order
must be a legislative and not a mere executive
order promulgated by an administrative authority,
and in support of this contention the learned
counsel has relied on a number of cases decided by
the Privy Council and the different High Courts in
India.
14. The first point does not impress us much and we
do not think that there is any material difference
between "an existing law" and "a law in force".
Quite apart from article 366(10) of the Constitution,
the expression "Indian law" has itself been defined
in section 3(29) of the General Clauses Act as
meaning any Act, ordinance, regulation, rule, order,
or bye-law which before the commencement of the
Constitution had the force of law in any province of
India or part thereof. In our opinion, the words "law
in force" as used in article 372 are wide enough to
include not merely a legislative enactment but also
any regulation or order which has the force of law.
We agree with Mr. Chatterjee that an order must be
                         85

          a legislative and not an executive order before it
          can come within the definition of law. We do not
          agree with him however that the order made by the
          Governor-General in the present case under section
          94(3) of the Government of India Act is a mere
          executive order. Part IV of the Government of India
          Act, 1935, which begins with section 94, deals with
          Chief Commissioners' Provinces and sub-section (3)
          lays down how a Chief Commissioner's Province
          shall be administered. It provides that it shall be
          administered by the Governor-General acting
          through a Chief Commissioner to such extent as he
          thinks fit. An order made by the Governor-General
          under     section   94(3)    investing   the    Chief
          Commissioner with the authority to administer a
          province is really in the nature of a legislative
          provision which defines the rights and powers of
          the Chief Commissioner in respect to that province.
          In our opinion such an order comes within the
          purview of article 372 of the Constitution and being
          "a law in force" immediately before the
          commencement of the Constitution would continue
          to be in force under clause (1) of the article.
          Agreeably to this view it must also be held that such
          order is capable of adaptation to bring it in accord
          with the Constitutional provisions under clause (2)
          of article 372 and this is precisely what has been
          done by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950.
          Paragraph 26 of the Order runs as follows :
          "Where any rule, order or other instrument was in
          force under any provision of the Government of
          India Act, 1935, or under any Act amending or
          supplementing that Act, immediately before the
          appointed day, and such provisions is re-enacted
          with or without modifications in the Constitution,
          the said rule, order or instrument shall, so far as
          applicable, remain in force with the necessary
          modifications as from the appointed day as if it
          were a rule, order or instrument of the appropriate
          kind duly made by the appropriate authority under
          the said provision of the Constitution, and may be
          varied or revoked accordingly."
13.7      A similar contention on behalf of the petitioner was
rejected by the Apex Court in the pronouncement of the Apex Court
reported at AIR 1960 SC 1312 M.G. Desai & Anr. vs. State of
                                  86

Bombay holding that :-
          “15. There is no substance in the contention that in
          the absence of adaptations which the President of
          India is competent to make under Clause 2 of
          Article 372, the Bhor State Ordinance lapsed. By
          Clause 2 of Article 372, the President is authorised
          to adapt existing laws; but the application of the
          existing laws is not conditioned by the making of
          adaptations or modifications in that law by the
          President.”
13.8      A pronouncement of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh
which throws valuable light on this issue is reported at AIR 1956
Andhra Pradesh 161 In Reg. Putta Ranganayakullu & Ors.
wherein the Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court held thus :-
                      “10. The Supreme Court in Edward Mills
                Co. vs. State of Ajmer, 1955 SC 25 (S) AIR V
                42) (A) considered the scope of Explanation I.
                There, it was argued that the Government of
                India Act stood repealed by Art. 395 of the
                Constitution and, therefore, an order issued
                under S. 94(3), Government of India Act would
                not    possibly    be   operative    after   the
                inauguration of the Constitution nor could it
                be regarded as an order made under Art. 239
                of the Constitution.
                      After negativing the contention that the
                order issued under that Act was not a “law in
                force” within the meaning of Art. 372, their
                Lordships observed at page 31 that an order
                made under S. 94(3), Government of India Act
                conferring certain powers on the Chief
                Commissioner was really in the nature of a
                legislative provision, which defines his powers
                in respect of the province and, therefore,
                being a “law in force” immediately before the
                commencement of the Constitution would
                continue to be in force under Cl.(1) of the
                Article.
                11. This     decision,   therefore,    is  clear
                authority for the position that, even though
                the Government of India Act was repealed, the
                laws made under that Act continue to be in
                                   87

                 force after the Constitution under Art. 372(1).
                 If so, a fortiori, the rules made by the High
                 Court in exercise of the powers conferred
                 under the Letters Patent, which have not been
                 repealed, would certainly continue to be in
                 force.”
                                  (Emphasis supplied)
13.9        The binding legal principle laid down in the above
precedents thus is that applicability of a pre-constitution law is not
conditional upon the making of an adaptation or a modification in the
post-constitution   law   for its   continued   applicability.      A   pre-
constitution law also does not require a specific adoption as has been
urged on behalf of the respondent herein.       Repeal thereof however
has to be specific.
13.10       The   submissions   made    by   learned   counsel     for   the
respondent must fail for another reason. Explanation I of Article 372
explains that the expression 'law in force' shall include a law passed
or made by a legislature or 'other competent authority' in the
territory of India before the commencement of the Constitution and
not previously repealed, notwithstanding that it or parts of it may not
be then in operation either at all or in particular areas.     It is clearly
evident therefrom that so far as a pre-constitution law is concerned,
the legislative competence of the law making authority is not
required to be tested on the touchstone of the Constitutional
provisions or the assignment or delegation or the separation of
powers provided thereunder.           An objection to the legislative
competence of the law making authority has to be examined on the
legislative competence and assignment of authority and power at the
                                     88

time the law/notification was made.
            Before me, it is not the submission of learned counsel for
the respondent that the notifications of 1937 are bad for legislative
incompetence.
13.11       So far as the Government of NCT of Delhi is concerned, it
has been held hereinabove that the Central Government has the
legislative competence to legislate on the issue of stamp duty. No
legislation by the State Government with regard to the rate of stamp
duty on the instrument in question has been pointed out.
14.         Notifications of 1937 do not apply to an order of approval
made under Companies Act, 1956
14.1        It was lastly submitted that the notification dated 16th
January, 1937 and 25th December, 1937 refers to the Indian
Companies Act of 1913 and would not apply to a scheme of
amalgamation which has been approved by this court in exercise of
jurisdiction under the Companies Act, 1956.
14.2        This submission fails to take into consideration the
provisions of Section 649 of the Companies Act, 1956 which provided
that:-
            “649.      Construction of references to former
            enactments in documents:             Any document
            referring to any former enactment relating to
            companies shall be construed as referring to the
            corresponding enactment in this Act.”
            So far as the references to Companies Act, 1913 in the
notification in question therefore would not be of any consequence,
                                    89

so far as applicability of the notification to the scheme of
amalgamation in question is concerned.
14.3         The notification no. 13 dated 25th of December, 1937 has
been   made    by   the  Central   Government    and  supersedes    the
notification no. 1 dated 16th of January, 1937. It is existing prior to
the Constitution and in view of the provisions of Article 372 of the
Constitution would continue in force.
15.         Objection   that   upon    amalgamation,   the   transferor
company ceases to exist
15.1        Another argument was laid before this court by the
respondent that the exemption granted under the notification dated
25th December, 1937 would not apply to a scheme of amalgamation
for the reason that upon giving effect to the scheme of amalgamation
the transferor company gets wound up and ceases to exist.          This
submission is also to be noticed only for the sake of rejection. The
dissolution and winding up of the transferor company takes place
only after transfer of all assets and liabilities to the transferee
company in terms of the scheme of amalgamation. The transferor as
well as transferee companies are actually existing at the time of
transfer.
15.2        So far as the submission that the question of the transfer
has ceasing through exist upon effectuation of the scheme of
amalgamation is concerned, this submission fails to take into
consideration the impact of the amalgamation.        This court in re:
Telesound India Limited (supra) and Hotline Hol Celdings
                                    90

Private Limited & Ors. (supra) has clearly held that upon giving
effect to a scheme for amalgamation, there is no winding up of the
transferor company. On the contrary, the effect is of absorption of
one company into another or merger into a larger third. It has been
compared to shelling of a corporate shell by the transferor company
which merges into the transferee company.           For all practical
purposes, the transferor company remains alive and thrive as part of
the larger whole.
15.3       Mr. P.V. Kapur, learned senior counsel for the petitioner
has drawn my attention to para 1(1.1) & Para 2 of the scheme of
amalgamation which points out that as per the approved scheme, the
effective date for the scheme is the date when the order approving
the scheme is filed with the Registrar of Companies. The scheme has
notified the appointed date as 15th November, 2002. Para 2.11 of the
scheme states that the transferor company stands dissolved on the
effective date.   The transfer of assets is to be effected on the
appointed date when the companies are in existence and effective.
15.4       Learned senior counsel for the petitioner has drawn my
attention to a pronouncement of this court reported at 1997 VI AD
(Delhi) 981 Sandy Estates Ltd. vs. Landbase India Ltd. wherein
the question as to whether stamp duty is leviable on a transfer of
assets by a scheme of amalgamation proposed between a hundred
per cent owned subsidiary company with its parent company. The
applicant before this court had placed reliance on the notification
dated 16th January, 1937. The court held as follows :-
                                   91

              “18. My attention has also been drawn by the
        counsel appearing for the petitioners to the contents
        of a notification on 16.1.1937 and published in the
        Gazette of India 1937 as Part I Page 78. Under the
        said notification, it was notified that in exercise of the
        powers conferred by Clause A of Section 9 of the
        Indian Stamp Act, the Governor General in Council
        was pleased to remit the stamp duty chargeable under
        Articles 23 and 62 of Schedule I to the said Act on
        instruments evidencing transfer of property between
        companies limited by shares as defined in the Indian
        Companies Act including where the transfer takes
        place between a parent company and a subsidiary
        company, one of which is the beneficial owner of not
        less than 90% of the issued share capital of the other.
        In view of the contents of the aforesaid notification,
        even if it is assumed that the provisions of Articles 23
        or 62 of Schedule I of the said Act are attracted to the
        facts of the present cases, yet in view of remission
        granted to a case where transfer takes place between
        a parent company and a subsidiary company, one of
        which is the beneficial owner of not less than 90% of
        the issued share capital of the other, no stamp duty
        would be leviable on such instrument conveying-
        transfer of property between such companies.
        19. In view of the aforesaid remission granted, no
        stamp duty would be leviable in any case to the
        transfer of assets between the transferor and the
        transferee companies when the transferor company is
        a 100% subsidiary of the transferee company which is
        the parent company......”
           It would appear that the notification dated 25th of
December, 1937 was not placed before the Bench.
15.5       It  was    also   asserted   that  the   eighteen   transferor
companies     were    wholly   owned    subsidiary   companies    of  the
transferee company and the main asset of the companies was land.
The amalgamation involved a transfer of all assets and liabilities of
the transferor companies with the transferee company. So far as
valuation is concerned, it is argued that the transferor company is a
hundred percent subsidiary of transferee company and there is no
                                    92

consideration for the amalgamation. For this reason, it is contended
that if it were to be held that stamp duty was payable, the calculation
thereof is not possible.
15.6        So far as this argument based on valuation is concerned,
the same stands rejected by the Apex Court by a detailed reasoning
noticed hereinabove in Hindustan Lever case (Supra).
15.7        The scheme of amalgamation stands accepted by the
court. I find that even the order dated 19th March, 2008 also records
that the transferor companies were hundred per cent subsidiaries of
the transferee company. In view of the requirement of item 55 of the
notification dated 25th December, 1937 requires a certificate to be
produced by the parties to the instrument that the conditions
prescribed in the instant case are fulfilled.   In the given facts, the
same would appear to be a technicality and there should be no
difficulty in obtaining such certificate.       Compliance with the
requirement of the notification cannot be waived.
16.         Finding
16.1.       The    objections  raised  by  learned   counsel    for the
respondent to the applicability of the notification are therefore
legally untenable and cannot be sustained.
16.2        It is held that the notification dated 25th of December,
1937 is applicable and binding.
17.         Result
17.1        As a result, subject to the petitioner satisfying the above
condition described in item 55 of the notification dated 25th
                                    93

December, 1937 the stamp duty chargeable on the approved scheme
of amalgamation would stand remitted in terms thereof.
          The concerned authorities shall ensure that proceedings in
the matter are concluded and an appropriate order passed within
four weeks.
          This application is allowed to the above extent and terms.
                                      (GITA MITTAL)
                                          JUDGE
December      , 2009
aa/kr
                                   94


