                 IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
            IA No. 5575/2005 in CS(OS) No. 1010/2005
                          Da te of decision: September 20, 2007
            M/s Jorden Electronics & Another                ... Plaintiff
                        through Mr. K. Singhal, Advocate
                              VERSUS
            Bombino Video (P) Ltd.                   .... Defendants
                       through Mr. Ravi Kumar Aggarwal, Advocate
      CORAM:
       HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE GITA MITTAL.
                 1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
                    to see the Judgment?                    Yes
                 2. To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
                 3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the
                    Digest?                                 Yes
GITA MITTAL, J.
1.    This application under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 Code of Civil
Procedure has been filed by the plaintiff in its suit for mandatory and
permanent injunction, declaration, rendition of accounts, damages
and delivery of infringing material urging infringement              of the
plaintiff's copyrights in respect of 23 Hindi films. The plaintiff has
asserted exclusive rights based on purported assignments of
copyright in favour of the plaintiff by producers and alleged copyright
holders therein.
2.    The claim of the plaintiff is vehemently disputed by the
defendant who has taken a strong objection even to the
                                     1

maintainability of the lis, as the suit has been filed without joining the
producers of the films. The defendant has also set up a claim of
having exclusive copyright in five of the films relying on agreements
in its favour.
3.     I have heard learned counsel for the parties at great length and
considered the material on record. In order to adjudicate on the
respective contentions and the merits of the present application, it
would be useful to consider the respective claims and contentions
based on the rights claimed in the individual films.
4.     The suit has been filed claiming copyright in respect of the 23
Hindi films which are titled as follows :-
       (i) Arth, (ii) Jeete Hai Shaan Se, (iii) Mirch Masala, (iv)
Sharara, (v) Kalakaar, (vi) Raani Aur Maharani, (vii) Basanti Tanke
Wali, (viii) Ramwati, (ix) Phoolan Haseena Ramkali, (x) Ganga
Jamna Ki Lalkar, (xi)        Sara Aakash, (xii) Us Paar, (xiii) Baaton
Baaton Main, (xiv) Shaukeen, (xv) Zevar, (xvi) Ek Ruka Hua Faisla,
(xvii) Pasand Apni Apni, (xviii) Bhabhi, (xix) Ghar Ghar Ki Kahani,
(xx) Pyar Mohabbat, (xxi) Ek Haseena Thi, (xxii) Betaj Badshah,
(xxiii) Zid
       By way of the present application the plaintiff has sought an
interim injunction prohibiting the defendant from manufacturing,
selling, circulating, distributing or giving on hire etc any video
cassettes, VCD's, DVD's, LCD's in relation to any and/or all of these
                                     2

films; an order to deliver the entire infringing material in relation to
any and/or all of the 23 films, and to submit a detailed account of
profits illegally earned by the defendants on sale of the infringing
material and in respect of the total value of the video cassettes,
VCD's, DVD's, LCD's sold, circulated, distributed or given on hire etc
in relation to any and/or all of the twenty three films.
5.    This application had come up for hearing on 3rd of August,
2005.     By an exparte order passed on that date, the court had
restrained from manufacturing, selling, supplying the copies of these
twenty three films.    The order has continued to operate till date
except the variation with regard to one film.
6.    I find that the defendant is claiming subsisting and exclusive
video rights in respect of only five films which are titled Arth, Jeete
Hain Shaan Se, Sharara, Kalakaar and Ek Haseena Thi.                The
defendant is not claiming any rights in respect of the remaining
eighteen films. It has also been stated that the defendant has not
conducted any business in respect of these eighteen films.
Consequently so far as the remaining eighteen films are concerned,
the plaintiff has no cause of action against the defendant and the
application and suit in respect thereof. With regard to the five films
in which the defendant is claiming rights, Mr. Ravi Aggarwal, learned
counsel for the defendant has urged that the plaintiff has no rights
therein and for this reason the application merits dismissal.
                                     3

7.    For reasons of convenience, the respective claims of the parties
are considered film wise hereafter :
      Title of Film : Arth
8.    The defendant has relied on an agreement dated 1st January,
2000 which is also executed by M/s Anu Arts as the exclusive right
holder of the cinematographic film Arth and assigns exclusive rights
in the film in favour of the defendant for a period up to 31st
December , 2007. The agreement in favour of the defendant is signed
by the producer Kuljit Pal who has been reflected as also the
proprietors/partners of M/s Anu Arts in the agreement and the
schedule annexed thereto.
9.    On the other hand the agreement dated 16th September, 2004
relied upon by the plaintiff has not been signed by Mr. Kuljit Pal nor
does the agreement indicate the particulars or the authority of the
person who has signed the agreement in favour of the plaintiff.
Undoubtedly, the defendant had the prior agreement in respect of the
film Arth with its producer.       There is nothing to evidence the
particulars of the producer of this film from the agreement dated 16th
September, 2004. The plaintiff has relied on this agreement which
has been purportedly executed in its favour by M/s Anu Arts whereby
it has assigned all rights in this film in favour of the plaintiff for a
period of three years which expires on 30th September, 2007.
10.   Perusal of the agreement relied upon by the plaintiff shows that
                                    4

this agreement mentions the assignment of rights on 1st January,
2000 in favour of the defendant and adverts to a termination thereof
by the assignor on the ground that the defendant had made false
representation.    The assertion in this behalf is vague and is not
supported by even a date of termination being mentioned let alone
any communication of such termination to the defendant. Inasmuch
as the defendant has repudiated any termination of the agreement
with it, prima facie, it is not possible to hold that the agreement dated
1st January, 2000 was ever terminated. There is also substance in
the defendant's contentions that so far as the agreement dated 1st
January, 2000 relied upon by the plaintiff is concerned, there is
nothing to support the contention that the same has been executed by
or on behalf of the producer of the film, who was the only person who
would have the right to assign copyright.
11.   The plaintiff has placed before this court copies of letters dated
2nd April, 2003, 23rd September, 2003 and 1st September, 2004
purportedly addressed by M/s Anu Arts to the defendant. By the
communication dated 2nd April, 2003, Mr. Kuljit Pal for Anu Arts
has purportedly terminated the agreement dated 3rd August, 2003
and 1st January, 2000 in respect of the film Arth which were assigned
to the defendant. The other two communications were in furtherance
of this termination.         The defendant has disputed any such
termination and these letters which were filed during the course of
                                      5

arguments.
12.   Be that as it may, the plaintiff has not been able to support that
the agreement dated 16th September, 2004 was executed and the
rights assigned in its favour by any authorised person on behalf of the
producer.     It is well settled that in order to be entitled to an
injunction, the plaintiff has to establish a prima facie legal right to the
same. In the absence of primafacie establishing that the agreement
dated 16th September, 2004 in its favour had been executed by any
person on behalf of the producer, the plaintiff would not be entitled
to any injunction against the defendant even if the agreement in
favour of the defendant stood cancelled.
13.   The defendant has relied on a criminal complaint dated 25th
April, 2005 lodged by it with the senior inspector of police of the
police station Santa Cruz. In this complaint, the defendant has stated
that "there is ample apprehension that Mr. Kuljit Pal might have
assigned the rights of the film Arth in favour of M/s Jorden
Electronics on the basis of the cancellation letter dated 20th
December, 1999 by concealing and hiding the next agreement dated
1st January, 2000 which needs the thorough investigation."             The
plaintiff has asserted that in this complaint, the defendant admits the
termination of the agreement in favour of the plaintiff by the
producer. In my view, this submission is incorrect. On the other
hand, this complaint only lends credence to the defendant's
                                     6

contention that the agreement dated 1st January, 2000 with it was
not terminated.       This complaint corroborates the defendant's
contention that no termination letter in respect of the agreement
dated 1st January, 2000 was issued to it. Further more as noticed
above, there is nothing to indicate that the agreement dated 16th
September, 2004 relied upon by the plaintiff has been executed by or
on behalf of the producer Mr. Kuljit Pal which could create any rights
in the film in favour of the plaintiff.
14.    Title of film : Jeete Hai Shaan Se
       From the documents placed by the parties before this court, it
would appear that Mr. P. Subba Rao, proprietor of M/s PSR Pictures
was the producer of the film Jeete Hai Shaan Se and hence the
copyright holder.       M/s PSR Pictures entered into a deed of
assignment of World Negative Rights dated 18th May, 2000 whereby
it assigned all rights in the film to M/s Hansa Pictures Pvt. Ltd. with
effect from 30th July, 2016 in respect of India Video and Cable TV.
So far as DVDs, LCDs and Overseas Video rights were concerned, the
assignment would take effect from 15th December, 2019.             This
assignment in favour of M/s Hansa Pictures was supported by a letter
dated 28th June, 2000 from Mr. P. Subba Rao as proprietor of M/s
PSR Pictures to the Prasad Film Laboratories notifying them about
the said assignment and requesting them to transfer the negatives
(picture and sound) in favour of M/s Hansa Pictures Pvt. Ltd. The
                                      7

Prasad Film Laboratories confirmed transfer of the World Negative
Rights and distribution, exhibition and exploitation rights in the film
for a perpetual period in favour of M/s Hansa Pictures Pvt. Ltd. Mr.
P. Subba Rao has also executed a declaration dated 7th July, 1995
declaring that he is the producer of the film.
15.    The defendant has urged exclusive propriety copyrights in this
film by virtue of an agreement dated 12th September, 1990 executed
between the defendant and M/s PSR Pictures which has been duly
signed by Mr. P. Subba Rao and the defendant. By this agreement
Mr. P. Subba Rao assigned rights in the film in favour of the
defendant for a period of 21 years which would lapse around 11th
September, 2011.
16.    Clause 7 of this agreement dated 12th September, 1990 shows
that the assignor M/s PSR Pictures agreed to deliver the first print or
issue an irrevocable letter to the laboratory for delivery of print and
trailer for video recording purpose at least 7 days before the release of
the film. The submission is that thereby all rights in the film vested
in the defendant.
17.    On the other hand the plaintiff has relied on an agreement
dated 25th January, 2001 purportedly executed in its favour by Shri
Bhagyalakshmi Movies represented by Mr. P. Subba Rao whereby
rights in the film were assigned to the plaintiff for a period of 21 years
which would end on or about the 24th January, 2003.
                                    8

18.   There is prima facie substance in the defendant's contention
that on 25th January, 2001, the producer had no subsisting or
assignable rights in the film Jeete Hai Shaan Se inasmuch as the
rights therein had been assigned earlier to the plaintiff. Furthermore,
Shri Bhagyalakshmi Movies has no concern whatsoever with the
production of the film. The agreement dated 25th January, 2001 is
not by or on behalf of the owner of the copyright in the said film on
the date the same has been executed.            The defendant's prior
agreement subsists and binds the parties. There was no cancellation
of this agreement.
19.   I find that there is also nothing on record to support the
plaintiff's plea that the film has been produced by Smt. P. Bhagyan.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, in my view the plaintiff has
failed to make out a prima facie case of rights in the film and is
consequently disentitled to an interim injunction so far as this film is
concerned.
20. Title of Film : Sharara
      This film has been produced by one Shri R.J. Chakravarti who
is also the sole proprietor of M/s Angel Films. The producer of the
film leased rights in this film in favour of M/s B & B Video by an
agreement dated 12th December, 1984. By virtue of clause 7 of the
agreement dated 12th December, 1984, M/s B & B Video were
entitled to sell, lease or let on hire from assigned rights in the film
                                     9

Sharara.     The defendant has relied upon an agreement dated 30th
September, 1986 executed between M/s B & B Video and the
defendant who is also running on its business under the name and
style of M/s Ruby Films whereby it acquired exclusive video
copyright in this film.
21.   The plaintiff has relied on a subsequent agreement dated 10th
September, 2003 executed in its favour by M/s Raj Enterprises who
have claimed a sole and exclusive video rights in the film and have
been described as "the legal assignors of the film." This agreement
bears a stamp of 'Rajpal HUF as the assignor'. However, there is
nothing in the agreement or any other document to establish the
manner in which M/s Raj Enterprises or Rajpal HUF acquired any
rights in this film from the producer. The agreement also does not
indicate that M/s Raj Enterprises or Rajpal HUF acquired any legal
rights in this film. In this view of the matter, in my view, the plaintiff
has failed to establish acquisition of legal rights in this film from the
producer or from any person who was assigned rights therein from a
copyright holder.
22.   Prima facie, the agreement with the defendant dated 30th
September, 1986 is prior to the agreement relied upon by the
plaintiff. There has been no cancellation of the assignment of rights
in favour of the defendant by any person competent to do so. In this
view of the matter, prima facie, the plaintiff has failed to establish the
                                     10

prima facie case so far as this film is concerned.
23. Title of Film : Kalakaar
      So far as this film is concerned, again the defendant has relied
on an agreement dated 12th September, 1993 executed by M/s Anand
Laxmi Art Movies in its favour. M/s Anand Laxmi Art Movies has
described itself as the producer/rights holder of the cinematograph
film Kalakaar and another film.            The agreement dated 12th
September, 1993 has also been signed by Mr. P. Subba Rao on behalf
of M/s Anand Laxmi Art Movies.
      The defendant has also relied upon a declaration dated 31st
March, 1995 executed by Mr. P. Subba Rao, a partner of M/s Anand
Laxmi    Art Movies declaring that the producer is the sole and
exclusive owner of all rights in the film which have been assigned and
transferred only to the defendant and to no other person.
24.   On the other hand, the plaintiff has relied on an agreement
dated 27th January, 2003 executed in its favour by M/s Vaigai Cine
Arts. Perusal of the agreement dated 27th January, 2003 shows that
M/s Vaigai Cine Arts has asserted herein that it has been assigned
World Negative Rights in the film Kalakaar by the producer Anand
Laxmi Art Movies, Chennai by an agreement dated 14th November,
1995.
25.   This assertion in the agreement has to be tested against the
defendant's agreement dated 12th September, 2003 which has been
                                    11

executed directly by M/s Anand Laxmi Art Movies in favour of the
defendant assigning rights in the film in favour of the defendant.
There is nothing on record which could evidence that this agreement
was terminated or lapsed in any manner whatsoever. Therefore, as
on 14th November, 1995 when M/s Vaigai Cine Arts has claimed
assignment of rights in the film, the assignor had no assignable rights
therein, inasmuch as there was a prior agreement dated 12th
September, 1993 in favour of the defendant which was valid, binding
and subsisting on this date. Furthermore, no assignment of rights
has been placed in favour of M/s Vaigai on record and for this reason
as well prima facie the plaintiff has not been able to make out a case
that it has any legal rights which are required to be protected.
26. Title of Film : Ek Hasina Thi
       The plaintiff had submitted that the agreement which was
claimed by it in respect of the film 'Ek Haseena Thi' had expired by
efflux of time and consequently the plaintiff is not claiming any rights
thereof. Accordingly, by order dated 20th March, 2007, the interim
order of 3rd August was modified to the extent that the same shall not
bind the defendant as far as this film is concerned. Consequently no
relief can be granted to the plaintiff so far as this film is concerned.
27.    The defendant has repeatedly pointed out the failure of the
plaintiff to comply with the mandate of Section 61 of the Copyright
Act, 1957 which requires that in every civil suit or other proceedings
                                    12

regarding infringement       of copyright instituted by an exclusive
licensee, the owner of the copyright would have the right to dispute
the claim of the exclusive licensee. The plaintiff has failed to take any
steps for impleading the producers and the owners of the copyright as
parties to the present suit and would therefore be not entitled to
injunction for this reason as well.
28.   The defendants have placed reliance on the pronouncement
reported on AIR 1997 Calcutta 63 Gramophone Company of India
Limited v. Shanti Films Corporation & Ors. in support of its several
contentions.    This judgment also reiterates the principles which
would guide the court while considering grant of injunction in respect
of a contract entered into between parties whereby copyright was
assigned in favour of one or the other party.
29.   In the light of the foregoing discussion, in my view, the plaintiff
has failed to make out a prima facie case for grant of interim
protection so far as films Arth, Jeete Hai Shaan Se, Sharara, Kalakaar
and Ek Hasina Thi are concerned, consequently requires to be
rejected.   The same therefore is hereby dismissed. So far as the
remaining films are concerned, the defendant is not claiming any
rights therein and therefore the apprehension of the plaintiff in
respect thereof is misconceived.
      This application is dismissed with costs which are quantified at
Rs.15,000/-
                                    13

     The order dated 3rd August, 2005 granting an injunction
against the defendant from manufacturing, selling, supplying the
copies of 23 films mentioned in para 37 of the present application
cannot be maintained and is hereby vacated.
                                            GITA MITTAL
                                              JUDGE
September 20, 2007
kr
                                 14


