*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                Date of decision: 3rd September, 2012
+       MAC APP. 213/2007
        SAZID ALI & ORS.                                       ..... Appellants
                                   Through: Mr. Deepak Tyagi, Adv. with
                                            Mr. K.K. Gautam, Adv.
                            versus
        SULEMAN & ORS.                            ..... Respondents
                                   Through: Mr. Pankaj Seth, Adv. for R-3.
+       MAC APP. 224/2007
        SARIFAN BEGUM & ORS.                                           ..... Appellants
                                   Through: Mr. Deepak Tyagi, Adv. with
                                            Mr. K.K. Gautam, Adv.
                            versus
        SULEMAN & ORS.                            ..... Respondents
                                   Through: Mr. Pankaj Seth, Adv. for R-3.
+       MAC APP. 227/2007
        SALEEM AHMED & ORS.                                            ..... Appellants
                                   Through: Mr. Deepak Tyagi, Adv. with
                                            Mr. K.K. Gautam, Adv.
                            versus
        SULEMAN & ORS.                            ..... Respondents
                                   Through: Mr. Pankaj Seth, Adv. for R-3.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE G.P.MITTAL
                                       JUDGMENT
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                                     Page 1 of 9

G. P. MITTAL, J. (ORAL)
1.      These three Appeals arise out of a common judgment dated 03.10.2006
        passed by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (the Claims Tribunal)
        whereby while deciding the issue of negligence, the Claims Tribunal held
        that the accident was caused on account of contributory negligence of the
        milk tanker No.DL-1GA-5548 driven by the First Respondent and of
        deceased Shakur Ahmed, who was driver of the Maruti car No.DL-7C-
        0001.
2.      Shakur Ahmed and two more occupants of the car suffered fatal injuries
        whereas two other escaped with minor injuries. The Claims Tribunal
        apportioned the contributory negligence to be 70:30 vis-à-vis the
        deceased Shakur Ahmed and Suleman, the First Respondent.
3.      Since common question of law and fact is involved in all the three
        Appeals, the same are taken together for disposal.
4.      The following contentions are raised on behalf of the Appellant:-
        (i)       The Claims Tribunal erred in holding that there was contributory
                  negligence on the part of deceased Shakur Ahmed. There was
                  overwhelming evidence in the shape of PWs 3,4 and 5 that the
                  tanker driver (Respondent No.1) was solely responsible for causing
                  the accident by rash and negligent driving of tanker No.DL-1GA-
                  5548. It is urged that the reliance placed on Bijoy Kumar Dugar v.
                  Bidyadhar Dutta & Ors., AIR 2006 SC 1255 is misplaced.
        (ii)      Even if, it is assumed that there was negligence on the part of
                  deceased Shakur Ahmed as well, it would be a case of composite
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                                 Page 2 of 9

                  negligence as far as MAC APP.213/2007 and MAC APP.227/2007
                  are concerned as deceased Noor Jahan Begum and Rashida Begum
                  did not contribute to the accident.
NEGLIGENC:-
5.      The Claims Tribunal while dealing with the issue of negligence held as
        under:-
             “PW 1 Sajid Ali is only a hear say witness and he did not witness
             the accident. PW 2 is also not an eye witness. PW 3 Allah Mehar
             had furnished his affidavit, who stated that he is a truck driver by
             profession and on 07.08.1995, around 12.30 in the noon he was
             proceeding near the accident spot driving his vehicle HR-46-5453.
             Ahead of him the tanker (offending vehicle) in a high speed and
             negligence had dashed against one Maruti car coming from the
             opposite direction. He got down from his vehicle and noted the
             Maruti car number. He also found that the driver of the car and
             the lady sitting next to him died on the seat and the condition of the
             woman who was sitting on the back seat was also serious. The
             accident occurred due to the negligence on the part of the tanker
             driver and a crowd collected there. The tanker driver fled from the
             scene. In the cross examination by respondent no. 1 & 2 it is
             elicited that the police had recorded the statement of PW 3 after
             several months of the accident. He did not remove the injured to
             the hospital. He denies a suggestion that he did not see the
             accident. He admits that he came with one of the claimants. In the
             evidence of PW 4 Raj Pal Singh it is found that on 07.08.1995 he
             was going to Mujjafar Nagar for repairing his tractor; He further
             stated that it was drizzling on that day and at about 12-12.30 noon
             when he reached at U.P. Steel factory Begraj Pur, near Mansoor
             Pur a Maruti, a Tanker coming from the opposite side in a rash
             and negligent manner hit the Maruti car. After parking his tractor,
             to a side, he went near the spot. He found that a lady and gent
             sitting in front seat were found dead and the the lady sitting in the
             back seat also sustained grievous injuries. After seeing the crowd
             the Tanker's driver fled away from the spot. In the cross
             examination he admits that his statement was recorded by the
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                                  Page 3 of 9

             police after 4-5 months of the accident. He denied the suggestion
             that the accident did not occur in his presence.
             PW 5 Dilshad Rana deposed through his affidavit that on
             07.08.1995 he was going to Khatoli on his scooter and when he
             was to reach near UP Steel factor, a Milk Tanker over took his
             vehicle in a rash and negligent manner without blowing any horn
             and hit a Maruti car which was coming from the opposite side.
             He saw that the lady and gent sitting in front seat were dead and
             the lady sitting in the back seat also sustained grievous injuries. In
             the cross examination he admits that he did not tell these facts to
             the police. He further admits that he met with the police on that
             day but police did not record his statement. He further admits that
             after 4-5 months police recorded his statement.
             The evidence of PW 6, 7 & 8 are of no use to decide issues no. 1.
             Per contra R1W1 the driver of vehicle no. 5548 Tanker deposed
             that he was arrested around eight years ago in 1996. The police
             stopped his vehicle and was taken to Mansoor Pur Police station.
             He further deposed that no accident occurred and was implicated
             in a false criminal case. In the cross examination by the petitioner
             it is elicited that this witness was unable to say whether he drove
             the tanker on 07.08.1995. He denied a suggestion that he had
             caused the accident. It is further admitted by him that he was in
             custody for seven days and admits that the tanker was seized by the
             police and he was released on bail. The petitioners have produced
             the Ex. P-1 FIR and Ex. P-2 the charge sheet. The accused in the
             criminal case is respondent no. 1 herein. The FIR is recorded at
             the instance of one Shafiq Tyagi. The contents of the FIR show that
             eye witness Shafiq Tyagi did not notice the number of the offending
             vehicle. He is the first informant. The information was given about
             12.30 in the noon. He is not examined in this case. The so called
             eye witnesses who are examined in this case have filed their
             examination in chief by way of affidavits all are in a stereo type
             manner. It is also found in their cross examination that their
             statements were recorded by the police after a gap of 4-5 months.
             It is very strange that none of these witnesses have volunteered to
             complain to the police immediately after the accident. However,
             considering that these witnesses are also the charge sheet
             witnesses and further considering that cross examination of these
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                                  Page 4 of 9

             witnesses wherein it was drawn in reply that they saw the truck
             behind the Milk tanker and that the Milk tanker remained at the
             spot for 10-12 minutes as found in the cross examination of PW 4
             and that PW 3 having stated in the cross examination, having
             denied that he did not see the accident, this Tribunal can only look
             at the preponderance and probabilities of the case. It is also
             pertinent that R1W1 was arrested in this case. These factors would
             out weigh the say of R1W1 who had denied the accident since he
             had not taken any measures of protest against his false
             implication. Hence, I hold that the offending vehicle was involved
             in the accident.
             x           x     x      x       x      x      x      x       x         x
             It is to be noted that there was a head on collision. In the matters
             of head on collision a presumption would always arise with regard
             to the contributory negligence of both the vehicles involved. This
             prudent observation is recognised in the ruling of Hon'ble upreme
             Court in AIR 2006 SC 1255 (BINAY KUMAR DUGGAR VS.
             BIDAGAR DATTA). The sketch / site plan shows that the course of
             the Maruti Van was from South to North. The course of the Tanker
             is from North to South. Considering point A which is towards
             extreme east, it can be easily gathered that the Maruti car which
             was going in the direction from South to North had transgressed
             the middle of the road and dashed against the Tanker. In the result
             the very site plan produced at Ex. P-3 by the petitioners evidently
             and amply establishes the negligence on the part of the car driver.
             Ex. P-3 is dated 07.08.1995. This is the document relied by the
             petitioners themselves. No prudent driver of a car would go to the
             extreme side of the flow of opposite traffic. Hence, the negligence
             on the part of the car driver is manifestly established by this
             document. But at the same time, it is to be noted that only if the
             Tanker driver had observed the car, he would have swerved to the
             edge of the road on his side, to have avoided the accident.
             Considering the site plan which is prepared on the date of accident
             itself, I find the car driver has taken a course negligently deviating
             from the course open to the traffic from South to North to have a
             head on collision with the traffic coming from North to South. The
             site plan shows no deviation on the part of the truck driver.
             Therefore, the blameworthiness on the part of the car driver
             almost clear to the extent of 70%/. Yet 30% negligence can be
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                                   Page 5 of 9

             attributed to the respondent no. 1, since the Tanker is a heavy
             vehicle which should have been more cautious. A mutual duty is
             fastened on the driver4s in the opposite direction. Though it was
             open for the respondents to have established no negligence on
             their part, the respondent no. 1 & 2 having totally denied the
             accident and from considering the oral testimony available on
             record, the part negligence can be imputed to the driver of the
             tanker since the driver in his deposition had not stated that he had
             taken any steps to avert the accident. I have already discussed the
             blameworthiness on the part of the car driver at 70% to be the
             cause of this accident.”
6.      All the three eye witnesses (PWs 3,4 and 5) deposed that tanker No.DL-
        1GA-5548 was being driven in a rash and negligent manner. PW-3 Allah
        Mehar testified that after the accident, the driver of the tanker fled from
        the spot. In cross-examination, the witness deposed that his statement
        was recorded by the police during investigation of the case. He stated
        that he stopped his truck at a distance of 150-200 mts. behind the milk
        tanker. He denied the suggestion that he did not see the accident taking
        place.
7.      Similarly, PW-4 Raj Pal Singh corroborated PW-3 Allah Mehar in his
        examination-in-chief. In cross-examination, the witness deposed that his
        statement was recorded by the police 4-5 months after the accident. He
        deposed that driver of the milk tanker overtook a two wheeler scooter and
        struck against the Maruti Car coming from the opposite direction.
8.      PW-5 Dilshad Rana, another eye witness of the accident, was riding on
        his two wheeler. He deposed that his two wheeler was overtaken by a
        tanker No.DL-1GA-5548. He deposed that after overtaking him, the
        tanker which was being driven in a rash and negligence manner collided
        against the Maruti Car coming from the opposite direction.
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                                 Page 6 of 9

9.      Thus, all the three witnesses stated in unison that the accident was caused
        on account of rash and negligent driving of the tanker driver (the First
        Respondent). The Claims Tribunal primarily held the deceased Shakur
        Ahmed to have contributed to the accident on the basis of the certified
        copy of the site plan Ex.P-3. In the said site plan, the Maruti car was
        found lying at Point A which was a little on the right side of the middle of
        the road. The Claims Tribunal opined that the driver of the Maruti car
        travelled into the portion of the road meant for the vehicle coming from
        the opposite direction and was therefore negligent in causing the accident
        to the extent of 70%. The Claims Tribunal lost sight of the fact that the
        site plan Ex.P-3 was not prepared on the statement of any of the eye
        witnesses. It was prepared by the IO of his own observations. The site
        plan merely depicted the position of the Maruti car No.DL-7C-0001 after
        the accident. Thus, simply from the position of the car at Point A after the
        accident, it cannot be said that the Maruti car had gone to the right
        portion of the road to cause the accident.
10.     PWs 3,4, and 5 were eye witnesses of the accident as was established
        from the report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. filed by the police in the Court
        in respect of this accident.
11.     The case of the first Respondent throughout had been that his tanker was
        not involved in the accident. Thus, he did not state a word as to how the
        accident occurred. On appreciation of evidence, the Claims Tribunal
        found that the involvement of the tanker was established in the accident.
        The first Respondent fled with the tanker after the accident. He refused
        to participate in the TIP. Thus, the Claims Tribunal opined that the
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                                Page 7 of 9

        involvement of tanker No.DL-1GA-5548 which was driven by the first
        Respondent at the time of the accident was established.
12.     From the testimony of the three eye witnesses (PWs 3,4 and 5) coupled
        with the first Respondent’s conduct, in fleeing from the spot and his
        refusal to take part in the TIP, it is proved that the accident was caused on
        account of rash and negligent driving of the tanker by him. The reliance
        on Bijoy Kumar Duggar was misplaced. Every case of head on collusion
        would not necessarily mean contributory negligence on the part of the
        drivers of both the vehicles coming from the opposite direction. In this
        case evidence came that the tanker was being driven in a rash and
        negligent manner.       The tanker driver overtook a two wheeler and
        thereafter collided with the Maruti car. Culpable negligence on the part
        of First Respondent in driving the tanker No. DL-1GA-5548 is
        sufficiently established.
13.     As far as MA APP. 213/2007 and 227/2007 are concerned the deceased
        Noor Jahan Begum and Rashida Begum did not contribute to the
        negligence. Even if, I would have taken the view that there was some
        negligence on the part of the driver of Maruti car, namely, Shakur Ahmed
        both the tortfeasors were jointly and severely liable to pay the
        compensation.
14.     In view of the foregoing discussion, the impugned judgment contributing
        negligence to the extent of 70% on the part of Shakur Ahmed, driver of
        the Maruti Car No.DL-7C-001 is set aside. It is held that the accident
        was caused solely on account of rash and negligent driving of tanker
        No.DL-1GA-5548 by the first Respondent.
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                                  Page 8 of 9

15.     Respondent No.2 Ashok Kumar Batra being owner of the tanker is
        vicariously liable for the act of the First Respondent.      United India
        Insurance Company Limited, Respondent No.3, being insurer of the
        offending vehicle is under obligation to indemnify the insured.
16.     The balance compensation along with interest @ 7.5% per annum from
        the date of filing of the Petition shall be deposited by the Respondent
        No.3 in UCO Bank, Delhi High Court, New Delhi within six weeks.
17.     Twenty percent of the compensation awarded shall be payable to each of
        the Appellants No.1,2,4 and 5 and rest 20% shall be payable to Appellant
        No.2. in MAC APP.213/2007 (for the death of Noor Jahan Begum).
18.     Fifteen percent of the compensation awarded shall be payable to each of
        the Appellants No.2 to 6, children of the deceased Shakur Ahmed and rest
        25% shall be payable to Appellant No.1, mother of the deceased in MAC
        APP.224/2007.
19.     Twenty percent of the compensation awarded shall be payable to each of
        the Appellants No.1 to 5, children of the deceased Rashida Begum in
        equal proportion, in MAC APP.227/2007.
20.     The Appeals are disposed of in above terms.
21.     Pending Applications also stand disposed of.
                                                                 (G.P. MITTAL)
                                                                     JUDGE
SEPTEMBER 3, 2012
vk
MAC APP 213, 224 & 227/2007                                              Page 9 of 9


