*         IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                     Date of Hearing : 8th April, 2011
                                                    Date of Decision : 25th April, 2011
+      CRL.A No.311/2011
PARMANAND & ORS.                                         ...    APPELLANT
                                  Through: Mr.Shailesh Kumar, Advocate.
Versus
STATE                                           ...      RESPONDENT
                                  Through: Mr.Jaideep Malik, APP for the State
                                  AND
+      CRL.A No.309/2011
MITHILESH                                ...                            APPELLANT
                                  Through: Mr.Shailesh Kumar, Advocate.
Versus
STATE                                           ...             RESPONDENT
                                  Through: Mr.Jaideep Malik, APP for the State
          CORAM:
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE G.P.MITTAL
          1. Whether reporters of local papers may be
              allowed to see the Order?                                           Yes
          2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?                               Yes
          3. Whether the Order should be reported
              in the Digest?                                                      Yes
                                    JUDGMENT
G.P. MITTAL, J.
          Crl. A. Nos. 311/2011 & 309/2011
1.        The appellants Parmanand and Mithilesh are the parents-in-law of Bobby
          (the deceased). They impugn the judgment and order dated 18.12.2010
          whereby the appellants were convicted for the offence punishable under
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                               Page 1 of 19

          Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and were sentenced to
          undergo imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- each. In
          default of payment of fine they were sentenced to undergo rigorous
          imprisonment for a further period of six months each.
2.        Facts of the case leading to the filing of charge sheet under Section 173
          Code of Criminal Procedure against the appellants and two others namely
          Kamlesh (husband of the deceased) and Santosh (Kamlesh‟s brother) can
          be extracted from the opening para of the judgment:-
                   “On 28.03.08 at about 11:50 pm, DD No.47 was registered
                   at PP Vijay Vihar, PS Rohini. As per such DD, one lady
                   had set herself on fire. Such information was received from
                   Police Control Room and SI Mahabir Singh and Ct.Rajesh
                   were rushed to the spot. They both reached the spot i.e.
                   House NO.J-42, Vijay Vihar. HC Ravidutt and Ct. Satpal
                   were already present there. They found smell of kerosene,
                   some burnt clothes, one empty bottle, few match-sticks and
                   water on the floor of room where the occurrence had taken
                   place and learnt that PCR Van had already removed the
                   victim to BSA Hospital. Executive Magistrate Sh.Sukhbir
                   Singh was telephonically intimated and HC Ravidutt and
                   Ct.Satpal were left at the spot for preservation of the spot
                   and SI Mahabir Singh and Ct. Rajesh reached at BSA
                   Hospital. Name of injured was found to be Bobby (wife of
                   accused Kamlesh). As per MLC, victim had told the doctor
                   that kerosene oil was poured on her by her father-in-law
                   and mother-in-law and then she was put on fire and her
                   husband was not present at home during the incident.
                   Bobby was declared fit for statement. Executive Magistrate
                   reached the hospital and dying declaration of Bobby was
                   recorded in which she claimed that she was married two
                   years back and her parents-in-law wanted her husband
                   Kamlesh to marry someone else. She claimed that at about
                   5 pm that evening, her husband left the house and before
                   such departure, her husband and her parents-in-law had
                   quarreled with her. She then stated that between 11:15 pm
                   and 11:30 pm, she was in her room and was about to go to
                   sleep, when her parents-in-law entered her room and her
                   mother-in-law poured kerosene oil on her and her father-in-
                   law set her ablaze with a match-stick. She also stated that
                   she shouted for help and some neighbours collected and
                   tried to douse the fire by pouring water on her and police
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                              Page 2 of 19

                   reached there and took her to the hospital. She, however,
                   succumbed to her injuries. Case was registered u/s
                   498A/302/120B IPC.”
3.        All appellants pleaded not guilty to the charge. The prosecution to prove
          the guilt of the accused persons examined 23 witnesses.
4.        PW- 4 Raja Ram, PW-6 Sadanand (father of the deceased Bobby), PW-9
          Dr. Sarvesh Tandon, PW-10 Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi, PW-11 Dr. Nitin
          Lashkary, PW-15 Dr. Jatinder, PW-16 SDM Sukhbir Singh, PW-22
          Inspector Raj Singh, Investigating Officer (IO) and PW-23 SI Mahabir
          Singh (initial IO) are important witnesses for the purpose of this appeal.
5.        PW-4 Raja Ram is a neighbour of PW-6 Sadanand (father of the
          deceased). He deposed that on 16.03.2008 (the date has been wrongly
          given by this witness) at about 11:45 p.m. he was on his way back to his
          house after selling vegetables. When he reached near the street he saw a
          crowd.       On inquiry he was informed by public persons that Bobby
          (daughter of Sadanand) was burnt by her in-laws and was removed to the
          hospital. He gave this information to Sadanand.
6.        PW-6 Sadanand, apart from deposing about the demands of dowry and
          the harassment meted out to Bobby by her husband and the appellants
          stated that on 28.03.2008 at 12/12:30 a.m. in the night while he was on his
          way back to his house from weekly bazaar, he met Raja Ram (PW-4).
          Raja Ram informed him that his daughter had been set ablaze. He (PW-6)
          immediately left his rickshaw at his house and went to the matrimonial
          home of Bobby. He found a crowd around the house. On inquiry he was
          informed that his daughter had already been removed to the hospital by a
          PCR van. He went to PP Vijay Vihar and was informed that his daughter
          had been taken to Baba Saheb Ambedkar (BSA) hospital.
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                              Page 3 of 19

7.        On reaching the hospital he met the SDM. The SDM informed him that
          he had already recorded her (the deceased) statement and that he could
          meet her.       His daughter told him that “ Ye Sab Milkar Mujhe Jala Diyan
          Hai”.       The deceased was shifted to Safdarjung hospital where she
          succumbed to her burn injuries on the next morning. He proved statement
          Ex.PW-6/A made by him to the SDM.
8.        PW-9 Dr. Sarvesh Tandon, Associate           Professor, Forensic   Medicine,
          Safdarjung hospital, conducted autopsy on the dead body of Bobby on
          30.03.2001 and proved his report Ex.PW-9/A. On external examination
          he found superficial to deep burns all over the body except lower abdomen
          and external genital area. The extent of burns was given as 90 per cent.
          When cross examined, the witness deposed that if the pulse is not
          palpable, the chances of survival of the patient are very less but such
          patient may regain consciousness in some cases.
9.        PW-10 Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi, Chief Medical Officer, BSA hospital is the
          doctor who initially attended to the deceased on 29.03.2008 at 12:15 a.m.
          He testified that the patient had disclosed that her father-in-law and
          mother-in-law had poured kerosene oil on her and then put her on fire with
          a match-stick. She also informed the doctor that her husband was not
          present at home at the time of the incident. PW-10 testified that on
          examination, the patient (deceased) was found to be conscious, oriented
          and crying. Her blood pressure could not be recorded due to burns present
          all over the body. Her pulse was found not palpable. Smell of kerosene
          oil was present on the body. He gave the percentage of burns to be about
          95 per cent. He proved the MLC Ex.PW-10/A.
10.       PW-11 Dr. Nitin Lashkary, Senior Resident, General Surgery,                BSA
          hospital was summoned by PW-10. He gave the details of the treatment
          given to the deceased. He gave the area of burns to be about 90 per cent.
          Pulse of the patient was found by him to be feeble. He deposed about the
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                              Page 4 of 19

          various injections i.e TT, IM Stat, Tramadol, I.V. etc. administered to the
          deceased. He deposed that the patient was cleaned and dressed with an
          ointment,        silver sulpha diazin.  The patient was then referred to
          Safdarjung hospital for further management. He proved his endorsement
          at point Y to Y on MLC marked as Ex.PW-10/A.
11.       PW-15 Dr. Jatinder was working as Junior Resident in Safdarjung
          hospital. He treated the patient when she was admitted in Safdarjung
          hospital. He deposed that the deceased was declared dead at about 7.45
          a.m. He proved the death report as Ex.PW-15/B.
12.       PW-16 Mr.Sukhbir Singh Executive Magistrate of the area deposed
          that on receipt of the message regarding the admission of a lady with burn
          injuries in BSA hospital, he reached there.        He obtained the fitness
          certificate from Dr.Raj Mohan Trivedi and recorded statement
          Ex.PW16/A of the deceased. He obtained endorsement on Ex.PW-10/B of
          Dr.Raj Mohan Trivedi. He then deposed about recording of the statement
          of Sadanand after the death of Bobby and after registration of this case.
13.       PW-23 SI Mahabir Singh deposed that on 28.03.2008 on receipt of DD
          No.47, (Ex.PW-14/A) he reached the spot i.e. J-42 Vijay Vihar, Phase-I
          along with constable Rajesh.        Head constable Ravidutt and constable
          Satpal were already present there. He was informed that the injured had
          already been removed to BSA hospital. He testified that there was a smell
          of kerosene coming from the room of the deceased on the ground floor,
          burnt match sticks, match box and some burnt pieces of cloth were also
          lying in the room. Some water was found on the floor. He deputed HC
          Ravidutt and Ct. Satpal to remain present at the spot. He informed the
          Executive Magistrate Mr.Sukhbir Singh (PW-16) about it and requested
          him to reach the hospital. He also reached BSA hospital and collected the
          MLC of Bobby. PW-16 also reached the hospital who consulted the
          doctor about the fitness of the injured to make a statement. The statement
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                             Page 5 of 19

          recorded by the Executive Magistrate was marked to him (PW-23) for
          further inquiry by the SHO. He made an endorsement on Ex.PW-23/A on
          the basis of which the present case was registered.       He got the spot
          inspected by the crime team; photographs Ex. PW2/1 to 6 were taken. He
          prepared the site plan Ex.PW-23/C, seized various articles from the spot
          and sealed them with a seal of MS. He deposed that on receipt of the
          information of death of Bobby in the morning of 29.03.2008, vide DD No.
          13, further investigation of the case was entrusted to Inspector Raj Singh.
          Inspector Raj Singh PW-22, second IO of the case corroborated the
          testimony of PW-23 SI Mahabir Singh. He deposed about the arrest of the
          appellants and recorded statement of Parmanand, Raj Kumar and other
          family members.
14.       On close of prosecution evidence, the appellants were examined under
          Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to enable them to explain
          the incriminating evidence which has appeared against them.
15.       The appellants were completely silent as to where they were at the time of
          the incident. Admittedly immediately after the incident they did not
          accompany the deceased to BSA hospital. The appellants took up the plea
          that the deceased was under depression as she was not able to conceive
          any child and, therefore, committed suicide. They denied that there was
          any demand of dowry, harassment or cruelty meted out to the deceased.
          They denied that they set Bobby on fire. They took up the plea that the
          dying declaration is false. She (Bobby) never made any dying declaration
          to Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi. They, however, showed their ignorance if the
          statement (dying declaration Ex.PW-16/A) was recorded by PW-16
          Executive Magistrate Sh. Sukhbir Singh (PW-16). They showed their
          willingness to produce defence evidence but did not produce any.
16.       Along with appellants, Kamlesh (deceased`s husband) and Santosh
          (Kamlesh‟s brother) were also challaned by the police.        Santosh was,
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                             Page 6 of 19

          however, discharged by order dated 01.06.2009 passed by the learned
          ASJ. Accused Kamlesh was acquitted by the impugned judgment on the
          ground that the deceased was completely silent about the allegation of
          harassment or cruelty for not meeting dowry demands. The learned ASJ
          held that had there been any such demand or harassment, the deceased
          would have spoken about the same. Thus the evidence of Sadanand PW-6
          (father of the deceased) with regard to harassment and demand of dowry
          without corroboration from the dying declaration or any other evidence
          was disbelieved.
17.       The dying declaration recorded on the MLC Ex.PW-10/A by PW-10
          Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi and Ex.PW-16/A by PW-16 Executive Magistrate
          Sukhbir Singh were held to be consistent, voluntarily, true and reliable by
          the learned ASJ. Thus relying upon the same the learned ASJ convicted
          the appellants under Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC and sentenced
          them as aforesaid.
18.       We have heard Mr.Shailesh Kumar learned counsel for the appellants and
          Mr. Jaideep Malik learned APP for the State and have perused the record.
19.       The prosecution case rests on the two dying declarations purported to have
          been made by the deceased. Statement of a person (who has died) in
          respect of the circumstances on the cause of his death is admitted in
          evidence as an exception to the rule of hearsay evidence.     It is believed
          that a dying person would not tell a lie. Khushal Rao v. State of Bombay,
          AIR 1958 SC 22 is the basic judgment of the Supreme Court on dying
          declaration where it was laid down that it was neither a rule of law nor of
          credence that a dying declaration without corroboration cannot form a
          basis for conviction of an accused.       It was observed that the dying
          declaration stands on the same footing as any other piece of evidence. If
          the dying declaration is found to be true and voluntary, the same can be
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                             Page 7 of 19

          taken into consideration to base the conviction of an accused without any
          corroboration.
20.       In Paniben (Smt.) v. State of Gujarat, (1992) 2 SCC 474, the Supreme
          Court while relying on a dozen earlier decisions analyzed and summed up
          the law on the subject under:
                   (i)      There is neither a rule of law nor of prudence that
                            dying declaration cannot be acted upon without
                            corroboration.
                   (ii)     If the Court is satisfied that the dying declaration is
                            true and voluntary it can base conviction on it,
                            without corroboration.
                   (iii)    The Court has to scrutinize the dying declaration
                            carefully and must ensure that the declaration is not
                            the result of tutoring, prompting or imagination.
                            The deceased had opportunity to observe and
                            identify the assailants and was in a fit state to make
                            the declaration.
                   (iv)     Where dying declaration is suspicious it should not
                            be acted upon without corroborative evidence.
                   (v)      Where the deceased was unconscious and could
                            never make any dying declaration the evidence with
                            regard to it is to be rejected.
                   (vi)     A dying declaration which suffers from infirmity
                            cannot form the basis of conviction.
                   (vii)    Merely because a dying declaration does not contain
                            the details as to the occurrence, it is not to be
                            rejected.
                   (viii)   Equally, merely because it is a brief statement, it is
                            not to be discarded. On the contrary, the shortness
                            of the statement itself guarantees truth.
                   (ix)     Normally the court in order to satisfy whether
                            deceased was in a fit mental condition to make the
                            dying declaration look up to the medical opinion.
                            But where the eyewitness has said that the deceased
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                                  Page 8 of 19

                            was in a fit and conscious state to make this dying
                            declaration, the medical opinion cannot prevail.
                   (x)      Where the prosecution version differs from the
                            version as given in the dying declaration, the said
                            declaration cannot be acted upon. Paniben (Smt.) v.
                            State of Gujarat, (1992) 2 SCC 474.”
21.       It is argued by Mr. Shailesh Kumar learned counsel for the appellants that
          the alleged dying declarations have failed to pass the test of reliability
          because the facts of the case would show that the father of the deceased
          was in the hospital by the side of the deceased at the time of recording
          dying declaration Ex.PW-16/A by Executive Magistrate (PW-10) and thus
          there was a great possibility of tutoring the deceased to make a statement
          falsely implicating the appellants. It is submitted that the circumstances
          indicate that the dying declaration was not true as the room in which the
          incident took place was not the bed room of the deceased and thus there
          was no question of the deceased retiring to the room to go to sleep. It is
          submitted that the evidence brought on record by the prosecution to show
          that the deceased was fit to make the statement is a suspect. It is thus
          urged that it would be highly unsafe to rely upon such dying declaration.
22.       Learned counsel for the appellant contends that the deceased was unable
          to conceive a child and on account of being depressed the deceased
          tookthe extreme step to end her life.
23.       The first statement of the deceased is on the MLC Ex. PW-10/A. A
          perusal of the same would show that the deceased was brought to BSA
          hospital by SI Vijay Kumar at 12:15 a.m. on 29.03.2008.               She was
          attended to by Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi, Chief Medical Officer on duty,
          BSA hospital. He recorded the history of the patient (the deceased) as
          under:
                    “Allegedly father-in-law and mother-in-law of Bobby
                    poured kerosene oil on her and then put her on fire with
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                                Page 9 of 19

                    match stick. Husband of Bobby was allegedly not present
                    at home during the incident. (Told by herself).”
24.       Learned counsel for the appellants criticized the testimony of PW-10 on
          the ground that as per the MLC, the deceased‟s BP was not recordable and
          her pulse was not palpable and thus it could not be said that the patient
          was fit to make the statement. It is submitted that PW-10 (Dr. Raj Mohan
          Trivedi) admitted that the patient was managed by Senior Resident
          Surgery and, therefore, the alleged history could not have been recorded
          by PW-10.
25.       We do not agree. Both PW-10 and PW-11 were cross-examined at length
          as to the treatment given to the deceased after she was brought to the
          casualty in BSA hospital. In cross-examination, PW-10 deposed that the
          treatment of a patient is started immediately when he/she is brought in
          Casualty. He deposed that treatment of Bobby was given by a team of
          doctors consisting of two JRs and one SR Surgeon present in the Casualty.
          He added that the pulse and blood pressure were checked by him (PW-10)
          as well as by JRs.         PW-10 stated that he was a coordinator in the
          emergency.         He stated that when the patient was brought, she was
          examined by him and simultaneously the surgeon had also come and
          examined the patient. When cross examined, he deposed that he wanted to
          see the opinion of the surgeon before the patient could be referred to
          Safdarjung hospital.
26.       To the same effect is the testimony of PW-11 Dr. Nitin Lashkary. He
          deposed that initially the patient was examined by Dr.Raj Mohan Trivedi
          (PW-10). The pulse of the deceased, by the time he examined her and
          made a note on the MLC, had become feeble from „not palpable‟. Thus it
          is clear that the patient was examined and managed by a team of doctors
          and not examined by any particular doctor.
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                           Page 10 of 19

27.       It has been urged by the learned counsel for the appellants that PW-6
          Sadanand (father of the deceased) got the information about the incident
          from PW- 4 Raja Ram. It is apparent that he reached the hospital almost
          simultaneously with the deceased and thus in all probability the history as
          to how Bobby got burnt was given by PW-6 Sadanand. In any case
          Sadanand must have reached the hospital before 1:00 am in the night and
          there is every possibility of tutoring the deceased by PW-6 before her
          statement could be recorded by Executive Magistrate PW-16.
28.       We have perused the statements of PW-4 and PW-6 and the other
          evidence brought on record. Of course PW-4 gave information to PW-6
          about the deceased sustaining burn injuries and her removal to the
          hospital. Neither PW-4 was aware of the name of the hospital nor could he
          give the same to PW-6. Therefore, after leaving his rickshaw at his house
          PW-6 proceeded to PP Vijay Vihar through the place of incident. He
          came to know only at the police post that Bobby was removed to BSA
          hospital by the PCR van. Thus even if PW-6 had hurried and made his
          best efforts it would have been difficult for him to have reached BSA
          hospital before 1:30 a.m.
29.       It is argued by the learned counsel for the appellants that PW-23 SI
          Mahabir has stated in his cross-examination that he reached the hospital at
          about 12:30 a.m. and collected the MLC within ten minutes which was
          retained by him. The MLC contains signatures of PW-6 regarding the
          receipt of articles (Jewellery) by Sadanand which shows that Sadanand
          was present in the hospital by 12:40 a.m.
30.       This contention raised on behalf of the appellants is misconceived. As per
          the endorsement made at the top of the MLC Ex.PW-10/A by PW-10, Dr.
          Raj Mohan Trivedi small articles of jewellery were removed by PW-10
          from the body of Bobby and handed over to the IO. These articles were
          not handed over by PW-10 to PW-6 Sadanand.
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                            Page 11 of 19

31.       The alleged history of Bobby, the fitness certificate and removal of
          jewellery articles are all in the hand writing of PW-10 Dr. Raj Mohan
          Trivedi. Of course a suggestion was put to PW-10, PW-11, PW-9 and
          PW-16 that if the pulse is not palpable the patient cannot make any
          statement. This suggestion was refuted by each of the doctors.
32.       The certificate of fitness has been given by PW-10 Dr Raj Mohan Trivedi
          initially on the MLC Ex.PW-10/A and then on the statement Ex.PW-16/A
          at point Ex.PW-10/B.
33.       Though the pulse was initially recorded as not palpable but later it had
          improved to be feeble as per endorsement Y to Y on Ex.PW-10/A by the
          senior resident. Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi had no animosity against the
          appellants nor any friendship with PW-6 Sadanand. Otherwise also there
          is no reason as to why PW-10 would falsely record that a patient is fit for
          statement if she was really not fit to make a statement.
34.       A reference can be made to a five judges decision of the Supreme Court in
          Laxman v.State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002 SC 2973.                  It has been
          observed therein as under:
                    The juristic theory regarding acceptability of a dying
                   declaration is that such declaration is made in extremity,
                   when the party is at the point of death and when every hope
                   of this world is gone, when every motive to falsehood is
                   silenced, and the man is induced by the most powerful
                   consideration to speak only the truth. Notwithstanding the
                   same, great caution must be exercised in considering the
                   weight to be given to this species of evidence on account of
                   the existence of many circumstances which may affect their
                   truth. The situation in which a man is on death bed is so
                   solemn and serene, is the reason in law to accept the
                   veracity of his statement. It is for this reason the
                   requirements of oath and cross-examination are dispensed
                   with. Since the accused has no power of cross-examination,
                   the court insist that the dying declaration should be of such
                   a nature as to inspire full confidence of the court in its
                   truthfulness and correctness. The court, however has to
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                                Page 12 of 19

                   always be on guard to see that the statement of the deceased
                   was not as a result of either tutoring or promoting or a
                   product of imagination. The court also must further decide
                   that the deceased was in a fit state of mind and had the
                   opportunity to observe and identify the assailant. Normally,
                   therefore, the court in order to satisfy whether the deceased
                   was in a fit mental condition to make the dying declaration
                   look up to the medical opinion. But where the eye-witnesses
                   state that the deceased was in a fit and conscious state to
                   make the declaration, the medical opinion will not prevail,
                   nor can it be said that since there is no certification of the
                   doctor as to the fitness of the mind of the declarant, the
                   dying declaration is not acceptable. A dying declaration can
                   be oral or in writing and in any adequate method of
                   communication whether by words or by signs or otherwise
                   will suffice provided the indication is positive and definite.
                   In most cases, however, such statements are made orally
                   before death ensues and is reduced to writing by someone
                   like a magistrate or a doctor or a police officer. When it is
                   recorded, no oath is necessary nor is the presence of a
                   magistrate is absolutely necessary, although to assure
                   authenticity it is usual to call a magistrate, if available for
                   recording the statement of a man about to die. There is no
                   requirement of law that a dying declaration must
                   necessarily be made to a magistrate and when such
                   statement is recorded by a magistrate there is no specified
                   statutory form for such recording. Consequently, what
                   evidential value or weight has to be attached to such
                   statement necessarily depends on the facts and
                   circumstances of each particular case. What is essentially
                   required is that the person who records a dying declaration
                   must be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of mind.
                   Where it is proved by the testimony of the magistrate that
                   the declarant was fit to make the statement even without
                   examination by the doctor the declaration can be acted upon
                   provided the court ultimately holds the same to be voluntary
                   and truthful. A certification by the doctor is essentially a
                   rule of caution and therefore the voluntary and truthful
                   nature of the declaration can be established otherwise.”
35.       Thus in the instant case it is not only that Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi gave a
          medical certificate Ex.PW-10/A declaring the deceased to be fit for
          making statement but he has also given reasons as to how the deceased
          was fit to make the statement. Thus we see no reason to disbelieve the
          testimony of PW-10 in this regard. Thus the dying declaration recorded
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                                 Page 13 of 19

          by PW-10 shows that the deceased had informed PW-10 that she was set
          ablaze by her father-in-law and mother-in-law after pouring kerosene oil
          on her.
36.       As stated above, the condition of the patient improved a little after she
          was administered certain injections etc. as senior resident recorded that the
          patient was oriented/obeying to verbal commands and the pulse was
          feeble. PW-16 Executive Magistrate Sukhbir Singh reached hospital at
          1:00 a.m. on 29.03.2008 and recorded the statement Ex.PW-16/A of the
          deceased.
37.       It is urged by the learned counsel for the appellants that the statement
          Ex.PW-16 purports to be recorded from 1:00 a.m. to 1:30 a.m. It was not
          possible that with such serious burn injuries, the deceased would make
          such a detailed statement for 30 minutes. It is submitted that the dying
          declaration being improbable has to be discarded. Reliance is placed on
          State of Maharashtra v. Sanjay, 2004 13 SCC 314.
38.       It is canvassed before us that a patient of burn injuries is in acute pain and
          discomfort therefore large doses of pain relief and tranquilisers are
          administered for management and treatment of the patient. This results in
          extreme sedation and drowsiness. Therefore, it is the duty of the
          prosecution to establish that the patient was mentally fit to make the
          statement which has not been done in this case. The learned counsel for
          the appellants placed heavy reliance on a division bench judgment of
          Karnataka High Court in the case of State of Karnataka v. Sri. Balu
          Rama Kalligaddi, 2004 (3) RCr (Crl) 569.
39.       There is no dispute about the proposition of law that to rely on a dying
          declaration it is essential that the maker of the statement has to be in a fit
          mental state. It is also true that pain killers and sometimes sedative are
          administered to a patient who has suffered severe burn injuries. It has
          come on record that the deceased suffered approximately 90 per cent burn
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                                Page 14 of 19

          injuries. We have gone through the MLC Ex.PW-10/A as also the case
          sheet Ex.PW-11/DA of the deceased. It was admitted by PW-11 that
          injection tramadol is a pain killer. PW-10 Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi was
          cross-examined at length with regard to the condition of the patient. As
          stated earlier it is recorded on the MLC that the patient was conscious,
          oriented and crying. We have mentioned earlier that the condition of the
          patient slightly improved as it is recorded in the endorsement Y to Y of
          Ex.PW-10/A by the Senior Resident PW-11 that the patient was obeying
          verbal commands and the pulse had become feeble (from not palpable).
          PW-10 Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi stated in his examination-in-chief that he
          had declared the patient fit for statement by his endorsement
          (Ex.PW10/B). On the statement Ex.PW-16/A Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi was
          subjected to a very lengthy cross-examination regarding the condition of
          the patient. PW-10 denied the suggestion that the deceased died due to
          cardiac arrest because at the time of her admission in BSA hospital her
          pulse was not palpable. PW-10 stated that if it was so, the deceased would
          have died in BSA hospital itself. He added that the final cause of death in
          every case is ultimately cardiac arrest as death occurs when heart stops
          functioning. PW-10 denied the suggestion that in case of 95 per cent
          burns when pulse is not palpable a person is not in a position to utter a
          single word        PW-19 stated that “fit for statement” means physically and
          mentally fit.
40.       On the statement Ex.16/A , PW-10 made an endorsement that “patient was
          conscious and oriented all the time during the time above statement was
          taken”. This shows that the deceased was physically and mentally fit to
          make the statement. In State of Karnataka v. Sri.Balu Rama Kalligaddi
          (supra), the division bench of Karnataka High Court held that the court
          has to assess from the material before it as to whether the victim was in
          fact in a position to rationally understand questions that have been put and
          give cogent and correct answers to those questions. It was observed that
          if the victim is under excruciating pain or if as a result of shock and pain
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                              Page 15 of 19

          the victim is hovering between a totally conscious and semi conscious
          condition or if pain killers and tranquilisers which have been administered
          are causing drowsiness, the court has to see if the victim is in a fit state to
          make the statement. In this particular case Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi was
          present throughout while the statement of the deceased Ex.PW-16/A was
          recorded. Nothing was brought in the cross-examination of PW-10 which
          could show that the deceased was drowsy or had become semi-conscious
          in between while the statement was being recorded.           Sri.Balu Rama
          Kalligaddi (supra) is, therefore, not attracted to the facts of the present
          case.
41.       State of Maharashtra v. Sanjay (supra) is not applicable to this case. In
          the said case there were three dying declarations including one of two
          typed pages giving minute details. Of course it had taken about 30 minutes
          to record the statement of Ex.PW-16/A of the deceased but the statement
          just runs into a half hand written page and is a brief statement. In State of
          Maharashtra v. Sanjay (supra) apart from the third dying declaration
          running into two typed pages, there were also variations in the three dying
          declarations and the third one giving minute details appeared to be
          manipulated. Here the two dying declarations are consistent. The first
          one made to Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi is just a two line statement whereas
          the second statement made to the Executive Magistrate runs into ½ hand
          written page. Both are consistent and the second one corroborates the first
          statement.
42.       It is pleaded on behalf of the appellants that it is doubtful as to who
          recorded the declaration Ex.PW-16/A.          The learned counsel for the
          appellants has taken us through the cross-examination of PW-10 where the
          witness stated “Statement as per Ex.PW-10/B was recorded in the
          language and wording given by patient. It is wrong to suggest that at the
          time of such statement I was neither present nor any such person was
          present to whom any such alleged statement was made by patient. That
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                              Page 16 of 19

          statement was recorded by a person who was in police uniform. (Vol. I
          am not sure.Vol. again said, he was a government official).”
43.       It has come in the evidence of PW-16 that the statement was recorded by a
          police officer on his dictation. PW-23 SI Mahabir Singh stated that he
          recorded the statement Ex.PW-16/A on the dictation of PW-16. Thus PW-
          10 was right when he stated that it was recorded by a person who was in
          police uniform. Of course a suggestion was given to PW-16 as also to
          PW-23 that the endorsement at point B of Ex.PW16/A was obtained from
          the Executive Magistrate later on but we are not inclined to believe the
          same. By endorsement at point B the statement was marked to SHO who
          immediately marked it to PW-23 SI Mahabir Singh for necessary action.
          The FIR was recorded on that very night at 2.00 a.m. It is not believable
          that without obtaining the endorsement of the Executive Magistrate PW-
          23 SI Mahabir Singh would make a mention thereof in the rukka for
          recording the FIR. Otherwise also we do not find any reason to disbelieve
          the document Ex.PW-16/A, the endorsement by the Executive Magistrate,
          the endorsement by SHO and then writing of the rukka by PW-23 SI
          Mahabir Singh.
44.       It is, therefore, established that the statement Ex.PW-16/A was recorded
          by Executive Magistrate after obtaining the fitness certificate from PW-10
          Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi who was present throughout the recording of the
          statement of the deceased. Thus the statement Ex.PW-16/A is not only
          consistent and corroborative to the first statement given to the doctor at the
          time of admission and recorded on the MLC Ex.PW-10/A but it meets all
          the tests of it being properly recorded after the Magistrate was satisfied
          that the patient was fit to make the statement. The statement is not very
          long but it contains all the details as to how the appellants had poured
          kerosene oil on her and appellant Parmanand had lit the match stick and
          set her on fire.
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                               Page 17 of 19

45.       It is pleaded by the learned counsel for the appellants that the deceased
          had suffered 95 per cent burns still the thumb impression obtained on the
          statement Ex.PW-16/A shows the ridges on the right thumb impression.
          Such a statement, argues the learned counsel, is unbelievable in view of a
          division bench judgment of Punjab and Haryana High Court in Ram Piari
          & Anr. v. State of Haryana, 2005 Crl L J 3251. We have perused the
          statement Ex.PW-16/A and are of the view that only 10/20 per cent ridges
          are seen in the thumb impression. Nothing could be brought in the cross-
          examination of PW-10 or PW-16 to show that the thumb impression did
          not belong to the deceased. Otherwise also there is no legal requirement
          to take a thumb impression of the deceased where her thumbs/fingers are
          burnt. Ram Piari & Anr. (supra) again does not apply to the facts of this
          case.
46.       It is urged by the learned counsel for the appellants that the incident had
          taken place in the outer room of the house. Relying on Ashok Kumar &
          Anr .v. State of NCT of Delhi, 167 (2010) DLT 72 a division bench
          judgment of this Court, it is submitted that though the site plan is not a
          substantive piece of evidence but evidentially its value cannot be slighted.
          There is no dispute that defence can very well refer to a site plan prepared
          by the IO or by the draftsman. There is no doubt that the room in which
          the incident had taken place is a outer room in the house still there is no
          universal rule that outer room cannot be given to the son/daughter-in-law.
          We see no reason to doubt the dying declaration made by the deceased to
          Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi, recorded on the MLC Ex.PW-10/A and made to
          the Executive Magistrate Sh.Sukhbir Singh (PW-16). In our view the two
          dying declarations are true and voluntary. The first dying declaration was
          very spontaneous and was made to the doctor immediately at the time of
          admission by the deceased herself. The deceased could not even know the
          purpose of the doctor recording the history and, therefore, there was
          nothing which could have impelled the deceased to make a false
          statement. As stated earlier the first statement is corroborated by the
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                              Page 18 of 19

          second statement Ex.PW-16/A recorded by the Executive Magistrate.
          Under these circumstances we see no reason to reject the dying declaration
          recorded by PW-10 Dr. Raj Mohan Trivedi, on MLC marked as PW-10/A
          and second dying declaration Ex.PW-16/A recorded by PW-16 Executive
          Magistrate Sh.Sukhbir Singh.
47.       The learned Additional Sessions Judge rightly convicted the appellants
          relying on the two dying declarations.        We do not find any error or
          infirmity in the impugned judgment. There is no merit in the appeal and
          therefore it has to fail. The same is accordingly dismissed.
                                                           (G.P. MITTAL)
                                                               JUDGE
                                                         (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
                                                              JUDGE
APRIL 25th , 2011
sa
Crl.A Nos.311/2011 & 309/2011                                           Page 19 of 19


