$~40.
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+      TEST.CAS. 83/2013
       ISHWAR DEVI GROVER & ORS.                             ..... Petitioners
                            Through : Mr.Sandeep P. Agarwal, Mr.Rajesh
                                         Pathak and Mr.Manjeet Kirpal, Advs.
                            versus
       STATE                                                 ..... Respondent
                            Through
CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE G.S.SISTANI
                     ORDER
%                    06.10.2016
I.A. 11580/2016
  1.   This is an application filed by petitioners/applicants seeking exemption
       from furnishing administrative bond and surety.
  2.   In this case, the petitioners had filed the present petition under Sections
       222, 224 and 276 read with Section 300 of the Indian Succession Act
       for grant of a probate with respect to the Will dated 4.3.2013 of late
       Sh.Bhagwan Dass Grover. Vide order dated 23.7.2014, the present
       petition, which was uncontested, was allowed and probate was granted
       to the petitioner.
  3.   Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that all the legal heirs of
       late Sh.Bhagwan Dass Grover, who are the beneficiaries of the Will
       dated 4.3.2013, are the petitioners herein. Counsel further submits that
       since all the legal heirs are beneficiaries of the Will dated 4.3.2013 of
       late Sh.Bhagwan Dass Grover, the requirement of furnishing the
       administrative bond and the surety may be dispensed with.
CS(OS).83/2013                                                           Page 1 of 4

 4.    Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that in the case of
       Shambhu P. Jaisinghani v. Kanayalal P. Jaisinghani, reported at
       1995 (34) DRJ 704, the Court while relying upon a decision rendered in
       the case of Subhash Chopra, etc. v. State, Probate Case No.12/87, has
       held that it would not be necessary for the petitioner therein to furnish
       the administrative bond as the mother therein had bequeathed the
       property to her natural heirs. Relevant portion of the judgment reads as
       under:
               “8. The Will is executed by the mother in favour of the sons.
               As the mother has bequeathed the property to her natural heirs,
               it is not necessary to order the petitioner to give the
               administrative bond. This view is taken by this Court in the case
               of Probate Case No.12/87 titled as Subhash Chopra, etc. Vs.
               State, decided on 26.7.1989.”
 5.    Counsel further submits that similarly in the case of Sanjay Suri v.
       State, reported at 2003 (71) DRJ 446, the Court has exempted the
       petitioner from furnishing administrative bond. Relevant portion of the
       judgment reads as under:
               “16. Section 291 of the Act, requires furnishing of an
               administration bond. The object of an administration bond is to
               secure due and proper administration of the estate of the
               deceased in which the executors and administrators have to
               discharge multifarious duties in respect of the estate. The
               administrator is to pay full expenses, duties, legacy, retain the
               residue of the estate, recover the due to the estate. Once the
               residue has been determined, the executor or administrator are
               to pay the residuary legacy in case there is a kin. The
               administrators or the executors are required to maintain true
               account and complete inventory of assets of the deceased and to
CS(OS).83/2013                                                      Page 2 of 4

               administer the estate of the deceased and to file true and
               complete account of the administrator.
               .......
               28. Considering the nature of the Testamentary and Intestate
               succession, the object and purpose sought to be achieved
               by Section 291 and thus applying the aforesaid principles of
               interpretation of statutes, it would be seen that Section 291 of the
               Act is not intended to cover within its ambit the cases of a sole
               beneficiary and legal heir under a Will being required to furnish
               administration/surety bond. One cannot administer the estate or
               his own estate against himself, for which he be required to give
               an indemnity or administration bond. Besides, none of the
               purposes and objectives of Section 291 of the Act are covered or
               fulfillled by the execution of an administration/surety bond by the
               sole inheritor or beneficiary under the Will duly proved. Such an
               exercise would be an exercise in futility. In the instant case if the
               petitioner's grand son was to mismanage or maladminister, he
               would be doing so only against his own and personal interests. A
               right that clearly vests in him by virtue of the bequest. Hence
               insistence of furnishing the administration bond in the present
               case would not only be meaningless and without any purpose,
               but inconsistent with succession. Section 291 in the light of the
               foregoing principles of interpretation, as noticed, has to be
               interpreted so as not being applicable to a case of a sole
               beneficiary and legal heir, under a duly proved Will insofar as
               requirement of furnishing an administration bond is concerned.”
 6.    Heard counsel for the petitioners. Having regard to the submissions
       made and taking into consideration the decisions rendered in the case of
       Shambhu P. Jaisinghani (supra) and Sanjay Suri (supra) and having
       regard to the fact that in the present case, all the petitioners are
       beneficiaries to the Will dated 4.3.2013,           present application is
CS(OS).83/2013                                                         Page 3 of 4

       allowed. Furnishing the administrative bond and surety is dispensed
       with.
 7.    Application stands disposed of.
                                                         G.S.SISTANI, J
OCTOBER 06, 2016
msr
CS(OS).83/2013                                                 Page 4 of 4


