06.
$~
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+      CS(OS) 1763/2005
%                                       Judgment dated 19.12.2011
       THE POLO/LAUREN COMPANY L .P.                          ..... Plaintiff
                           Through : Mr. Pravin Anand and Ms.Abhilasha
                                        Nautiyal, Advs.
                    versus
       ROHIT S. BAJAJ AND ORS.                        ..... Defendants
                           Through
       CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE G.S.SISTANI
G.S.SISTANI, J. (ORAL)
I.A.NO.3914/2006.
1.     Application stands dismissed with liberty, as prayed, to raise the
       pleas made in this application in the execution petition.
CS(OS) 1763/2005
2.     Plaintiff has filed the present suit under Sections 134 and 135 of
       Trade Marks Act, 1999, and Sections 51 and 55 of Copyright Act,
       1957, for permanent injunction and damages against the defendants.
3.     Since none appeared on behalf of defendants no.1, 2, 4 to 8, they
       were proceeded ex parte on 17.2.2009. None is present on behalf of
       defendants no.3 and 9, as the matter stands settled with defendant
       No.3 and 9.
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                      Page 1 of 14

4.     Necessary facts to be noticed for disposal of the present suit are that
       plaintiff, which is a limited company, stated to be a global leader in
       the field of designer and branded apparel, accessories and home
       collections since the year 1967. The plaintiff has also been involved
       in the business of designing and authorizing the manufacture,
       promotion and sale of high quality women‟s and children‟s clothing
       as well as accessories. Plaintiff enjoys a high reputation and goodwill
       in the market. The plaintiff uses a family of trade marks such as
       POLO, RALPH LAUREN, POLO PLAYER DEVICE, POLO BY
       RALPH LAUREN amongst many other POLO formative marks. The
       plaintiff adopted the trade mark POLO for use in relation to clothing
       in 1967 and the POLO PLAYER DEVICE was adopted in the year
       1972 besides few other variants.
5.     Learned counsel for the plaintiff submits that plaintiff is also the
       proprietor of several trademarks comprising or containing “POLO”
       in India, details of which have been extracted in the plaint. Counsel
       further submits that reputation and goodwill of the Plaintiff‟s POLO
       Trademarks extends to India and the trademarks are well known to
       the relevant class of consumers. The Plaintiff has been exporting
       products made under its registered trademarks to various countries.
6.     Grievance of the plaintiff is that defendants have been manufacture,
       marketing and exporting the impugned garments and accessories
       deceitfully and fraudulently using the Plaintiff‟s various registered
       trademarks.
7.     Plaintiff has filed the affidavit of Mr. David Robert Brown, Vice
       President, International Trademarks Division of the Plaintiff. In the
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                   Page 2 of 14

       said affidavit Mr. David has identified the signatures of Mr.C.A
       Brijesh, Constituted Attorney of the Plaintiff, on the plaint at points
       marked „C‟ and „D‟ and also proved the original Power of Attorney
       executed by the Plaintiff in favour of Mr.C.A. Brijesh, which is
       exhibited as Ex. PW-1/1. He deposed that he is the signatory of the
       power of attorney and is duly authorized and competent to file the
       affidavit by virtue of a Board Resolution dated 29th August 2001 of
       the Plaintiff, which is exhibited as Ex. PW-1/2. He has further
       deposed that Plaintiff is carrying on the business since 1968 and is
       established in the business of designing, manufacturing and
       marketing articles of contemporary high quality men‟s, women‟s and
       children‟s clothing and accessories. Ralph Lauren, Chairman of the
       Board of the Plaintiff and principal shareholder, is widely recognized
       throughout the world for excellence in the creation of contemporary
       clothing designs. The Plaintiff trades in its goods and services inter
       alia under the trademarks POLO, POLO BY RALPH LAUREN,
       RALPH LAUREN and POLO PLAYER DEVICE, POLO (Polo
       Player Device) RALPH LAUREN, LAUREN, POLO JEANS CO.,
       POLO SPORTS, RALPH LAUREN and the representation of a Polo
       Player Device (collectively referred to as “POLO Trademarks”).
8.     It is deposed by Mr. David that Plaintiff‟s goods and services under
       the POLO trademarks are much sought after for their style and
       design excellence and quality of workmanship.         With around 40
       years of continuous, extensive and uniform use the POLO
       Trademarks have become so well known among the purchasing
       public as an international brand synonymous with high quality and
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                  Page 3 of 14

       prestige. As a result the POLO Trademarks and the goodwill
       associated with these are of incalculable value to the Plaintiff. It is
       further deposed that Plaintiff is also the proprietor in India of several
       trademarks comprising or containing “POLO”, details of which have
       been extracted in the affidavit. Certificates for use in legal
       proceedings for the registered trademark Nos. 742755, 420657,
       674214, 357142 and 742760 have been exhibited as Ex. PW-1/3, Ex.
       PW-1/4, Ex. PW-1/5, Ex. PW-1/6, Ex. PW-1/7; the certificates for
       use in legal proceedings of trademark Nos. 476409 and 577995 have
       been exhibited as Ex. PW-1/8 and Ex. PW-1/9; and certified copies
       for the registered trademark Nos. 489215, 67207 and 67245 have
       been exhibited as Ex. PW-1/10, Ex. PW-1/11 and Ex. PW-1/12. It is
       also deposed by Mr. Davit that Plaintiff has registered or has applied
       for registration of the POLO Trademarks in many countries of the
       world such as Australia, Canada, Hong Kong, New Zealand, United
       Kingdom, Singapore and Malaysia. Certified copies of registration
       certificates in respect of Plaintiff‟s trademarks comprising or
       containing “POLO” have been exhibited as Ex. PW-1/13 at pages 4
       to 15, Ex.PW-1/14 at pages 16 to 19, Ex.PW-1/15 at pages 20 to 25,
       Ex.PW-1/16 at pages 26 to 32, Ex.PW-1/17 at pages 33 to 40,
       Ex.PW-1/18 at pages 41 to 44 and Ex.PW-1/19. It is also deposed
       that Plaintiff registered its domain name www.polo.com on 14 th
       January 1998. A printout of the relevant extracts of the search engine
       whois.com is exhibited as Ex.PW-1/20. The Plaintiff‟s website
       www.polo.com gets approximately 800,000 visits each month at the
       home section alone.
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                    Page 4 of 14

9.     Mr. David further goes on to state that substantial reputation and
       goodwill has accrued to the Plaintiff‟s POLO Trademarks through
       extensive sales worldwide. The reputation and goodwill of the
       Plaintiff‟s POLO Trademarks extends to India and the trademarks are
       well known to the relevant class of consumers here. The worldwide
       sales figures including in the USA of the products bearing the POLO
       Trademarks either alone or in conjunction with the trademark POLO,
       POLO BY RALPH LAUREN and RALPH LAUREN from the years
       1978 to 2004 as derived from the Plaintiff‟s records have been
       extracted in the affidavit. Mr. David further deposed that an original
       Form 10K United States Securities and Exchange Commission report
       of Polo Ralph Lauren Corporation, of which the Plaintiff is a
       subsidiary, of the year 2005 is filed on record with list of documents
       dated 17th January 2006 which is exhibited as Ex. PW-1/21. The
       original Annual Reports of the Polo Ralph Lauren Corporation for
       the years 2000 to 2005 have been exhibited as Ex. PW- 1/22, Ex.
       PW- 1/23, Ex. PW- 1/24, Ex. PW- 1/25 and Ex. PW- 1/26. Mr.
       David also deposed that Plaintiff‟s products are sold in several
       countries including India. The Plaintiff has been exporting products
       made under its registered trademarks to various countries. The
       original invoices, bills of lading etc., establishing export of products
       bearing the Plaintiff‟s POLO Trademarks along with the original
       certificate of Notary Public have been exhibited as Ex. PW- 1/27.
       Mr. David next deposed that major part of the advertising expenses
       have been incurred in the placement of advertisements in leading
       magazines and newspapers like Forbes, Esquire, Vanity Fair, Vogue,
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                    Page 5 of 14

       Elle, Rolling Stone, W magazine etc. and published in the United
       States as well as in Europe, Asia and the Middle East which are
       widely circulated inter alia in India. Original magazines have been
       filed and exhibited as Ex. PW- 1/28 to Ex. PW- 1/29. Copies of
       other advertisements released by the Plaintiff‟s POLO Trademarks
       have been exhibited as Ex. PW- 1/30. The statement of expenses
       incurred by the Plaintiff on advertisement and publicity and sales
       promotion for the POLO Trademarks from the year 1980 to 2004
       have been extracted in the affidavit. This witness has further deposed
       that plaintiff has successfully enforced its rights in eight (8) US cases
       where the fame of the POLO Trademarks has been recognized.
       Certified copies of the decisions in the Plaintiff‟s favour from
       various jurisdictions have been exhibited as Ex. PW- 1/31, Ex. PW-
       1/32 and Ex. PW- 1/33.
10.    As per this witness defendants No.1 and 2 have been manufacturing
       and exporting garments including shirts and T-shirts under the
       trademark POLO and Device of Polo Player to various countries.
       Defendant No.3 is also involved in manufacture, marketing and
       export of the impugned garments and accessories and deceitfully and
       fraudulently using the Plaintiff‟s various registered trademarks.
       Defendants No. 4 to 8 are various business entities run by Defendant
       No. 1 and 2. Defendant No.9 is a business entity being managed and
       operated by Defendant No.3. Defendant No.9 also operates through
       its website www.varshaa.com, besides others, two of which known to
       the        Plaintiffs      are       www.rohitfashions.com               and
       www.stockgarments.com. Printouts from www.varshaa.com and
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                     Page 6 of 14

       printouts from the Online Database of registered domain names in
       respect of the website www.varshaa.com have been exhibited as Ex.
       PW- 1/34 and Ex. PW- 1/35, respectively. Printouts of webpages
       from www.rohitfashions.com and printouts from the online database
       pertaining to its domain name registrations have been exhibited as
       Ex. PW- 1/36 and Ex. PW- 1/37 respectively. Printouts of web pages
       from www.stockgarments.com and printouts from the online
       database pertaining to its domain name registrations have been
       exhibited as Ex. PW- 1/38 and Ex. PW- 1/39 respectively.
11.    This witness has further deposed that it was in February 2005 that the
       Plaintiff became aware of fact that Defendants No.1 and 2 were
       manufacturing and exporting garments and accessories under the
       Plaintiff‟s POLO Trademarks to various countries through Defendant
       Nos. 4 and 5. The Plaintiff‟s apprehensions were further confirmed
       when it received copies of UK Customs Seizure reports and
       Netherlands Custom Authorities reports which contained details of
       the counterfeit garments seized. Copies of the UK and Netherlands
       Custom Authorities seizure reports have been marked as X- 1.
       Pursuant to such information from the UK and Netherlands Customs
       Authorities plaintiff filed a complaint against Defendants No. 1, 2, 4
       and 5 with the Commissioner of Police, Greater Chennai, Egmore,
       Chennai on June 27, 2005, a true copy of which has been marked as
       X- 2. The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Chennai Crime Branch,
       sought an opinion from the Trademark Registry prior to taking
       action. The original opinion of the Registrar of Trademarks has been
       exhibited as Ex. PW- 1/40. Upon receiving the Registrar‟s opinion,
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                 Page 7 of 14

       the Central Crime Branch registered FIR No. 830/2005 against
       Defendant Nos.1 and 2 trading as Defendant Nos. 4 and 5 and
       ordered a raid allowing „search and seizure‟ at the premises of
       Defendant Nos. 1, 2, 4 and 5. A true copy of the FIR has been
       marked as X-3. A copy of the search slip issued by the Central Crime
       Branch has been marked as X- 4. Original photographs taken during
       the search and seizure have been exhibited as Ex. PW-1/41. An
       original sample of a counterfeit garment seized during the raid is also
       exhibited as Ex. PW-1/42.         The police raids conducted at the
       premises of these Defendants were given press coverage and an
       original news report has been exhibited as Ex. PW-1/43. This witness
       has also deposed that Defendants have been actively colluding and
       selling the counterfeit clothing and accessories bearing the Plaintiff‟s
       POLO Trademarks.         The Defendants have adopted an identical
       trademark, namely POLO, for identical goods, namely garments for
       which the Plaintiff and its trademarks are well known. Defendant
       No.3 and 9 have also been involved in online sale of counterfeit
       garments bearing the POLO Trademarks or similar trademarks of the
       Plaintiff supplied by Defendant Nos. 1 and 2 and 4 to 8 and
       otherwise. He has also deposed that in the light of the identity of the
       marks adopted and used by the Defendants with the registered POLO
       Trademarks of the Plaintiff, the malafides and dishonest intentions of
       the Defendants are obvious. The Plaintiff‟s trademarks are registered
       in India from as early as the year 1984 and the Defendants‟
       unauthorized use thereof amounts to an infringement of the
       Plaintiff‟s exclusive statutory and proprietary rights in its trademarks.
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                     Page 8 of 14

       There are several printouts obtained from the internet that
       demonstrate that large quantities of infringing products were being
       manufactured, offered and sold by the Defendants through the
       internet. Printouts from the various websites on the internet
       demonstrating the Defendant‟s infringing activities have been
       exhibited as Ex. PW-1/45, Ex. PW-1/46, Ex. PW-1/47, Ex. PW-1/48,
       Ex. PW-1/49, Ex. PW-1/50 and Ex. PW-1/51. Additional printouts
       containing extracts of the Defendants‟ website www.varshaa.com
       from the year 2003 to 2007 obtained from www.webarchive.org and
       extracts from Google search results have been exhibited as Ex. PW-
       1/52 and Ex. PW-1/53 respectively. It is next deposed that the
       damage to the Plaintiff‟s POLO Trademarks on account of the
       infringing and unlawful activities of the Defendants by their use for
       counterfeit goods bearing the POLO Trademarks is estimated to be
       around Rs.40,01,200 (Rupees four million twelve hundred). The
       surreptitious online trade activities of the Defendants under the
       POLO Trademarks are continuing to causing incalculable harm and
       injury to the business, goodwill and reputation of the Plaintiff. The
       Plaintiff‟s POLO trademarks are suffering dilution and erosion of the
       goodwill and reputation occasioned by the loss of distinctiveness,
       uniqueness and exclusivity attached thereto. All profits earned by the
       Defendants in pursuance of their infringing activities and
       misrepresentation of their goods as emanating from, licensed by or
       associated with the same source as the Plaintiff‟s goods are the losses
       of the Plaintiff and amounts to unjust enrichment of the Defendant.
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                  Page 9 of 14

12.    I have heard counsel for the plaintiff and perused the plaint and the
       accompanying documents and the evidence led by the plaintiff. The
       evidence of the plaintiff remained unrebutted.        In this case at the
       stage of filing of the suit, interim orders were granted and the Local
       Commissioner was also appointed to seize the goods in question.
       The goods were taken possession of and then released on superdari to
       the defendant. The plaintiff has established that the plaintiff is the
       proprietor    of   the   registered   trade    mark    POLO/      RALPH
       LAUREN/POLO PLAYER DEVICE. Plaintiff has placed on record
       certificates for the use in legal proceedings for their registered
       trademark as Ex.PW-1/3 to PW-1/12. Having regard to the evidence
       placed on record the plaintiff has also established that the registered
       trademark of the plaintiff is a well known mark as defined in Section
       2(z)(g) of the Trade Marks Act. The aforesaid facts and
       circumstances show that the plaintiff has the exclusive right to use
       the trademark POLO/ RALPH LAUREN/POLO PLAYER DEVICE.
       The defendant is attempting to counterfeit the products of the
       plaintiff and pass off its goods as that of the plaintiff. This not only
       causes loss of profits to the plaintiff, but results in inferior products
       made available to the public at large who are deceived by the
       conduct of the defendant.
13.    In view of the above, the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of permanent
       injunction against the defendant from dealing with the goods having
       infringing mark in terms of prayers (i) to (vii) of paragraph 35 of the
       plaint.
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                     Page 10 of 14

14.    The last aspect to be considered is the issue of damages for loss of
       reputation and business as also the cost of the present proceedings. It
       is trite to say that the defendant has deliberately stayed away from
       the present proceedings with the result that an enquiry into the
       accounts of the defendant for determination of damages cannot take
       place. However, the infringement of the trademark of the plaintiff is
       not in dispute. The plaintiff has claimed damages to the tune of
       Rs.50,00,000/- for loss of sale and reputation payable to the plaintiff.
       The attention of this Court has been drawn to a number of judgments
       in this behalf where dealing with similar situations, damages have
       been awarded.
15.    In the case of 'M/s L.T. Overseas Ltd. v. M/s Guruji Trading Co.
       and Anr. [CS (OS) No. 2711/1999] decided on 07.09.2005 this court
       had granted Rs.3 lakhs damages to the plaintiff. In the case of
       Relaxo Rubber Limited and Anr. v. Selection Footwear and Anr.,
       1999 PTC 578, the defendant did not file the written statement after
       taking time for the same and a decree was passed under Order VIII
       Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Against the claim of
       tentative damages of Rs.5 lakhs, Rs.3 lakhs was awarded as
       damages. In another case of Hindustan Machines v. Royal
       Electrical Applies, 1999 PTC (19) 685, a sum of Rs.3 lakhs was
       awarded.
16.    In the case of Time Incorporated v. Lokesh Srivastava and Anr.,
       2005 (30) PTC 3 (Del) where apart from compensatory damages of
       Rs.5 lakhs, punitive damages have also been awarded. It would be
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                  Page 11 of 14

       useful to reproduce paras 7 and 8 of the said judgment, which are as
       under :-
               “7. Coming to the claim of Rs.5 lacs as punitive and
               exemplary damages for the flagrant infringement of the
               plaintiff's trade mark, this Court is of the considered view that
               a distinction has to be drawn between compensatory damages
               and punitive damages. The award of compensatory damages to
               a plaintiff is aimed at compensating him for the loss suffered
               by him whereas punitive damages are aimed at deterring a
               wrong doer and the like minded from indulging in such
               unlawful activities. Whenever an action has criminal
               propensity also the punitive damages are clearly called for so
               that the tendency to violate the laws and infringe the rights of
               others with a view to make money is curbed. The punitive
               damages are founded on the philosophy of corrective justice
               and as such, in appropriate cases these must be awarded to
               give a signal to the wrong doers that law does not take a
               breach merely as a matter between rival parties but feels
               concerned about those also who are not party to the lis but
               suffer on account of the breach. In the case in hand itself, it is
               not only the plaintiff, who has suffered on account of the
               infringement of its trade mark and Magazine design but a large
               number of readers of the defendants' Magazine 'TIME ASIA
               SANSKARAN' also have suffered by purchasing the
               defendants' Magazines under an impression that the same are
               from the reputed publishing house of the plaintiff company.
               8. This Court has no hesitation in saying that the time has
               come when the Courts dealing actions for infringement of
               trade marks, copy rights, patents, etc. should not only grant
               compensatory damages but award punitive damages also with
               a view to discourage and dishearten law breakers who indulge
               in violations with impunity out of lust for money so that they
               realize that in case they are caught, they would be liable not
               only to reimburse the aggrieved party but would be liable to
               pay punitive damages also, which may spell financial disaster
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                     Page 12 of 14

               for them. In Mathias v. Accor Economi Lodging, Inc., 347
               F.3d 672 (7th Cir. 2003) the factors underlying the grant of
               punitive damages were discussed and it was observed that one
               function of punitive damages is to relieve the pressure on an
               overloaded system of criminal justice by providing a civil
               alternative to criminal prosecution of minor crimes. It was
               further observed that the award of punitive damages serves the
               additional purpose of limiting the defendant's ability to profit
               from its fraud by escaping detection and prosecution. If a
               tortfeasor is caught only half the time he commits torts, then
               when he is caught he should be punished twice as heavily in
               order to make up for the reason that it is very difficult for a
               plaintiff to give proof of actual damages suffered by him as the
               defendants who indulge in such activities never maintain
               proper accounts of their transactions who they know that the
               same are objectionable and unlawful. In the present case, the
               claim of punitive damages is of Rs.5 lacs only which can be
               safely awarded. Had it been higher even this court would not
               have hesitated in awarding the same. The Court is of the view
               that the punitive damages should be really punitive and not
               flee bite and quantum thereof should depend upon the
               flagrancy of infringement.”
17.    Learned counsel for the plaintiff states that damages have been
       claimed in the present suit and the plaintiff is entitled to the damages
       to the tune of Rs.50,00,000/-.
18.    I am in agreement with the aforesaid submission of learned counsel
       for the plaintiff that damages in such cases must be awarded and a
       defendant, who chooses to stay away from the proceedings of the
       Court, should not be permitted to enjoy the benefits of evasion of
       court proceedings.       Any view to the contrary would result in a
       situation where the defendant who appears in Court and submits its
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                     Page 13 of 14

       account books would be liable for damages, while a party which
       chooses to stay away from court proceedings would escape the
       liability on account failure of the availability of account books. A
       party who chooses to not participate in court proceedings and stays
       away must, thus, suffer the consequences of damages as stated and
       set out by the plaintiff. There is a larger public purpose involved to
       discourage such parties from indulging in such acts of deception and,
       thus, even if the same has a punitive element, it must be granted.
       R.C. Chopra, J. has very succinctly set out in Time Incorporated's
       case (supra) that punitive damages are founded on the philosophy of
       corrective justice. That was the case where the publishers of Time
       Magazine had come to Court and one of the factors which weighed
       while awarding punitive damages was that the readers had been
       sufferers of the infringement of the mark of the plaintiff. The only
       difference is that in the present case it is the consumer of the
       products of the plaintiff, who have suffered as a consequence of the
       infringement of the mark of the plaintiff by the defendant.
19.    For the reasons stated above, the plaintiff has made out a case for
       grant of decree as prayed in the plaint. Accordingly, the order dated
       20.12.2005 is confirmed and the suit is decreed in favour of the
       plaintiff and against the defendant with costs.       Plaintiff is also
       entitled to the damages to the tune of Rs.5.0 lacs.
                                                             G.S.SISTANI,J
DECEMBER 19, 2011
msr
CS(OS) 2044/2009                                                  Page 14 of 14


