*            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+             W.P.(C) 7239/2011 and CM 16457/2011
                                      Decided on: 29th September, 2011.
IN THE MATTER OF :
NASIRUDDIN AND ORS                                      ..... Petitioners
                         Through:     Mr. Sarfaraj Hussein, Adv. with Mr.
                                      Masood Hussein, Mr. M.M. Shukla,
                                      Advs.
                   versus
MCD AND ORS                                             ..... Respondents
                         Through:     Ms. Mansi Gupta, Adv. for MCD.
                                      Mr. Arun Birbal, Adv. for R-3/DDA.
  CORAM
*HON'BLE MS.JUSTICE HIMA KOHLI
   1. Whether Reporters of Local papers may             Yes
       be allowed to see the Judgment?
   2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?            Yes
   3. Whether the judgment should be                    Yes
       reported in the Digest?
HIMA KOHLI, J. (Oral)
1.     The present petition is filed by the petitioners praying inter alia for
directions to the respondents to conduct a survey of the dairies of the
petitioners as also to consider the applications of the petitioners for
allotment of plots in Ghogha Dairy as per law.
2.     At the outset, counsel for the petitioners was requested to inform
the Court as to the date on which the applications, copies of which have
been    placed  on   record   at   pages-20-31,    were   submitted     to the
W.P.(C)7239/2011                                                       Page 1 of 4

respondent/MCD.      The said query was raised in view of the fact that
photocopies of the aforesaid applications placed on record by the
petitioners neither bear a date of filing of the applications nor an
endorsement      of the respondent/MCD showing receipt of the said
applications. Counsel for the petitioner orally submits that though there
is no averment in the writ petition as to the exact date on which the
aforesaid applications were submitted by the petitioners to the MCD, the
said applications were, in fact, submitted sometime in the year 2004.
3.     To test the aforesaid submission made on behalf of the petitioners,
this Court has perused the averments in the plaint, copy of which is
placed on record at page-32-38.      The aforesaid suit for permanent and
mandatory injunction instituted by the petitioners on 10.12.2009, against
the respondent/MCD is pending before the learned Senior Civil Judge. A
perusal of the said plaint shows that the petitioners (plaintiffs therein)
had applied for the re-settlement and rehabilitation of dairy farms in Delhi
under a scheme floated in the year 1997.     In para-7 of the plaint, it was
mentioned that the petitioners did not file their applications with the
respondent/MCD for the Ghogha Dairy project as they were under the
impression that since they had already filed applications in the year 1997,
for allotment with the prescribed fee, they were not required to do so
again in the year 2004. It is, thus, apparent that the averments made in
the present petition that the petitioners submitted their applications to
W.P.(C)7239/2011                                                    Page 2 of 4

the respondent/MCD in the year 2004, are incorrect and contrary to their
stand in the suit proceedings.         In fact, it appears that the said
applications were never submitted by the petitioners to MCD. Counsel for
the petitioner is unable to explain the circumstance in which the
petitioners have failed to mention the date of their submitting applications
under the Ghogha Dairy project floated by the respondent/MCD for
relocation of their dairies existing in urbanized areas of NCT of Delhi,
more so when the entire relief in the present petition hinges on the said
applications. Further, no proof of actual deposit of the said applications
with the respondent/MCD has been placed on record by the petitioners.
4.     The aforesaid view is fortified by the submission by the counsel for
the respondent/MCD that applications under the aforesaid scheme were
invited from parties interested in relocating their unauthorized dairies
from urbanized areas of NCT of Delhi to Ghogha Dairy project on three
occasions, for the first time on 03.09.2004, which were required to be
submitted by 20.09.2004; the second time, such applications were invited
was on 27.07.2007 to be submitted by 14.08.2007; and the third time
they were invited on 30.03.2010 to be submitted by 29.04.2010.
5.     In view of the fact that the petitioners have not been able to
establish   the  factum    of  their    filing the  applications  with   the
respondent/MCD for seeking allotment of alternate plots in the Ghogha
Dairy project for running their dairies and considering the fact that the
W.P.(C)7239/2011                                                    Page 3 of 4

petitioners had three opportunities to apply to MCD for relocation of their
dairies to the Ghogha Dairy Project, none of which appear to have been
availed by the petitioners, the question of issuing any directions to the
respondent/MCD for allotment of plots in their favour, does not arise.
This Court is not inclined to entertain the present petition.
6.     The petition is, therefore, dismissed in limine, along with pending
application.  However,     it  is  made    clear  that   if and   when    the
respondent/MCD invites further applications from the public for relocation
of unauthorized dairies, the petitioners would be at liberty to apply at that
time for allotment of plots as per the rules applicable. This will, however,
not create any special equities in favour of the petitioners insofar as the
removal of their existing dairies is concerned, if they are unauthorized
and are required to be removed as per law.
                                                               HIMA KOHLI,J
SEPTEMBER 29, 2011
‘anb’
W.P.(C)7239/2011                                                     Page 4 of 4


