$~
*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+            RFA 705/2016 and CM APPL. 33911/2016 (stay)
                                             Reserved on:          16.01.2017
                                            Date of decision:      19.01.2017
IN THE MATTER OF:
HARISH RELAN                                             ..... Appellant
                          Through: Mr. K.V. Balakrishnan, Advocate
                          versus
KAUSHAL KUMARI RELAN                                     ..... Respondent
                          Through: Mr. Vivek Singh, Advocate
CORAM
HON'BLE MS.JUSTICE HIMA KOHLI
HIMA KOHLI, J.
1.    A mother, called by any name, in any language, whether as “Ma,
Amma, Aayi, Mai, Ammee” in India or as “Madre, Mamma, Moer and
Mana” and several others dialects in foreign lands, is universally
acknowledged as a symbol of pure and unconditional love for her offsprings.
The sanskrit shloka from the Hindu Epic, Ramayana, uttered by Lord Ram,
epitomizes the stature of a Mother in our country and treats her at par with
the Almighty and the Mother Land in the following words :
      “Janani Janma bhoomischa Swarga diapi Gariyasi”
      (Translation : Mother and Motherland are greater than Heaven.)
      The debt that a child owes to his mother, who is not only the
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 1 of 53

procreater and the rearer, but also a lifelong teacher, mentor, healer and
guide, is embodied in the following sanskrit shloka :
       “Matridevim Namastubhya Mam Janmdatrim twam Namo Namah
       Balyakale Ma Palan Kritva Matrakabhyo twam Namamyaham.”
(Translation: I salute my mother, who gave me birth; I also salute my other
mother (woman) who added knowledge and wisdom to my actions and life to
make me a good human being.)
2.     The love for her child that beats in a mother‟s heart, has been aptly
characterized by Swami Vivekananda as a “colourless love that knows no
barter, a love that never dies”. Mahatama Gandhi has paid homage to a
mother‟s affection for her child in the following words:
     “Seeing God face to face is to feel that He is enthroned in our
     hearts, even as a child feels a mother‟s affection without needing
     any demonstration”.
3.     For centuries, a Mother has been held in high esteem in our society
and cherished for her devotion and affection for her children. She is the
fulcrum of the family unit, constantly working towards binding family
members together with her selfless dedication, open heartedness and
unstinting loyalty. She evokes strong and positive emotions in her children
that range from adoration to admiration, sheer awe to eternal gratitude.
Rooted in this ethos and robust cultural values, is the sad saga of the
respondent/plaintiff, a 94    years old widow, bed ridden due to several
ailments, and kept out of her own home and hearth for sixteen long years by
none other than her own son, the appellant/defendant herein who has
dragged her into litigation spanning over a decade.
RFA 705/2016                                                    Page 2 of 53

4.     The present appeal arises from an order dated 14.05.2016, passed by
the learned ADJ in a suit for eviction and possession instituted by the
respondent/plaintiff, against her son, the appellant/defendant. The impugned
judgment on admissions has been pronounced by the learned ADJ on an
application filed by the respondent/defendant under Order XII Rule 6 CPC.
5.     Having regard to the chequered history of the litigation between the
parties, it is considered imperative to narrate the sequence of events that
ultimately compelled the respondent/plaintiff to institute a suit for eviction
and possession against her son in respect of the third floor of premises
bearing No.N-18, Jangpura Extension, New Delhi.
6.     When instituting the suit in the early part of 2015, the
respondent/plaintiff had averred in the plaint that she is a 92 years old
widow, had undergone a major heart surgery and is bed ridden. She and her
husband, late Shri Aishi Lal Relan have four children, two sons and two
daughters. One of the sons, who had not got married, had expired on
23.8.2014. Out of the two daughters, one had got widowed and the other
was unmarried and unemployed and lived with the respondent. The
appellant is a banker and has a working wife. The respondent‟s husband was
allotted the subject plot by the Government, vide lease deed dated
14.12.1960 and he had constructed a ground floor on the property where he
was residing with the respondent/plaintiff and their children. Sh. Aishi Lal
Relan had expired on 25.6.1989, leaving behind the respondent/plaintiff and
four children.
7.     In the year 1999, all the children of the respondent/plaintiff, including
the appellant/defendant herein, had executed a Relinquishment Deed dated
18.11.1999, relinquishing their rights in the subject premises in her favour.
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 3 of 53

On 3.3.2000, all the children of the respondent/plaintiff, including the
appellant/defendant herein, had executed a Rectification Deed in respect of
the Relinquishment Deed, which was duly registered. On the basis of the
aforesaid documents, L&DO had transferred the suit premises in the name
of the respondent/plaintiff, by executing a Conveyance Deed dated 7.2.2001.
Subsequently, the suit premises was converted by the respondent from
leasehold to freehold property. Pertinently, it was the appellant/defendant
who had signed the said Conveyance Deed, as a witness.
8.     In the year 1999, the respondent/plaintiff decided to demolish the
existing construction and raise fresh construction comprising of basement,
ground floor, first floor, second floor and a third floor in the subject
premises.     A contractor was engaged by her to undertake the construction
activity that was completed in the year 2000, for which the
respondent/plaintiff herein had to take loans from various agencies,
including friends and family members. After the building was constructed,
the respondent/plaintiff shifted to the ground floor and started residing
there.
9.     It has been further averred in the plaint that in January, 2001, the
appellant/defendant approached the respondent/plaintiff with a request to
shift to the third floor of the premises for a short time on the ground that the
tenanted premises that he and his family was occupying, had to be vacated.
As he undertook to vacate the said floor within a period of four to six
months, the respondent/plaintiff acceded to the said request and permitted
the appellant and his family to reside on the third floor of the premises for a
period of four to six months. This concession given to the appellant by his
mother, turned out to be the trigger point for the litigation between the
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 4 of 53

parties.
10.    Since the respondent/plaintiff had no other source of income and was
not in a position to return the amounts she had borrowed for raising the
construction, she had to sell the second floor of the suit premises on
4.3.2002, and the first floor in December, 2004. Even after doing so, a part
of the loan amount remained outstanding. As a result, in the year 2005 the
respondent/plaintiff requested the appellant/defendant to vacate the third
floor with the idea of selling the same and clearing the remaining loan
amount while retaining some money to meet her day to day expenses. When
the appellant/ defendant refused to comply, the respondent/plaintiff was left
with no other option but to vacate the ground floor occupied by her and her
unmarried daughter and sell it on 16.8.2005. The appellant/plaintiff
remained defiant and continued to occupy the third floor. With no other roof
on their head, the respondent/plaintiff and her daughter had to shift to a
tenanted premises in the neighbourhood.
11.    The appellant/defendant fired the first salvo against his mother and
siblings in the year 2006, by instituting a suit in the High Court claiming
partition, declaration and permanent injunction in respect of the entire
premises [CS(OS) No.724/2006]. He also impleaded the purchasers of the
ground, first and second floors as co-defendants in the said suit. The prayer
clause in the suit reads as follows :-
       “a) Property bearing No.N-18, Jangpura Extension, New Delhi-
       110014 may please be ordered to be partitioned by giving 1/5th share
       each to plaintiff and defendants No.1 to 4.
       b)     Preliminary decree for declaration may please be ordered to be
       passed declaring Relinquishment Deeds dated 18.11.99, Rectification
       Deed dated 30.3.2000 and Sale Deeds dated 4.3.2002, 3.12.2004 and
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 5 of 53

       16.8.2005, to be null and void.
       c)     A decree for permanent injunction be also passed in favour of
       the plaintiff and against defendants restraining the defendants from
       interfering in the possession of the plaintiff in the third floor of
       property bearing N-18, Jangpura Extension, New Delhi.
       d)     Cost of the application be also awarded.”
12.    One of the preliminary issues framed in the aforesaid suit was with
regard to it being barred by limitation and the onus to prove the same was
placed on the respondent (defendant No.1 therein). The suit was adjourned
to 28.4.2014 for counsels for the parties to address arguments on the
preliminary issues. In the meantime, the plaintiff therein (appellant herein)
filed an application under Order VI Rule 17 CPC, for seeking amendment of
the plaint.   On 02.05.2014, the learned Single Judge expressed an opinion
that counsel for the plaintiff ought to first address arguments on the
maintainability of the suit and observed that only if the same is shown to be
maintainable, will the amendment application be considered.
13.    Aggrieved by the aforesaid order dated 02.5.2014, the plaintiff therein
(appellant herein) filed an intra-court appeal, registered as FAO(OS)
295/2014, which was disposed of by the Division Bench vide order dated
03.09.2014, with directions issued to the learned Single Judge to decide the
pending amendment application. Finally, by an elaborate judgment dated
28.11.2014, exercising his suo moto powers under Order VII Rule 11 CPC
the learned Single Judge rejected the plaint on the ground that the suit
instituted by the plaintiff was barred by limitation. The operative paras of
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 6 of 53

the judgment dated 28.11.2014 are apposite and are reproduced herein
below:-
      “23. In the present case, the documents available on record show
      that the plaintiff and other legal heirs of Sh.Aishi Lal Relan have
      executed relinquishment deed dated 18th November, 1999 in favour
      of defendant No.1 and rectification deed dated 30th March, 2000.
      The plaintiff is also the witness to the first sale deed dated 4th
      March, 2002 for second floor by the defendant No.1 in favour of the
      defendant No.7. After the execution of the said document, the entire
      property was transferred in the name of the defendant No.1 by
      conveyance deed dated 7th February, 2001 in the office of L&DO.
      The plaintiff in the conveyance deed also signed as a witness. It is
      undisputed fact that the plaintiff at his own willingness has
      transferred the entire rights in the name of the defendant No.1. It is
      also undisputed that the plaintiff has got full knowledge about the
      purchase of the property by the defendants No.5 to 7 from the
      defendant as he was residing in the same building. Thus, the present
      suit was filed in April, 2006 in which the plaintiff is seeking
      declaration declaring the relinquishment deeds dated 18th November,
      1999, rectification deed dated 30th March, 2000 and sale deeds dated
      4th March, 2002, 3rd December, 2004 and 16th August, 2005 to be
      null and void and the suit filed by him for partition be decreed and an
      order be passed for partitioning the suit property by giving 1/5th
      share to the plaintiff and the defendants No.1 to 4.
      24. In the present suit, the declaration sought by the plaintiff is barred
      by time on the face of the documents. Thus, the suit filed by the
      plaintiff is barred by limitation. The relinquishment deed was
      executed in favour of the defendant No.1 on 18th November, 1999.
      The present suit is filed in 2006 i.e. after about more than six and half
      years. Thus, the submission of the counsel cannot be accepted. It
      appears to the Court from all the angles, i.e. from the date of
      relinquishment deed or from the dates of three sale deeds executed in
      favour of defendants No.5 to 7, the suit filed by the plaintiff is not
      within time.
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 7 of 53

       25. From the above mentioned facts and settled law, it is clear that
       the suit is time barred as admittedly the plaintiff has denied the
       execution of relinquishment deed in the year 1999. Subsequently,
       when the other floors were sold, the plaintiff had full knowledge and
       even the plaintiff was the witness to the said transaction. On the face
       of said registered documents which are not denied and cannot be
       denied by the plaintiff. The plaintiff is not entitled to cover up such
       delay on flimsy reasons which have no application in law. Once the
       suit is time barred the application for amendment is not maintainable.
       The suit and the application being I.A. No.8296/2014 under Order 6
       Rule 17 CPC is dismissed. The interim order dated 1st May, 2006 is
       vacated by allowing the application under Order 39 Rule 4 CPC by
       the defendant No.1 who is declared to be the owner of the property
       of N-18, Jangpura Extension, Delhi-110014.” (emphasis added)
14.    Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment, the plaintiff (appellant herein)
filed an appeal [RFA(OS) No.162/2014], that was dismissed by the Division
Bench by an equally detailed judgment dated 3.8.2015, that has
painstakingly discussed the primary grievance of the appellant that the
learned Single Judge had erred in dismissing his application for seeking
amendment of the plaint and thereafter the court had proceeded to examine
the said application on merits and concluded that the same was nothing but
an attempt on the part of the appellant to set up an entirely new case and
withdraw the admissions already made by him in the original plaint. It was
also observed by the Division Bench that the proposed amendments to the
plaint were patently barred by limitation. Further, the view taken by the
Single Judge that the suit as instituted by the plaintiff (appellant herein) was
barred by limitation, was endorsed in the appeal. Before parting with the
said case, taking into consideration the constant harassment faced by the
mother (respondent herein) at the hands of her son (the appellant) and
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 8 of 53

describing the litigation initiated by him as malafide, in addition to litigation
expenses assessed at Rs.25,000/- and held to be payable by the appellant to
his mother and siblings collectively, as also to the other respondents, further
costs @ Rs.25,000/- were directed to be paid by him to each of the seven
respondents arrayed in the appeal. Lastly, holding that the appellant had
committed an offence by making false claims on affidavit, which is
punishable in law, proceedings under Section 340 Cr.PC were directed to be
launched against him.
15.   The aforesaid decision was challenged in an appeal preferred by the
appellant before the Supreme Court [SLP(C) No.36127/2015]. Vide order
dated 8.1.2016, the said SLP was dismissed with an observation that no
grounds for interference had been made out. Not satisfied by the aforesaid
decision, the appellant filed a review petition, which suffered the same fate
vide order dated 27.4.2016. Thus it took an entire decade for curtains to be
drawn on the first round of litigation that was set into motion by the
appellant/defendant against his mother in the year 2006. In all this duration,
the appellant continued occupying the third floor of the suit premises
without paying a penny toward use and occupation charges whereas, the
respondent herein and her unmarried and unemployed daughter had no
option but to reside in a tenanted premises in the vicinity. The respondent
has averred in the plaint that after the judgment dated 28.11.2014 was
passed, dismissing the suit instituted by the appellant, she had requested him
to vacate the suit premises, but he had flatly refused to do so.
16.   Facing intense resistance from the appellant, in February, 2015, the
respondent/plaintiff was compelled to institute a suit for eviction and
possession against him in the High Court. In the said suit, reference was
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 9 of 53

made to the decision of the Single Judge in the earlier suit filed by the
appellant. Pertinently, at that time, the intra count appeal filed by the
appellant/defendant was still pending consideration.
17.    The appellant/defendant was served with the summons in the suit and
he filed a written statement raising several preliminary objections. Two of
the preliminary objections that need to be particularly mentioned, are of
adverse possession and that the suit is barred by limitation.
18.    On 26.10.2015 the pecuniary jurisdiction of the High Court was raised
to Rs.2.00 crore and above and resultantly, the present suit, that was valued
at Rs.40.00 lacs, was transferred for further proceedings to the District
Court. On 23.3.2016, while considering an application filed by the
respondent/plaintiff under Order XV Rule 1(A) of the CPC, the trial court
had expressed an opinion that the suit for possession could be decreed in
view of the pleading of the parties. At the request of the learned counsel for
the appellant/defendant, the case was put up for arguments on 30.4.2016 and
judgment was pronounced on 14.5.2016.
19.    On examining the admitted pleadings of the parties and the previous
history of their inter se litigation, vide judgment dated 14.5.2016, the
learned trial court arrived at the conclusion that the respondent/plaintiff is
entitled to a decree for possession in respect of the third floor of the suit
premises on the basis of admissions made by the appellant/defendant.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid decision, the appellant/defendant has filed the
present appeal.
20.    The impugned judgment has been assailed on two counts. Firstly, that
the trial court had erred in passing the judgment on admissions under Order
XII Rule 6 CPC when there were no categorical and unequivocal admissions
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 10 of 53

made by the appellant/defendant in the pleadings and that the provisions of
Order XII Rule 6 CPC are not a matter of right, but a matter of discretion of
the Court, which ought not to have been exercised in favour of the
respondent/plaintiff in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
Mr. K.V. Balakrishnan, learned counsel submitted that the averments made
by the appellant/defendant in his written statement ought to have been
examined by the trial court in totality instead of picking and choosing some
statements in isolation and reading them out of context. The second plea
taken is that the appellant/defendant had raised various triable issues in the
written statement and in the light of the proviso to Order VIII Rule 5 CPC,
he ought to have been afforded an opportunity to prove his defence by
leading evidence. Learned counsel argued that the defences taken by the
appellant included that of adverse possession and limitation which, could not
have been adjudicated without a proper trial. To buttress his arguments,
learned counsel for the appellant/defendant had cited the following
decisions:-
     1.    Raj Kumar Chawla vs. Lucas Indian Services, AIR 2006 Delhi
           266,
     2.    Himani Alloys Ltd. vs. Tata Steel Ltd., (2011) 15 SCC 273.
     3.    Gurdwara Sahib vs. Gram Panchayat Village Sirthala & Anr.
           (2014) 1 SCC 669.
21.    Per   contra,   Mr.    Vivek    Singh,    learned   counsel    for    the
respondent/plaintiff supported the impugned judgment and stated that no
ground was made out for interference. He drew the attention of the Court to
the previous history of litigation between the parties and stated that upto the
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 11 of 53

year 2005, even as per his own version, the appellant/defendant had
remained in permissive possession of the suit premises when the
respondent/plaintiff had asked him to vacate the same. As a consequence, he
is now estopped from taking the plea of adverse possession. Even otherwise,
in the earlier suit instituted by the appellant, in respect of the entire
premises, he had sought the relief of partition to the extent of 1/5th share as a
legal heir of late Shri Aishi Lal Relan, on the ground of an alleged oral
family settlement arrived at between family members, whereunder it was
agreed that he would be entitled to one floor in the suit premises. Learned
counsel argued that it is settled law that the pleas of adverse possession and
a claim to the title of property are mutually inconsistent and self destructive
and cannot be taken simultaneously. Reference was also made to the
averments of the appellant/defendant in the written statement to canvass that
nowhere did he state as to when had his possession become hostile to the
respondent/plaintiff and nor has he furnished any other material information
to back his claim of adverse possession.
22.   In support of his submission that two mutually contradictory and self-
destructive defences cannot be available to the appellant/defendant, learned
counsel for the respondent had referred to and relied upon the following
decisions :
     1.   Arundhati Mishra (Smt.) vs. Sri Ram Charitra Pandey, (1994) 2
          SCC 29;
     2.   Konda Lakshmana Bapuji vs. Govt. of AP & Ors., (2002) 3
          SCC 258;
     3.   Karnataka Board of Wakf vs. Govt. of India & Ors., (2004) 10
          SCC 779;
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 12 of 53

      4.   T. Anjanappa & Ors. vs. Somalingappa & Anr., (2006) 7 SCC
           570; and
      5.   Maria Margarida Sequeira Fernandes & Ors. vs. Erasmo Jack DE
           Sequeira (dead) through LRs, (2012) 5 SCC 370
23.    As for the objection of limitation taken by the appellant/defendant in
the written statement, counsel for the respondent/plaintiff submitted that
assuming without admitting that the plea of adverse possession could be
available to the appellant/defendant, at best, his possession could be treated
as hostile to the respondent/plaintiff only in the year 2006, when he had
instituted a suit for partition against his mother and siblings and others.
Reckoned from the said date, the period of 12 years available under Article
65 of Schedule I of the Limitation Act, 1963 would have ended in the year
2018, and the present suit was instituted by the respondent/plaintiff in the
year 2015. Therefore, the said suit is not barred by limitation.
24.    Counsel for the respondent/plaintiff contended that the trial court was
well entitled to invoke the provisions of Order XII Rule 6 CPC in the facts
of present case and pronounce a judgment on the basis of admissions made
by the appellant/defendant in his written statement and it was equally
empowered to take cognizance of the previous litigation between the parties
in respect of the very same premises and arrive at the conclusion that the suit
for possession instituted by the respondent/plaintiff deserved to be decreed
against her son, the appellant herein.
25.    This Court has considered the rival submissions of the learned counsel
for the parties, carefully examined the pleadings in the suit which has given
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 13 of 53

rise to the present appeal as also the pleadings in the earlier suit instituted by
the appellant/defendant against his mother, the respondent/plaintiff as well
as the orders passed therein including those of the learned Single Judge, the
Division Bench and the Supreme Court.
26.    There is no dispute with the settled principles of civil jurisprudence
that a judgment on admissions is not a matter of right and rather, it is a
matter of discretion of a court, as has been observed in the cases of Raj
Kumar Chawla (supra) and Himani Alloys (supra), relied upon by learned
counsel for the appellant. It is however, considered necessary to highlight
the object of including Rule 6 to the provision of Order XII in the CPC by
way of an amendment. The scope and ambit of Order XII Rule 6 CPC was
discussed by the Supreme Court in the oft quoted case of Uttam Singh
Duggal & Co. Ltd. vs. United Bank of India and Ors. reported as (2000) 7
SCC 120, where it was observed as below:-
       “12. As to the object of the Order XII Rule 6, we need not say
       anything more than what the legislature itself has said when the said
       provision came to be amended. In the objects and reasons set out
       while amending the said rule, it is stated that “where a claim is
       admitted, the court has jurisdiction to enter a judgment for the
       plaintiff and to pass a decree on admitted claim. The object of the
       Rule is to enable the party to obtain a speedy judgment at least to the
       extent of the relief to which according to the admission of the
       defendant, the plaintiff is entitled.” We should not unduly narrow
       down the meaning of this Rule as the object is to enable a party to
       obtain speedy judgment. Where other party has made a plain
       admission entitling the former to succeed, it should apply and also
       wherever there is a clear admission of facts in the face of which, it is
       impossible for the party making such admission to succeed.”
       (emphasis added)
RFA 705/2016                                                          Page 14 of 53

27.   In the case of I.T.D.C. Ltd. vs. Chander Pal Sood & Son reported as
84 (2000) DLT 337 (DB), a Division Bench of this Court had interpreted the
provisions of Order XII Rule 6 CPC as below:-
      "17. .....Order 12 Rule 6 of the Code gives a very wide
      discretion to the Court. Under this rule the Court may at any
      stage of the suit either on the application of any party or of its
      own motion and without determination of any other question
      between the parties can make such order giving such judgment
      as it may think fit on the basis of admission of a fact made in the
      pleadings or otherwise whether orally or in writing..."
28.   Another Division Bench of this Court had the occasion to interpret the
expression „otherwise‟, as used under Order XII Rule 6 CPC in the case of
Rajiv Srivastava vs. Sanjiv Tuli and Anr. reported as AIR 2005 Delhi 319,
wherein the following observations were made:-
      "10. The use of the expression 'otherwise' in the aforesaid
      context came to be interpreted by the Court. Considering the
      expression the Court had interpreted the said word by stating
      that it permits the Court to pass judgment on the basis of the
      statement made by the parties not only on the pleadings but
      also dehors the pleadings i.e. either in any document or even
      in the statement recorded in the Court. If one of the parties'
      statement is recorded under Order 10 Rules 1 & 2 of the Code
      of Civil Procedure, the same is also a statement which
      elucidates matters in controversy. Any admission in such
      statement is relevant not only for the purpose of finding out the
      real dispute between the parties but also to ascertain as to
      whether or not any dispute or controversy exists between the
      parties. Admission if any is made by a party in the statement
      recorded, would be conclusive against him and the Court can
      proceed to pass judgment on the basis of the admission made
      therein.................." (emphasis added)
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 15 of 53

29.    In the case of Nagindas Ramdas vs. Dalpatram Ichharam @ Brijram
and Ors. reported as (1974) 1 SCC 242, the Supreme Court had highlighted
the fact that admissions made in judicial proceedings themselves can form
the basis of granting relief under Order XII Rule 6 CPC for the reason that a
judicial admission is placed on a much higher footing than any evidentiary
admissions. The aforesaid view was expressed by the Supreme Court in the
following words:-
       “27. From a conspectus of the cases cited at the bar, the
       principle that emerges is, that if at the time of the passing of
       the decree, there was some material before the Court, on the
       basis of which, the Court could be prima facie satisfied, about
       the existence of a statutory ground for eviction, it will be
       presumed that the Court was so satisfied and the decree for
       eviction, though apparently passed on the basis of a
       compromise, would be valid. Such material may take the
       shape either of evidence recorded or produced in the case, or,
       it may partly or wholly be in the shape of an express or
       implied admission made in the compromise agreement, itself,
       Admissions, if true and clear, are by far the best proof of the
       facts admitted. Admissions in pleadings or judicial
       admissions, admissible under Section 58 of the Evidence Act,
       made by the parties or their agents at or before the hearing of
       the case, stand on a higher footing than evidentiary
       admissions. The former class of admissions are fully binding on
       the party that makes them and constitute a waiver of proof.
       They by themselves can be made the foundation of the rights of
       the parties. On the other hand evidentiary admissions which are
       receivable at the trial as evidence, are by themselves, not
       conclusive. They can be shown to be wrong.” (emphasis added)
30.    In Shikharchand and Ors. vs. Mst. Bari Bai and Ors. reported as AIR
1974 MP 75, it was held that a judgment under Order XII Rule 6 CPC can
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 16 of 53

be based on a statement made by the parties de hors the pleadings and such
admissions could be either express or constructive. The aforesaid view was
reiterated by a Single Judge of this Court in the case of K.N. Construction
vs. JVG Finance Ltd. reported as 111 (2004) DLT 437. It would also be
beneficial to quote the following observations of the Division Bench of this
Court in the case of Delhi Jal Board vs. Surendra P. Malik reported as 104
(2003) DLT 151:-
       “9. The test, therefore, is (i) whether admission of fact arise in
       the suit, (ii) whether such admissions are plain, unambiguous
       and unequivocal, (iii) whether the defence set up is such that
       it requires evidence for determination of the issues and (iv)
       whether objections raised against rendering the judgment are
       such which go to the root of the matter or whether these are
       inconsequential making it impossible for the party to succeed
       even if entertained. It is immaterial at what stage the judgment
       is sought or whether admissions of fact are found expressly in
       the pleadings or not because such admissions could be gathered
       even constructively for the purpose of rendering a speedy
       judgment.” (emphasis added)
31.    As can be seen from the view taken in the above decisions and a
series of judicial pronouncements on similar lines, the underlying object of
Order XII Rule 6 CPC is to enable the parties to obtain speedy justice. This
Court had observed in the case of Tirath Ram Shah Charitable Trust and
Ors. vs. Sughra Bi @Sughra Begum(Decd.) reported as 225 (2015) DLT
666, that the object of Order XII Rule 6 CPC is that once there are
categorical admissions of facts made by a party, then the litigation should
not be permitted to linger on unnecessarily and in appropriate cases, on an
application filed by a party under Order XII Rule 6 CPC, asking for a decree
on the basis of the said admissions, the court ought to exercise its discretion
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 17 of 53

and bring an end to such litigation by passing appropriate orders. Such
admissions can be express or implied. They can be a part of the pleadings or
judicial admissions. However, the facts of each case have to be examined for
applying the law laid down above.
32.    To test the submissions made by learned counsel for the
appellant/defendant on the anvil of the settled judicial precedents, it is
considered necessary to refer to the relevant pleadings not only in the
present suit instituted by the respondent/plaintiff against her son, but also in
the previous suit for partition instituted by the appellant/defendant against
his mother to examine whether or not there are clear/unambiguous
admissions made by the appellant/defendant for passing a judgment on
admission. The observations made by the Single Judge and the Division
Bench, while dismissing the appellant suit and appeal will also have a
bearing in so far as the appellant‟s conduct is concerned.
33.    The undisputed facts as culled out from the pleadings in the suit for
partition,  declaration    and   permanent    injunction   instituted   by the
appellant/defendant against his mother, siblings and the owners of separate
floors of the suit premises in April 2006, are that Shri Aishi Lal was allotted
the subject plot by the Govt. Shri Aishi Lal expired on 25.06.1989, leaving
behind five legal heirs, namely, his widow (the respondent/plaintiff) and
four children (two brothers and two sisters). The appellant‟s brother, who
was unmarried, expired during the pendency of the partition suit. One of the
sisters, Smt. Promila Kapoor was married to a resident of USA, who expired
and on his demise, she shifted back to India. The third sister, Ms. Pooja
Relan is unmarried and unemployed and living with her mother, the
respondent/plaintiff, who relies on her as a care giver.
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 18 of 53

34.     The documents filed by the appellant/defendant alongwith the
partition suit instituted by him reveal that Smt. Promila Kapoor had
executed a General Power of Attorney dated 27.08.1999 at USA, duly
stamped in India, appointing her sister, Smt. Pooja Relan as her attorney to
execute a relinquishment deed on her behalf, relinquishing all her rights, title
and interest in the suit property in favour of their mother, the
respondent/plaintiff herein. The appellant/defendant had also filed a copy of
the registered Relinquishment Deed dated 18.11.1999, whereby he and his
siblings had relinquished their 1/5th undivided share each in the suit premises
unconditionally     and    absolutely   in  favour    of   their    mother,    the
respondent/plaintiff. All the legal heirs including the appellant/plaintiff had
declared in the said Relinquishment Deed that "the executor(s) wishes/wish
to relinquish his/their share in the plot as mentioned herein above in favour
Smt. Kaushal Kumari Relan the releasee(s) who is/are also the legal heirs of
the allottee." The appellant/defendant and his siblings also made an
unconditional declaration in the Relinquishment Deed that they have “no
claim, right or interest in the property”.
35.     The aforesaid Relinquishment Deed dated 18.11.1999 was followed
by    a   Rectification    Deed    dated   30.03.2000    also    filed  by     the
appellant/defendant in the suit instituted by him, which was executed by him
and his siblings to overcome a mistake in the Relinquishment Deed dated
18.11.1999 that had erroneously recorded that Smt. Promila Kapoor, who
was then residing in USA and was represented by her attorney and sister,
Ms. Pooja Relan, was executing the Deed in person. In the Rectification
Deed, the parties had clarified the position and reiterated the contents of the
RFA 705/2016                                                         Page 19 of 53

Relinquishment Deed in the following terms:-
       “2. That the same is hereby rectified and modified as aforesaid
       in the Relinquishment Deed and the Relinquishment Deed shall
       remain in full force and effect.”
36.    Based on the aforesaid Relinquishment Deed and the Rectification
Deed executed by the appellant/plaintiff and his three siblings, on
16.05.2000, the Land & Building Office, Govt. of India had substituted the
name of the respondent/plaintiff as the sole owner of the suit premises in
their records. This was followed by execution of a Conveyance Deed dated
04.01.2011,      by    the   Competent     Authority    in    favour    of    the
respondent/plaintiff, converting the leasehold rights in the suit premises into
freehold rights and conveying an absolute and exclusive right, title and
interest in the suit premises in her favour. Pertinently, the appellant/plaintiff
was a witness to the said Conveyance Deed.
37.    All the aforesaid facts form a part of the judgment dated 03.08.2015
pronounced by the Division Bench in the intra court appeal preferred by the
appellant against the order dated 28.11.2014, passed by the learned Single
Judge whereby his suit was dismissed [RFA(OS) 162/2014].                 In the
pleadings of the suit instituted by the appellant, he has not denied execution
of the aforesaid documents, namely, the Relinquishment Deed, the
Rectification Deed, mutation of the property by the Land & Building Office
in favour of the respondent/plaintiff and the Conveyance Deed executed in
her favour and duly witnessed by him. In this context, the averments made
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 20 of 53

by the appellant in para 11 of the plaint are relevant and are reproduced
below:-
       “11. That during the family discussion it was decided that in
       order to construct property, which will be in the interest of the
       members of family first the property is to be transferred in the
       name of one member and it will facilitate raising of loan etc.
       However, it was decided that ownership of other members will
       remain intact in spite of the fact that property may be
       transferred in the name of any one member of the family, as the
       purpose of transfer of property was only to raise loan to
       minimize the formality.       Accordingly, property was got
       transferred in the name of Defendant No.1 who was eldest
       member of the family and accordingly all the four persons,
       plaintiff and Defendant No.2 to 4 executed relinquishment
       deeds in favour of Defendant No.1 on 18.11.99. Copy of the
       relinquishment deed is filed herewith. On the basis of the
       relinquishment deed, the property was transferred in the name
       of Defendant No.1 and conveyance deed dated 4th Jan. 2001
       was executed by her.” (emphasis added)
38.    It is apparent from the above that the only plea taken by the appellant
in the earlier suit was that while executing the aforesaid documents, there
was an understanding between the family members that the purpose of
transferring the suit premises in favour of the mother was only to facilitate
raising of a loan. The appellant had however not denied that the built up
structure on the subject premises was brought down and a fresh construction
of five floors including a basement was raised on the premises which was
completed in the year 2000. In para 10 of the plaint, the appellant/defendant
had categorically stated as below:-
       “10. That construction of the property was completed in the
       year 2000. On completion of the property, plaintiff requested
       defendant No.1 to 4 to allow him to take possession of the first
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 21 of 53

       floor of the property. But defendants told him that since the
       property has been constructed by taking loan and same was to
       be repaid and could be repaid only by letting out the first floor
       of the property which will fetch better rent, he should take the
       third floor and as and when loan is repaid he would be shifted
       to the first floor of the property. Believing representation of
       Defendants No.1 to 4 the plaintiff agreed to the request of
       Defendants No.1 to 4 and shifted to the third floor of the house
       and has been living there since 2000.” (emphasis added)
39.    Subsumed in the aforesaid plea of the appellant/defendant is a clear
admission on his part that his occupancy of the third floor of the suit
premises was only with the categorical permission of his mother, the
respondent/plaintiff and not on the basis of adverse possession. It is also
relevant to note that the partition suit was instituted by the appellant in
April, 2006 and till the said date, he did not raise any plea of adverse
possession in respect of the suit premises. Instead, his consistent plea was
that there was a family settlement, whereunder his mother and siblings had
assured him that he would be given the ground floor of the suit premises
after the same was reconstructed. Though the appellant had pleaded in the
suit that the respondent/plaintiff did not abide by the settlement and
proceeded to transfer different portions of the suit premises to third parties,
it is a matter of record that when the respondent/plaintiff executed a Sale
Deed dated 04.03.2002, in respect of the second floor of the suit premises in
favour of one Shri P.N. Mehra, it was the appellant who had accompanied
his mother and appeared before the Sub-Registrar of documents and signed
the Sale Deed as a witness and the said document was executed and
registered in his presence. It is also relevant to note that in the recital of the
RFA 705/2016                                                         Page 22 of 53

captioned Sale Deed, a reference was made to the fact that on 07.11.2000,
the respondent/plaintiff had entered into an Agreement to Sell in respect of
the second floor of the suit premises and the said floor was handed over to
the purchaser in the year 2000 itself. Within a few days of executing the
Agreement to Sell, the respondent/plaintiff had also executed a General
Power of Attorney dated 19.11.2000, appointing the purchaser‟s son to deal
with the second floor portion and once again, it was the appellant/defendant,
who had signed the said Power of Attorney as a witness.
40.     In the teeth of the aforesaid documents, the appellant/defendant issued
a legal notice dated 07.11.2005 to his mother, stating inter alia for the very
first time that the Relinquishment Deed executed in her favour as long back
as in the year 1999, was with the understanding that after the suit premises is
mutated in her favour, it would be handed back to him as one of the legal
heirs of late Shri Aishi Lal. In the said legal notice, it was contended that
the respondent had misled the appellant and broken his trust by selling the
ground, first and second floors of the suit premises and had failed to pay him
his share in the sale proceeds and that she was going to “dispose of the
basement and the third floor to a third party which was contrary to the
promise made to him”. The legal notice had ended with a demand made by
the appellant, calling upon the respondent to “pay the legal share of my
client procured from the sale of the part of the abovementioned property and
not to alienate or create any third party interest in the remaining property
which is in possession of my client and to transfer the same back to my client
along with the share of my client from the sale proceeds, already with you,
within 15 days from the date of receipt of this notice”.
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 23 of 53

41.    In the aforesaid background, the appellant proceeded to file a suit for
partition, declaration and permanent injunction against his mother, siblings
and other owners of different portions of the suit premises. As for the third
floor, which is the subject matter of the eviction suit instituted by the
respondent/plaintiff against the appellant, well aware of his plea that his
mother has permitted him to occupy the said floor for a limited period, he
had prayed for a decree of permanent injunction for restraining the
defendants therein from interfering with his possession. Thus, it can be seen
that there was not a whisper in the pleadings in the earlier suit instituted by
the appellant/defendant to the effect that he was in uninterrupted occupation
of the third floor as an owner by adverse possession and had remained in the
suit premises for a period of over twelve years to the knowledge and
acquiescence of his mother. Instead, the foundational facts of his partition
suit were raised on the edifice of a purported family settlement whereunder
the family members had agreed to hand over the third floor to the appellant.
42.    The aforesaid observations were sought to be dislodged by the learned
counsel for the appellant, who had vehemently urged that no such plea of
adverse possession was required to be taken by the appellant in his suit for
partition, declaration and injunction etc. for the reason that a plea of adverse
possession can only be taken as a defence and the said plea was duly taken
by the appellant in the written statement filed in opposition to the suit for
eviction instituted by his mother against him and that the aforesaid plea
required the parties to lead evidence before any finding could be returned in
that regard.
43.    There is no quarrel with the position of law stated in the case of Gram
Panchayat Village Sirthala (supra), relied upon by the counsel for the
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 24 of 53

appellant, which lays down that if a party is found to be in adverse
possession, he as a plaintiff, cannot seek a declaration to the effect that such
an adverse possession has matured into ownership for the reason that such a
plea of adverse possession is only available to a defendant as a
shield/defence. But unlike the said case, the appellant herein had not sought
any such relief of declaration in the earlier suit instituted by him. Instead, he
had prayed for a decree of partition, to the extent of 1/3 rd undivided share in
the entire property. Furthermore, for the appellant/defendant to plead
adverse possession in the suit for possession instituted against him, he must
not only plead hostile possession, he should also demonstrate that the said
possession has been long and uninterrupted and to the knowledge of
the other co-owners. In the present case, the respondent/plaintiff is on a
much higher footing as she is not a co-owner, but the recorded owner of the
suit premises.
44.    Article 65 of Schedule I of the Limitation Act prescribes the
limitation of twelve years for instituting a suit for possession of an
immovable property reckoned from the date when the possession of the
defendant becomes adverse to the plaintiff and places the burden of proof on
the defendant, who raises a plea of adverse possession. It was observed by
the Supreme Court in the case of Nagabhushanammal(dead) by Legal
Representatives vs. C. Chandikeswaralingam, reported as AIR 2016 SC
1134, that ouster is a strong defence only if the defendant is able to establish
consistent and open assertion of denial of title, long and uninterrupted
possession and exercise of right of exclusive ownership openly and to the
knowledge of the other co-owner. For arriving at the aforesaid conclusion,
the Supreme Court had relied on its earlier decision in the case of Syed Shah
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 25 of 53

Ghulam Ghouse Mohiuddin and Others vs. Syed Shah Ahmed Mohiuddin
Kamisul Quadri and Ors reported as (1971) 1 SCC 597, wherein it was held
that possession of one co-owner is presumed to be on behalf of all the
co-owners, unless it is established that the possession of the co-owner is in
denial of title of co-owners and the possession is in hostility to co-owners by
their exclusion. It was also held that there has to be open denial of title to the
parties who are entitled to it by excluding and ousting them.
45.    On the pre-conditions prescribed for applying the doctrine of ouster,
the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of P. Lakshmi Reddy v.
L. Lakshmi Reddy reported as AIR 1957 SC 314 is a clincher. In the said
case, it was held as below:-
       “4. Now, the ordinary classical requirement of adverse
       possession is that it should be nec vi nec calm nec precario.
       (See Secretary of State for India v. Debendra Lal Khan
       AIR 1934 PC 23). The possession required must be adequate
       in continuity, in publicity and in extent to show that it is
       possession adverse to the competitor. (See Radhamoni Debi v.
       Collector of Khulna [(1900) LR 27 IA 136, 140]). But it is
       well-settled that in order to establish adverse possession of one
       co-heir as against another it is not enough to show that one out
       of them is in sole possession and enjoyment of the profits of the
       properties. Ouster of the non-possessing co-heir by the co-heir
       in possession, who claims his possession to be adverse, should
       be made out. The possession of one co-heir is considered, in
       law, as possession of all the co-heirs. When one co-heir is
       found to be in possession of the properties it is presumed to be
       on the basis of joint title. The co-heir in possession cannot
       render his possession adverse to the other co-heir not in
       possession merely by any secret hostile animus on his own
       part in derogation of the other co-heir's title. (See Corea v.
       Appuhamy [(1912) AC 230)]. It is a settled rule of law that as
       between co-heirs there must be evidence of open assertion of
       hostile title, coupled with exclusive possession and enjoyment
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 26 of 53

       by one of them to the knowledge of the other so as to
       constitute ouster. This does not necessarily mean that there
       must be an express demand by one and denial by the other.”
       (emphasis added)
46.    In Mst. Sultan Jehan Begum and Ors. v. Gul Mohd. and Ors., reported
as AIR 1973 MP 72, the following principles on adverse possession were
laid down:-
        “(1) When a person entitled to possession does not bring a
        suit against the person in adverse possession within the time
        prescribed by law his right to possession is extinguished.
        From this it only follows that if the former brings a suit
        against the latter within the prescribed period of limitation
        his right will not be extinguished.
        (2) If a decree for possession is passed in that suit in his
        favour he will be entitled to possession irrespective of the time
        spent in the suit and the execution and other proceedings.
        (3) The very institution of the suit arrests the period of
        adverse possession of the defendant and when a decree for
        possession is passed against the defendant the plaintiff's
        right to be put in possession relates back to the date of the
        suit.
        (4) Section 28 of the Limitation Act merely declares when the
        right of the person out of possession is extinguished. It is not
        correct to say that that section confers title on the person who
        has been in adverse possession for a certain period. There is
        no law which provides for 'conferral of title' as such on a
        person who has been in adverse possession for whatever
        length of time.
        (5) When it is said that the person in adverse possession 'has
        perfected his title', it only means this. Since the person who
        had the right of possession but allowed his right to be
        extinguished by his inaction, he cannot obtain the possession
        from the person in adverse possession, and, as its necessary
        corollary the person who is in adverse possession will be
        entitled to hold his possession against the other not in
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 27 of 53

        possession, on the well settled rule of law that possession of
        one person cannot be disturbed by any person except one who
        has a better title.” (emphasis added)
47.   The essential ingredients required to be met for establishing the plea
of ouster were also considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Vidya
Devi vs. Prem Prakash & Ors. reported as (1995) 4 SCC 496, wherein it was
held as below:-
      “28. „Ouster‟ does not mean actual driving out of the co-sharer
      from the property. It will, however, not be complete unless it is
      coupled with all other ingredients required to constitute adverse
      possession. Broadly speaking, three elements are necessary for
      establishing the plea of ouster in the case of co-owner. They
      are (i) declaration of hostile animus, (ii) long and
      uninterrupted possession of the person pleading ouster, and
      (iii) exercise of right of exclusive ownership openly and to the
      knowledge of other co-owner. Thus, a co-owner, can under
      law, claim title by adverse possession against another co-owner
      who can, of course, file appropriate suit including suit for joint
      possession within time prescribed by law.” (emphasis added)
48.   In the case of Annasaheb Bapusaheb Patil and Others vs. Balwant
alias Balasaheb Babusaheb Patil (dead) by LRs and heirs etc. reported as
(1995) 2 SCC 543, referring to Article 65 of Schedule I to the Limitation
Act, 1963, the Supreme Court had explained the meaning of `adverse
possession‟ in the following words:-
      “14. Article 65 of the Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963
      prescribes that for possession of immovable property or any
      interest therein based on title, the limitation of 12 years begins
      to run from the date the defendant's interest becomes adverse
      to the plaintiff. Adverse possession means a hostile assertion i.e.
      a possession which is expressly or impliedly in denial of title of
      the true owner. Under Article 65, burden is on the defendants
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 28 of 53

      to prove affirmatively. A person who bases his title on adverse
      possession must show by clear and unequivocal evidence i.e
      possession was hostile to the real owner and amounted to a
      denial of his title to the property claimed. In deciding whether
      the acts, alleged by a person, constitute adverse possession,
      regard must be had to the animus of the person doing those
      acts which must be ascertained from the facts and
      circumstances of each case. The person who bases his title on
      adverse possession, therefore, must show by clear and
      unequivocal evidence i.e. possession was hostile to the real
      owner and amounted to a denial of his title to the property
      claimed.
      15. Where possession can be referred to a lawful title, it will
      not be considered to be adverse. The reason being that a
      person whose possession can be referred to a lawful title will
      not be permitted to show that his possession was hostile to
      another's title. One who holds possession on behalf of
      another, does not by mere denial of that other's title make his
      possession adverse so as to give himself the benefit of the
      statute of limitation. Therefore, a person who enters into
      possession having a lawful title, cannot divest another of that
      title by pretending that he had no title at all.” (emphasis added)
49.   The observations of the Supreme Court in the case of P Periasami vs.
P Periathambi reported as (1995) 6 SCC 523, to the effect that “Whenever
the plea of adverse possession is projected, inherent in the plea is that
someone else was the owner of the property”, also find resonance in the case
of Karnataka Board of Wakf vs. Govt. of India & Ors., reported as (2004)
10 SCC 779.
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 29 of 53

50.   In the case of T. Anjanappa and Ors. vs. Somalingappa and Anr.
reported as (2006) 7 SCC 570, the Supreme Court had elaborated the basic
principle of adverse possession and observed that:-
      “12. The concept of adverse possession contemplates a hostile
      possession i.e. a possession which is expressly or impliedly in
      denial of the title of the true owner. Possession to be adverse
      must be possession by a person who does not acknowledge the
      other's rights but denies them. The principle of law is firmly
      established that a person who bases his title on adverse
      possession must show by clear and unequivocal evidence that
      his possession was hostile to the real owner and amounted to
      denial of his title to the property claimed. For deciding
      whether the alleged acts of a person constituted adverse
      possession, the animus of the person doing those acts is the
      most crucial factor. Adverse possession is commenced in wrong
      and is aimed against right. A person is said to hold the property
      adversely to the real owner when that person in denial of the
      owner's right excluded him from the enjoyment of his property.
      13. Possession to be adverse must be possession by a person
      who does not acknowledge the other's rights but denies them:-
             “24.It is a matter of fundamental principle of law
             that where possession can be referred to a lawful
             title, it will not be considered to be adverse. It is on
             the basis of this principle that it has been laid down
             that since the possession of one co- owner can be
             referred to his status as co-owner, it cannot be
             considered adverse to other co-owner. (See Vidya
             Devi v. Prem Prakash and Ors. (1995) 4 SCC 496)”
      14. Adverse possession is that form of possession or
      occupancy of land which is inconsistent with the title of the
      rightful owner and tends to extinguish that person's title.
      Possession is not held to be adverse if it can be referred to a
      lawful title. The person setting up adverse possession may have
      been holding under the rightful Owner's title e.g. trustees,
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 30 of 53

     guardians, bailiffs or agents. Such persons cannot set up
     adverse possession.
         "14. ……..Adverse possession means a [hostile
         possession] which is expressly or impliedly in denial
         of title of the true owner. Under Article 65 [of
         the Limitation Act,] burden is on the defendants to
         prove affirmatively. A person who bases his title on
         adverse possession must show by clear and
         unequivocal evidence i.e. possession was hostile to the
         real owner and amounted to a denial of his title to the
         property claimed. In deciding whether the acts, alleged
         by a person, constitute adverse possession, regard
         must be had to the animus of the person doing those
         acts which must be ascertained from the facts and
         circumstances of each case. The person who bases his
         title on adverse possession, therefore, must show by
         clear and unequivocal evidence i.e. possession was
         hostile to the real owner and amounted to a denial of
         his title to the property claimed…..” (See Annasaheb v.
         B.B. Patil; (1995) 2 SCC 543).
     15. An occupation of reality is inconsistent with the right of the
     true owner. Where a person possesses property in a manner in
     which he is not entitled to possess it, and without anything to
     show that he possesses it otherwise than an owner (that is, with
     the intention of excluding all persons from it, including the
     rightful owner), he is in adverse possession of it. Thus, if A is in
     possession of a field of B's, he is in adverse possession of it
     unless there is something to show that his possession is
     consistent       with     a     recognition    of     B's      title.
     (See Ward v. Carttar [(1865) LR 1 Eq 29 : 35 Beav 171 : 55 ER
     860] .) Adverse possession is of two kinds, according as it was
     adverse from the beginning, or has become so subsequently.
     Thus, if a mere trespasser takes possession of A's property,
     and retains it against him, his possession is adverse ab initio.
     But if A grants a lease of land to B, or B obtains possession of
     the land as A's bailiff, or guardian, or trustee, his possession
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 31 of 53

     can only become adverse by some change in his position.......
     16. Adverse possession is that form of possession or occupancy
     of land which is inconsistent with the title of any person to
     whom the land rightfully belongs and tends to extinguish that
     person's title, which provides that no person shall make an
     entry or distress, or bring an action to recover any land or rent,
     but within twelve years next after the time when the right first
     accrued, and does away with the doctrine of adverse
     possession, except in the cases provided for by Section 15.
     Possession is not held to be adverse if it can be referred to a
     lawful title.
     17.     xxx           xxx         xxx
     18. It is the basic principle of law of adverse possession that
     (a) it is the temporary and abnormal separation of the
     property from the title of it when a man holds property
     innocently against all the world but wrongfully against the
     true owner; (b) it is possession inconsistent with the title of the
     true owner.” (emphasis added)
51.  In Tribhuvanshankar vs Amrutlal, reported as 2014 (2) SCC 788, the
Supreme Court had discussed the concept of adverse possession as follows:-
       "34. The conception of adverse possession fundamentally
       contemplates a hostile possession by which there is a denial of
       title of the true owner. By virtue of remaining in possession
       the possessor takes an adverse stance to the title of the true
       owner. In fact, he disputes the same. A mere possession or
       user or permissive possession does not remotely come near the
       spectrum of adverse possession. Possession to be adverse has
       to be actual, open, notorious, exclusive and continuous for the
       requisite frame of time as provided in law so that the possessor
       perfects his title by adverse possession. It has been held in Secy.
       Of State for India In Council v. Debendra Lal Khan AIR 1934
       PC 23 that the ordinary classical requirement of adverse
       possession is that it should be nec vi, nec clam, nec precario.
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 32 of 53

         35. In S.M. Karim v. Bibi Sakina AIR 1964 SC 1254, it has been
         ruled that:
              “5. ....Adverse possession must be adequate in
              continuity, in publicity and extent and a plea is
              required at the least to show when possession becomes
              adverse so that the starting point of limitation against
              the party affected can be found.”
         36.           xxx         xxx         xxx
         37. It is to be borne in mind that adverse possession, as a right,
         does not come in aid solely on the base that the owner loses his
         right to reclaim the property because of his wilful neglect but
         also on account of the possessor’s constant positive intent to
         remain in possession. It has been held in P.T. Munichikkanna
         Reddy and Others v. Revamma and Others. (2007) 6 SCC 59”
         (emphasis added)
52.     It would also be very useful to refer to the observations made by the
Supreme Court in a recent case of Maria Margarida (supra), where the
respondent/plaintiff therein had urged that he was in possession of the suit
premises for over 28 years and had been forcibly dispossessed by his own
sister, the appellant/defendant therein and that he had never conceded that
the title of the suit property was with her. In the said case, the Supreme
Court has clarified in so many words that a possessory suit was good against
the whole world except the rightful owner and that it is not maintainable
against the true owner. It was observed that “there is a presumption that
possession of a person, other than the owner, if at all it is to be called
possession, is permissive on behalf of the title-holder; that in an action for
recovery of possession of an immovable property, upon legal title to the
property being established, the possession or occupation of the said
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 33 of 53

property by a person other than the holder of the legal title, will be
presumed to have been under and in subordination to the legal title and it
will be for the person resisting a claim for recovery of possession or
claiming a right to continue in possession, to establish that he has such a
right”.
53.    In the captioned case, the Supreme Court had opined that only if the
pleadings are found to be sufficient, would an issue be struck and matter be
sent to trial in which case, the onus will be on the party resisting the title
holder‟s claim to possession to prove his entitlement to remain in
possession. Such a person averring a right to continue in possession is
expected to give a “detailed particularised specific pleading alongwith
documents to support his claim and details of the subsequent conduct
which establish his possession”. The said details required to be given, have
been enumerated as follows:-
       “70. It would be imperative that one who claims possession
       must give all such details as enumerated hereunder. They are
       only illustrative and not exhaustive:
              (a) who is or are the owner or owners of the
                  property;
              (b) title of the property;
              (c) who is in possession of the title documents;
              (d) identity of the claimant or claimants to
                  possession;
              (e) the date of entry into possession;
              (f) how he came into possession - whether he
                  purchased the property or inherited or got the same in
                  gift or by any other method;
              (g) in case he purchased the property, what is the
                  consideration; if he has taken it on rent, how much is
                  the rent, license fee or lease amount;
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 34 of 53

            (h) If taken on rent, license fee or lease - then insist on
                rent deed, license deed or lease deed;
            (i) who are the persons in possession/occupation or
                otherwise living with him, in what capacity; as family
                members, friends or servants etc.;
            (j) subsequent conduct, i.e., any event which might have
                extinguished his entitlement to possession or caused
                shift therein; and
            (k) basis of his claim that not to deliver possession but
                continue in possession.
     71. Apart from these pleadings, the Court must insist on
     documentary proof in support of the pleadings. All those
     documents would be relevant which come into existence after
     the transfer of title or possession or the encumbrance as is
     claimed. While dealing with the civil suits, at the threshold,
     the court must carefully and critically examine pleadings and
     documents.
     72. The court will examine the pleadings for specificity as also
     the supporting material for sufficiency and then pass
     appropriate orders.
     73. Discovery and production of documents and answers to
     interrogatories, together with an approach of considering what
     in ordinary course of human affairs is more likely to have been
     the probability, will prevent many a false claims or defences
     from sailing beyond the stage for issues.
     74. If the pleadings do not give sufficient details, they will not
     raise an issue, and the Court can reject the claim or pass a
     decree on admission. On vague pleadings, no issue arises.
     Only when he so establishes, does the question of framing an
     issue arise. Framing of issues is an extremely important stage
     in a civil trial. Judges are expected to carefully examine the
     pleadings and documents before framing of issues in a given
     case.” (emphasis added)
RFA 705/2016                                                     Page 35 of 53

54.     On a conspectus of the case law cited above, an adverse possession
contemplates a hostile possession, where there is a clear assertion of hostile
title in denial of the title of the true owner. Further, a party claiming adverse
possession must prove that his possession is “nec vi, nec clam, nec
precario”, that is, peaceful, open and continuous and over the statutory
period. Another vital requirement of acquisition of title by adverse
possession is that the said possession should be in denial of the true owner‟s
title and must be peaceful, open, continuous and hostile enough to be known
the parties interested in the property. For coming to a conclusion as to
whether the alleged acts of a person constituted adverse possession, the
critical factor is the animus of the said person. Therefore, mere possession or
user or permissive possession does not fall within the spectrum of adverse
possession, nor does a person pleading adverse possession has any equity in
his favour as he is trying to dislodge and defeat the right of a true owner.
55.     To test as to whether the appellant herein is entitled to take the plea of
adverse possession, it is relevant to examine the half baked and tenuous
pleadings in his written statement on the said aspect, which are as follows:-
        “PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS:
        1. That the present suit is barred under provision of Adverse
        Possession as the defendant has been in open and hostile
        possession of the property since the year 2000 as the plaintiff
        had left the property unattended and uncared for. It is the
        defendant who has been in the property for a period of more
        than 14 years, has cared for the same, looked after the same
        and has enjoyed the same without any interference of the
        plaintiff, therefore, has now become owner in possession of the
        premises in question as possession has not been challenged for
        a period of more than 14 years.”
RFA 705/2016                                                          Page 36 of 53

56.    In complete variance to the preliminary objection of adverse
possession taken by the appellant/defedant above, in para 6 on merits of his
written statement, he claims to be in possession on the basis of a family
settlement and has stated his position as below:-
       “6. That the defendant is owner in possession on account of
       oral family agreement reached between the parties, wherein the
       defendant had executed certain documents in favour of the
       plaintiff, i.e. Relinquishment Deed, Ratification Deed etc. in
       favour of the plaintiff on the promise of the plaintiff who is his
       mother and had trusted her to be just fair and honest but now it
       seems that the plaintiff had turned dishonest as one of her
       daughter who is widow and other who is unmarried have no
       means to survive but want to sell the remaining portion of the
       property which is occupation and ownership of the defendant by
       throwing him out by hook or crook which itself is a pre-mature
       action since the appeal is pending. The suit is liable to be
       dismissed on this scope alone.”
57.    In the above context, it is also considered necessary to refer to para 16
of the plaint, where the respondent/plaintiff has stated as below:-
       “16. That in January, 2001, defendant requested the plaintiff
       that he wants to reside on the third floor of the property for 4 to
       6 months as his landlord is forcing him to vacate the property,
       further he is having his daughter‟s examination and he is
       unable to locate a suitable property for his family. It is
       submitted that the defendant promised to vacate the third floor
       property as soon as he finds a premises on rent for himself
       within 4 to 6 months.”
       In   the    corresponding    para   of   his   written   statement,    the
appellant/plaintiff has only issued a bald denial in the following words:-
       “16. That para No.16 as stated is wrong and hence denied. The
       plaintiff be called upon to provide proof of the same. The
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 37 of 53

       defendant had shifted in the premises in the year 2000 and not
       in 2001.”
58.    From the averments made in the written statement, it is crystal clear
that even if it is assumed for a moment in his favour that the
appellant/defendant had shifted to the third floor of the suit premises in the
year 2000, for claiming ownership by adverse possession, it was incumbent
for him to have shown that his possession was all along hostile to the
respondent/plaintiff and she had acquiesced to the same and allowed him to
remain in possession thereof for over twelve years, which he has miserably
failed to demonstrate. Rather, he has himself stated in para 6 of the written
statement that his possession is on account of an oral family arrangement
between family members.
59.    Quite evidently, the appellant/defendant does not fulfil any of the tests
laid down in the judicial pronouncements cited above for claiming adverse
possession as he has nowhere stated in the written statement as to the date
on which he came into possession, what was the nature of his possession,
whether the factum of possession was known to the respondent/plaintiff who
is the recorded owner, for how long did his possession continue and whether
his possession was open and undisturbed. In other words, to affirmatively
assert adverse possession, the appellant/defendant should have atleast
pleaded in his written statement that after the title of the suit premises had
been mutated in the government records in favour of his mother, he had
asserted his own exclusive right, title and interest in the suit premises to her
knowledge and that the respondent/plaintiff had acquiesced to such a hostile
exercise of right and had allowed him to remain in continuous possession
and enjoyment of the suit premises in an assertion of the said hostile title,
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 38 of 53

during the entire statutory period of twelve years, as has been contemplated
under Article 65 of the Limitation Act, without any let or hindrance.
60.     None of the aforesaid ingredients have been satisfied by the appellant
in the instant case. In the absence of affirmative, detailed and clear pleadings
on the above material aspects in the written statement, a hollow defence
shorn of any material particulars raised by the appellant/plaintiff to claim
that he was in adverse possession, is found to be devoid of merits and is
rejected. The entire plea of adverse possession taken by him now flies in the
face of the appellant/defendant‟s own case set up in the partition suit
instituted by him where he had stated that his mother had permitted him to
initially occupy the first floor of the suit premises and later on, he had been
permitted to shift to the third floor.       This Court finds no force in the
submission of the counsel for the appellant that the suit ought to have been
taken to trial and evidence permitted to be lead on the above aspect. In the
instant case, the trial court has carefully looked into the pleadings and the
documents before concluding that the respondent/plaintiff is entitled to a
judgment on admission and held that merely because the appellant/defendant
was allowed by her to live in the suit premises for some time, could not be
treated as a case of adverse possession. This Court concurs with the
aforesaid findings returned in the impugned judgment. In the absence of the
foundational facts and supporting material in the pleadings, the learned trial
court was under no obligation to afford any such opportunity to the
appellant/defendant of framing an issue and asking the parties to lead
evidence.
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 39 of 53

61.    Apart from the above reasoning, it is settled law that the pleas on title
and adverse possession are mutually inconsistent and self-destructive and
the latter does not begin to operate until the former is renounced. In the case
of Mohan Lal (Deceased) through his LRs Kachru & Ors. vs. Mirza Abdul
Gaffar & Anr. reported as (1996) 1 SCC 639, while considering a case
where the defendant therein had raised a plea of permissive possession and
averse possession, the Supreme Court had made the following observations:
       “4. As regards the first plea, it is inconsistent with the second
       plea. Having come into possession under the agreement, he
       must disclaim his right thereunder and plead and prove
       assertion of his independent hostile adverse possession to the
       knowledge of the transferor or his successor in title or interest
       and that the latter had acquiesced to his illegal possession
       during the entire period of 12 years, i.e., up to completing the
       period his title by prescription nec vi, nec clam, nec precario.
       Since the appellant's claim is founded on section 53-A, it goes
       without saying that he admits by implication that he came into
       possession of land lawfully under the agreement and continued
       to remain in possession till date of the suit. Thereby the plea of
       adverse possession is not available to the appellant.”
62.     The aforesaid aspect of mutually inconsistent pleas of permissive
possession and possession without animus possidendi also came up for
consideration in the case of L.N. Aswathama and Anr. vs. P. Prakash
reported as (2009) 13 SCC 229 and the position of law was stated as below:-
       “17. The legal position is no doubt well settled. To establish a
       claim of title by prescription, that is adverse possession for 12
       years or more, the possession of the claimant must be
       physical/actual, exclusive, open, uninterrupted, notorious and
       hostile to the true owner for a period exceeding twelve years. It
       is also well settled that long and continuous possession by itself
       would not constitute adverse possession if it was either
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 40 of 53

       permissive possession or possession without animus possidendi.
       The pleas based on title and adverse possession are mutually
       inconsistent and the latter does not begin to operate until the
       former is renounced. Unless the person possessing the
       property has the requisite animus to possess the property
       hostile to the title of the true owner, the period for
       prescription will not commence. (Vide Periasami vs. P.
       Periathambi – (1995) 6 SCC 523, Md. Mohammad Ali vs.
       Jagdish Kalita – (2004) 1 SCC 271 and P.T. Munichikkanna
       Reddy vs. Revamma – (2007) 6 SCC 59)” (emphasis added)
63.    When the appellant/defendant herein had filed the previous suit for
partition, claiming a share in the suit premises, his singular plea was about
his entitlement to 1/5th undivided share in the suit premises, as one of the
five legal heirs of his deceased father, while simultaneously admitting to the
fact that he alongwith his siblings had of their own free will and volition
given up their respective shares in the suit premises, in favour of their
mother, the respondent/plaintiff herein, by executing a Relinquishment Deed
and a Rectification Deed as long back as in the year 1999 and 2000 and
based on the said documents, a Conveyance Deed had been executed in her
favour on 07.2.2001. Having failed to succeed in the said suit right upto the
Supreme Court, when the respondent/plaintiff had to institute the present
suit, the appellant raised the untenable plea of adverse possession only to
prolong the suit by hook or crook and continue occupying the suit premises
in that duration.
64.    The mere fact that the appellant/defendant, being a family member,
was permitted to occupy the third floor of the suit premises, cannot be
treated as adverse to his mother, who is the recorded owner, because at no
stage, right from the date when he was granted such a permission in the year
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 41 of 53

2000, to the year 2006, when he had instituted a partition suit, did he assert
his exclusive title therein or claim that the respondent/plaintiff was
completely excluded from enjoying the suit premises or that such an adverse
possession had continued during the statutory period. Rather, the appellant
had admitted to the fact that his occupation of the third floor was on the
basis of permissive user granted by his mother and he had sought to invoke
an oral family settlement to claim 1/5th undivided share in the entire
property.
65.    In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, there is considerable force in
the submission of the learned counsel for the respondent/plaintiff that the
appellant cannot be permitted to blow hot and cold in the same breath. On
the one hand, in April, 2006, he had pleaded in his partition suit that on the
demise of his father, he had inherited 1/5th undivided share in the suit
premises alongwith his mother, the respondent herein and his other siblings
and on the other hand, after the said claim was tested and turned down by
successive courts, starting from the judgment of the learned Single Judge
dated 28.11.2014, that was sustained by the Division Bench and the
Supreme Court in the appeals preferred by him, he has now sought to raise a
bogus defence in the written statement that he is in open and undisturbed
adverse possession of the third floor, hostile to the respondent/plaintiff, to
her knowledge. Having shifted to the third floor of the suit premises on the
permission of the respondent/plaintiff, the appellant is prohibited in law
from divesting her of the title, by pretending that she had no title at all. It is
not out of place to mention here that in the penultimate para of the judgment
dated 28.11.2014 in CS(OS) 724/2006, while dismissing the appellant‟s
partition suit, the respondent/plaintiff was declared to be the lawful owner of
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 42 of 53

the suit premises.
66.    As for the plea taken by learned counsel for the appellant that the suit
instituted by the respondent/plaintiff is barred by limitation, the records
reveal that the appellant had instituted the partition suit against his mother in
April 2006, which was successfully resisted by her and ultimately rejected
vide judgment dated 28.11.2014. Within a few months therefrom, she had
instituted the present suit against the appellant. Even if it is assumed for a
moment that the appellant/defendant is entitled to take the plea of adverse
possession, the period of twelve years prescribed in Article 65 of Schedule I
of the Limitation Act, 1963, if reckoned from April, 2006, would have
expired    by   the   end    of   March,    2018,    whereas    admittedly,    the
respondent/plaintiff had instituted the present suit for eviction and
possession against the appellant/defendant in February, 2015, which was
much before the expiry of twelve years. Thus, by no stretch of imagination
can the appellant be heard to state that his possession in the suit premises
stands converted into that of an owner and thus deprive his mother, who is
the recorded lawful owner thereof, of her right of action to recover the same,
as per law. There is not a shadow of doubt that the right and title of the
respondent/plaintiff in the suit premises had never been extinguished for the
appellant to raise the plea of adverse possession.
67.    This Court is equally unimpressed with the argument advanced by
learned counsel for the appellant that the parties ought to have been
permitted to lead evidence before a judgment was pronounced. Sub-rule (1)
of Order XII Rule 6 CPC empowers the Court to pronounce a judgment on
admissions if it is satisfied that there are admissions of facts in the pleading
or otherwise, whether orally or in writing and for doing so, it does not even
RFA 705/2016                                                         Page 43 of 53

need to await an application of any party as it is empowered to do so of its
own motion. Further, Order VIII Rule 5 CPC that deals with specific denial,
contemplates that every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied
specifically or by necessary implication, or stated to be not admitted in the
pleading of the defendant, shall be taken to be admitted except as against a
person under a disability. Appended to the said prescription, is a proviso to
the effect that the court “may in its discretion” require any fact so admitted
to be proved otherwise than by such admission. It is manifest from the above
provision that the legislature had deemed it fit to leave it to the discretion of
the court as to whether in the facts of a given case, there is a requirement of
proving the same, otherwise than by admission. In other words, the
prescription of Order VIII Rule 5 CPC is that every allegation of fact in the
plaint, if not denied specifically or by necessary implication or stated to be
not admitted in the written statement, shall be taken to be admitted. The
aforesaid proviso to the Rule is quite clearly, an exception to the general rule
of evidence that a fact which is admitted, need not be proved. [Refer: Balraj
Taneja & Anr. vs. Sunil Madan & Anr. (1999) 8 SCC 396] There is no merit
in the submission of the counsel for the appellant that the trial court ought to
have framed issues in the suit and asked the parties to lead evidence. There
was no reason to frame issues in the facts of the present case and the trial
court had rightly exercised its discretion in favour of the respondent/plaintiff
by invoking Order XII Rule 6 CPC.
68.    In the instant case, there are sufficient admissions on record, express
and implied for the learned trial court to have passed a judgment on
admissions. The ownership of the respondent/plaintiff in the suit premises
stands established by the Relinquishment Deed dated 18.11.1999, executed
RFA 705/2016                                                        Page 44 of 53

by the appellant and his siblings in her favour, followed by the Conveyance
Deed dated 4.1.2011, executed by the Competent Authority in her favour.
Both the said documents were filed by the appellant in the suit for partition
instituted by him. In para 10 of the plaint in his partition suit, the appellant
had admitted that his mother had permitted him to occupy the third floor. In
an effort to overcome the said admission, in para 16 of the written statement
in the present suit, the appellant has baldly denied the plea of the
respondent/plaintiff in the corresponding para of the plaint that he had
approached her with a request to shift to the third floor of the subject
premises for a period of 4-6 months and that he had assured her that he
would shift as soon as he finds an alternate premises on rent. In the absence
of any clear and specific pleadings in the light of the categorical assertions
of title made by the respondent/plaintiff backed with relevant documents of
title, the inevitable inference is that the appellant/defendant had no leg to
stand on and the pleas taken by him were in fact implied admissions and the
defence raised, was completely hollow and bereft of material facts.
69.     It is also a settled position in law that clever drafting cannot provide a
camouflage to create an illusion of a cause of action and such cases ought to
be snipped out and nipped in the bud at the first hearing itself [Refer: (1977)
4 SCC 467; T. Arivandandam vs. T.V. Satyapal, 1999 (48) DRJ 292; Ajay
Goel vs. K.K. Bhandari; Church of Christ Charitable Trust vs. Ponniamman
Education Trust; (2012) 8 SCC 706 and Maria Margarida (supra)]. In the
present case, invoking its inherent powers under Order XII Rule 6 CPC, the
trial court has proceeded to pass a judgment on admissions by successfully
sifting the chaff from the grain and piercing the smoke screen of adverse
possession sought to be created by the appellant/defendant, with the
RFA 705/2016                                                          Page 45 of 53

malafide intention of willy-nilly hanging onto the suit premises.
70.     This Court thus concludes that the present appeal preferred by the
appellant/defendant is completely misconceived and the defences taken by
him to contest the suit instituted by the respondent/plaintiff were
misconceived, malafide and mischievous and only a ploy to buy more time.
Resultantly, the appeal is dismissed as being devoid of merits. However, the
matter does not rest here.
71.     The appellant and several other litigants like him seem to be
harbouring an impression that by engaging in prolonged litigation, they
would not only manage to deprive the lawful owner of the right to enjoy her
premises, the said litigation will also give them a handle to occupy the same
for a song. It is high time that such devious attempts are curbed and clipped.
The appellant appears to have factored in the fact that once he files an
appeal, the dockets of the courts exploding with litigations, the said appeal
may not ripe for final hearing for long long time and in this duration, he
would reap the benefits of remaining in occupation of the suit premises. He
has already tried his luck in the previous rounds of litigation that was
initiated by him in the year 2006, where initially, an ad interim injunction
was granted in his favour, which had continued till the said suit was
dismissed vide judgment dated 28.11.2014. Over the next two years
thereafter, the appellant kept the respondent/plaintiff embroiled in the
appellate courts, first before the Division Bench and then before the
Supreme Court. Having now lost before the trial court in the suit for
possession instituted against him by the respondent/plaintiff, the appellant
has filed the present appeal in the fond hope and expectation that if he is
able to drag this litigation, it will outlive his 94 year old mother who will
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 46 of 53

remain out in the cold. Even if the appeal is ultimately dismissed, the
appellant would have achieved indirectly, that which he could not have
achieved directly.
72.    The Court must dispel this impression with all the authority at its
command.      Justice is not blind and nor do the       courts wear blinkers.
Swayed by the classic personification of the statute of Goddess of Justice,
described as Lady Justice in Roman mythology and Goddess Themis in
Greek mythology, as reflected in literary works, illustrations and in several
films and teleserials that depicts her modern iconography, frequently
adorning the courts and court rooms, where she is shown as blindfold,
holding a set of scales typically suspended from her left hand and a double
edged sword in the right hand, facing downward, some litigants remain
under a misconception that the justice system turns a blind eye to false,
vexatious and frivolous claims and defences.
73.    It must be clarified that „blindfold‟ personifies impartiality and
objectivity and it signifies that justice should be meted out without fear or
favour, regardless of money, wealth, fame, power or identity. Similarly, the
set of scales are symbolic of measuring the strength of a case‟s support and
the double edged sword is an embodiment of the power of reason and justice
that must be wielded either for or against any party. To this date, the
bulwark of the modern justice delivery systems work on the allegorical
personification of the aforesaid abstract concepts that are endorsed by their
sheer moral force. Courts are not influenced by the background,
connections, status, power or authority of a claimant or a defendant. In
exercise of the powers of reason and logic and while measuring the relative
strength of the pleas taken by both sides, courts are constantly engaged with
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 47 of 53

the effort of sifting the truth and cutting fact from fiction for arriving at a
fair, just and equitous decision, unsullied by discrimination, partisanship and
prejudice. When wielding the sword of justice, in deserving cases, courts
are known to act with due compassion and compunction for the
disadvantaged, underprivileged, deprived and the destitute.
74.     Coming to the instant case, one would have thought that once the
appellant had failed to secure a favourable verdict in the suit for partition
instituted by him against his mother, the respondent/plaintiff herein, his
siblings and other co-owners of the entire premises before several tiers of
the judicial mechanism, including the remedy of review exhausted by him
before the Supreme Court, on moral ground alone, he would have vacated
the suit premises on his own and handed it back to his mother. But that was
not to be. The respondent/plaintiff was compelled to knock at the doors of
the court and institute a suit for eviction against the appellant/defendant,
which also he has contested to the hilt by raising specious pleas. In these
circumstances and having regard to the conduct of the appellant/defendant
as highlighted above, this court would be failing in discharging its duty if it
did not impose reasonable and realistic costs on him in exercise of its
appellate jurisdiction. This is considered necessary so as to fully restitute
the respondent/plaintiff.    It has been repeatedly emphasized in several
judicial precedents that awarding realistic costs is to fully restitute the party
that has been put to disadvantage on account of the litigation and to ensure
that such costs act as a deterrent for unscrupulous litigants who cause
prejudice, harassment and deprivation of the hapless opponents [Refer:
Salem Bar Association, T.N. vs. Union of India; 2005 (6) SCC 344,
Padmawati v. Harijan Sewak Sangh & Ors.; (2008) 154 DLT 411, Ashok
RFA 705/2016                                                         Page 48 of 53

Kumar Mittal v. Ram Kumar Gupta; (2009) 2 SCC 656, Maria Margarida
(supra), Vinod Seth v. Devinder Bajaj & Anr.; (2010) 8 SCC 1,
Ramrameshwari Devi and Ors. vs. Nirmala Devi and Ors.; (2011) 8 SCC
249 and Sanjeev Kumar Jain v. Raghubir Saran Charitable Trust; (2012) 1
SCC 455]
75.    In the aforesaid judicial pronouncements, the courts have held time
and again that costs have to be actual and reasonable including costs of the
time spent by a successful party, their transportation and lodging, if any, or
any other incidental costs, besides payment of lawyers‟ fee, court fee and
miscellaneous expenses pertaining to the litigation. The said costs should
also include the real time costs that the aggrieved party had to bear on
account of the deprivation suffered by her.
76.    One of the causes of the docket explosion that the courts are facing
now-a-days, is on account of vexatious, frivolous and mischievous litigation
being brought in by litigants, who for their vested interest, make every
effort to perpetuate the lis at the costs of the opposite side. The
appellant/defendant before this Court is a litigant of such an ilk. As noted
above, the suit premises is located in Jungpura, a posh colony in South
Delhi. In the year 2000, the respondent/plaintiff had allowed the
appellant/defendant and his family to occupy the third floor of the suit
premises for a few months, but he has perpetrated his possession for the past
sixteen years, without paying even a penny to his mother.
77.    In the year 2006, the appellant proceeded to institute a partition suit
against the respondent/plaintiff, his other siblings and the owners of
different portions of the suit premises. The said suit was dismissed by the
learned Single Judge vide judgment dated 28.11.2014. Aggrieved by the said
RFA 705/2016                                                     Page 49 of 53

decision, the appellant had preferred an appeal; vide judgment dated
03.08.2015, the Division Bench sustained the order of the Single Judge. The
said judgment was challenged by the appellant before the Supreme Court
and vide order dated 08.01.2016, his SLP was dismissed. This did not deter
the appellant, who elected to file a review application, which was also
dismissed by the Supreme Court vide order dated 27.04.2016. The
occupation of the suit premises by the appellant and his family members in
all this duration has been without compensating her in any manner.
78.     By now, the respondent/plaintiff, who is a widow, has reached the
ripe old age of 94 years and is completely bed ridden, feeble in body, broken
in spirit and financially stressed. She alongwith her unmarried and
unemployed daughter is having to reside in a rented accommodation in the
adjoining locality for the past sixteen years. With the meagre resources at
her command, the respondent/plaintiff had to invoke the Protection and
Maintenance of Senior Citizen Act against the appellant for an order of
residence and maintenance. On enquiring, counsel for the parties had stated
that the Tribunal constituted under the above enactment had permitted the
respondent/plaintiff to live in the suit premises and directed the
appellant/defendant to pay her a sum of Rs.10,000/- per month towards
maintenance. The said order was however challenged by the appellant in
WP(C) No.400/2012. The said petition was disposed of by a consent order
dated 10.9.2013 whereunder, the appellant had agreed to pay his mother a
sum of Rs.10,000/- per month towards maintenance, which he has been
doing. But that would not suffice for the reason that the rent being paid by
the respondent/plaintiff in respect of the tenanted premises occupied by her
and her unmarried daughter, is much more.
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 50 of 53

79.    It is not out of place to mention here that while rejecting the appeal
filed by the appellant/defendant against the judgment dated 28.11.2014,
having regard to his deplorable conduct, the Division Bench had imposed
costs on him but at that time, they had refrained from imposing costs on the
appellant to compensate the respondent/plaintiff for the deprivation suffered
by her at his hands in respect of the suit premises, on the assumption that the
same would be awarded in the suit for eviction that by then, she had filed
against the appellant/defendant. But the respondent/plaintiff, being a
generous mother, did not seek any such relief and only instituted a suit for
possession. Having suffered a decree in the said suit, the appellant ought to
have done the decent thing by vacating the suit premises. Instead, he has
unabashedly hung on to the premises and filed the present misconceived
appeal. At the stage of admission itself, on 22.09.2016, this Court had made
it clear that pendency of the present appeal will not be ground for the
executing court to stay its hands in respect of the execution petition filed by
the respondent/plaintiff. However, counsel for the respondent/plaintiff had
stated that he would not precipitate matters as the appeal was being finally
argued.
80.    In the aforesaid background, while imposing costs on the
appellant/defendant, the aspect of compensating the respondent/plaintiff for
the deprivation caused to her by the appellant‟s continuous occupation of the
suit premises must be examined by the Court. The appellant/defendant is a
Bank officer, who has retired in May, 2013. His family comprises of a wife
who is employed with the Delhi Transport Corporation and a daughter. As
per the documents furnished by the counsel for the respondent, the
RFA 705/2016                                                       Page 51 of 53

combined salary and emoluments of the appellant and his wife would easily
exceed a lac of rupees per month. The appellant/defendant and his family
members have been enjoying the third floor of the suit premises built up on
a plot of land measuring 200 sq. yards in a prime locality of south Delhi,
since the year 2000. The said flat comprises of three bedrooms, a drawing-
cum-dining room, two toilets and a kitchen. On the other hand, the
respondent/plaintiff has a meagre source of income. Apart from Rs.10,000/-
per month that the appellant/defendant pays her, she receives a paltry
amount as pension. Her unmarried daughter is not employed and is her full
time care giver. In February 2005, the respondent/plaintiff, along with her
daughter had first shifted from the ground floor of the subject premises to a
smaller tenanted premises in the adjoining vicinity at a monthly rent of
Rs.18,000/-. In September, 2010, she had to shift to another tenanted
premises in the same area, at a monthly rent of Rs.16,000/-.
81.    Taking judicial notice of the location and size of the suit premises
under the occupation of the appellant/defendant, where he has been residing
alongwith his family members, for the past 16 years, to the exclusion of the
respondent/plaintiff, who is the lawful owner, he ought to be called upon to
compensate her for the said user for all these years. However, keeping in
mind the fact that the respondent/plaintiff had instituted the present suit in
February, 2015 and has succeeded vide judgment dated 14.05.2016,
whereafter no interim orders have been operating in his favour, this Court is
of the opinion that ends of justice would be met if the appellant/defendant is
called upon to compensate the respondent/plaintiff for the deprivation
caused to her by calling upon him to pay her a sum of Rs.20,000/- per month
towards use and occupation, which is considered to be a very conservative
RFA 705/2016                                                      Page 52 of 53

figure having regard to the going rent in the area. The said amount shall be
paid by the appellant with effect from February 2015. As a result, the
appellant is held liable to pay costs            of Rs.4,80,000/-   to    the
respondent/plaintiff, apart from the litigation expenses and counsel‟s fee,
which is capped at Rs.50,000/-. The said amount shall be paid within four
weeks. The appeal is hereby dismissed with costs of Rs.5,30,000/- granted in
favour of the respondent/plaintiff.
                                                          HIMA KOHLI, J
JANUARY 19, 2017
rkb/sk/ap/mk
RFA 705/2016                                                    Page 53 of 53


