$~25.
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+      RFA 85/2017 and CM APPL. 2749/2017
       M/S A & A ASSOCIATES                                  ..... Appellant
                            Through: Mr. Vinod Malhotra, Advocate with
                            Mr. Nikhil Malhotra, Advocate
                            versus
       M/S LADLY-CO. & ANR                                   ..... Respondents
                            Through: None
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE HIMA KOHLI
                            ORDER
       %                    23.01.2017
1.     The appellant/plaintiff is aggrieved by the judgment dated 24.08.2016
passed by the trial court in its favour in a suit for recovery of Rs.18,40,000/-
instituted by it against the respondents/defendants. By the impugned
judgment, the trial court has awarded a decree for a sum of Rs.10 lacs in
favour of the appellant/plaintiff alongwith pendentelite and future interest @
9% per annum from the date of institution of the suit, till realisation.
2.     Counsel for the appellant/plaintiff states that the trial court ought to
have awarded interest for a period of three years reckoned backwards from
the date of institution of the suit, i.e., from 23.09.2009. He further states that
the rate of interest awarded by the trial court, which is 9% per annum, is on
the lower side particularly when as per the agreement arrived at between the
parties, the respondents were to pay interest @ 2% per month, which
amounts to 24% per annum.
RFA 85/2017                                                            Page 1 of 3

3.     It is an admitted factual position that the cause of action to institute
the suit against the respondents had arisen in favour of the appellant/plaintiff
in the year 2006, when it had cancelled the order for supply of the subject
machines, placed on the respondents and had demanded refund. However,
the present suit was instituted in the year 2012. Counsel for the appellant
explains that the said suit was instituted belatedly for the reason that under
wrong legal advice, the appellant/plaintiff had filed a complaint against the
respondents before the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum,
Janakpuri in the year 2006, which was withdrawn in the year 2012 and only
thereafter, was the civil suit for recovery of money instituted against the
respondents.
4.     On enquiring from the counsel for the appellant as to whether the
respondents had taken a preliminary objection in its reply with regard to the
maintainability of the aforesaid complaint before the District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Forum, counsel for the appellant concedes that such an
objection was taken but despite that, the appellant had continued pursuing its
remedies before the said forum for a period of six years. He submits that that
the said complaint was ultimately withdrawn by the appellant in the year
2012 with the consent of the respondents.
5.     Knowing that a specific objection with regard to maintainability of the
complaint was taken by the respondent before the District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Forum, the appellant had elected to pursue the said
complaint for a period of six years before the said forum. It is a different
matter that the trial court has given the benefit of limitation to the appellant
under Section 14 of the Limitation Act, by deciding issue No.2 in its favour.
But that would not be a ground for the appellant/plaintiff to now claim
RFA 85/2017                                                          Page 2 of 3

interest for the entire period reckoned from 2006, merely because it had
elected to withdraw its complaint before the Forum in the year 2012 and
then proceeded to institute a civil suit.
6.     Furthermore, having regard to the fact that the trial court has awarded
pendendelite and future interest @ 9% per annum from the date of
institution of the suit till realisation, this Court is of the opinion that the said
rate of interest is fairly reasonable and the impugned judgment and decree
does not deserve interference on this count.
7.     At this stage, counsel for the appellant states on instructions from his
client that he does not wish to press the appeal on merits and instead,
requests that the court fee affixed on the appeal may be refunded.
8.     The appeal is accordingly disposed of, as not pressed, alongwith the
pending application.
9.     In view of the fact that the appeal is still at the stage of admission, and
a request for withdrawal has been made on behalf of the appellant, the
Registry is directed to issue a certificate in its favour for refund of the court
fee to the extent of Rs.20,000/-.
                     `                                          HIMA KOHLI, J
JANUARY 23, 2017
rkb
RFA 85/2017                                                              Page 3 of 3


