                  IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL
                                  PRADESH)
                                           I.A. 582/2016
                        United India Insurance Co. Ltd.
                                                                    ………..Appellant
                                  -Versus-
                        Dr. Mrs. Lakshmi Goswami & Ors.
                                                                 ……….Respondents
   For the Appellant      :       Mr. S.S. Sarma, Sr. Advocate
   For the Respondents :          Mr. S.K. Sahu, Advocate
                                           BEFORE
                        THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
   Date of hearing & Judgment and order: 31.07.2017
                     JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
           Heard Mr. S.S. Sarma, learned Sr. Counsel for the petitioner and Mr.
   S.K. Sahu, learned counsel for the respondents.
   2.      This petition under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, R/W Section
   173(1) proviso of MV Act has been filed praying for condonation of 167 days
   delay in preferring the appeal.
   3.      The reasons for delay has been stated in paragraph-2 of the petition,
   which is reproduced below:
                          “2. That the petitioner has states that papers had to be
                          collected from advocate to Divisional Office and than to
                          Regional Office, which took time and in view of huge

                        amount involved, opinion of senior advocate was
                        required to be obtained and all these took time and in
                        doing so, the normal period of time to file an appeal
                        expired and papers were ultimately sent to advocate on
                        08.01.2016 to file the appeal by engaging the senior
                        advocate. But it was found that the certified copy of
                        award was not available amongst the papers sent to
                        him and just a photocopy of the same was available.
                        The said fact was communicated to the regional office
                        and thereafter the certified copy was applied before the
                        Tribunal and was ultimately sent to the advocate on
                        06.05.2016 and he took some more time to finalise and
                        settle the memo of appeal, stay petition etc. and
                        thereafter appeal could be filed only on 12.05.2016 and
                        by that time delay of 167 days had occurred. This delay
                        is required to be condoned.”
4.      The respondents by filing a counter affidavit vehemently objected the
petition stating that the delay was indeed of 184 days and not of 167 days as
stated in the petition. It has also been stated that the petitioner has not been
able to show any cogent reason for the delay.
5.      The cause shown as above, transpires that, judgment and award was
passed on 17.08.2015 and the appellant allegedly sent necessary papers to
its counsel on 08.01.2016 for filing appeal. It has been stated in a very casual
and routine manner that in order to collect the documents from the advocate
and obtaining opinion from the learned counsel the delay was caused. No
cogent reason has been shown, why more than 4 months time was required
just for handing over the brief to the learned counsel for filing the appeal.
Nothing has been stated specifically, how much time was required for
collecting the papers from the advocate or how much time was taken by the
learned Sr. Counsel for giving opinion. After more than 4 months, when the
papers were sent to the learned counsel on 08.01.2016, learned counsel
discovered, that certified copy of the award was not there and only a
photocopy of the award was sent. Then again the appellant took 4 months
for obtaining certified copy and handing it over to the learned counsel.
Nothing has been stated as to when the certified copy was applied or when it

was made available. Simply a casual statement that the certified copy was
applied and ultimately the same was sent to the learned counsel on
06.05.2016. Explaining the delay in such a lackadaisical manner by the
appellant, in my view, can only be attributed to sheer negligence, or inaction
or lack of bonafide on the part of the appellant. A litigant guilty of lack of
bonafide and negligence or inaction cannot expect the indulgence of the
court for filing an appeal or application beyond the prescribed period without
showing sufficient cause.
6.      Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that sufficient cause
should be construed liberally considering that the appellant is a corporate
body, dealing with public money and that a huge amount is involved in the
matter. No doubt, sufficient cause has to be construed liberally, but that does
not mean, that one is totally absolved from showing any cause for the delay.
Procedural law are meant for advancement of justice and usually expected to
be followed and certainly not for flouting. Anyone seeking exemption from
the prescribed procedure laid down by the statute is certainly under
obligation to assign good cause preventing him to follow the prescribed
procedure. When the statute has fixed certain time, within which an appeal or
application is to be filed, it is expected that the appeal or application shall be
filed within such time. Anyone seeking indulgence to file appeal or application
beyond such prescribed time is bound to show sufficient cause for not filing
the appeal or application in time. Proviso to Section 173 lays down that an
appeal can be filed against any order of the Tribunal within 90 days.
However, beyond such period of 90 days also, one can file an appeal
provided ‘sufficient cause’ is shown preventing the appellant to file the appeal
within the prescribed time. Merely because the appellant is a corporate body
(Insurance Company) is not supposed to take it granted, that court shall
condone the delay, irrespective of it shows or not any cogent reason.

7.       The Apex Court in (2013) 4 SCC 52 (Am alendu Kum ar Bera Vs.
State of W est Bengal) observed that merely because the Respondent is
the State, delay in filing the appeal or revision cannot and shall not be
mechanically considered and in absence of ‘sufficient cause’ delay shall not be
condoned. In (2015) 9 SCC 102 (Union of India Vs. Tata Ydogaw a
Ltd.) , the Apex Court refused to condone the delay of 51 days on the ground
of inter-departmental correspondences and processing of matter, wherein the
Apex Court observed as under:
                “We are aware of the fact that the Government being
                impersonal takes longer time than the private bodies or the
                individuals. Even giving that latitude, there must be some way
                or attempt to explain the cause for such delay.”
8.       This Court also, in the case of ICICI Lom bard General Insurance
Co. Vs. R up Nath Brahm a Choudhury reported in 2017 (2) GLT 487 ,
held that interdepartmental consultation cannot be considered as sufficient
cause for condonation of delay.
9.       In Postm aster General Vs. Living M edia India Ltd . reported in
(2012) 3 SCC 563 dealing with the delay in respect of appeal by
Government, observed as under:
                “29. In our view, it is the right time to inform all the
                government bodies, their agencies and instrumentalities that
                unless they have reasonable and acceptable explanation for
                the delay and there was bonafide effort, there is no need to
                accept the usual explanation that the file was kept pending for
                several months/years due to considerable degree of procedural
                red-tape in the process. The government departments are
                under a special obligation to ensure that they perform their
                duties with diligence and commitment. Condonation of delay is
                an exception and should not be used as an anticipated benefit
                for government departments. The law shelters everyone under
                the same light and should not be swirled for the benefit of a
                few.”
10.      What therefore follows is that even a corporate body or a Government
or instrumentality of the Government as a litigant does not stand on a higher

    pedestal as law shelter everyone under the same light. Even if such
    impersonal bodies are held to be entitled to some amount of latitude, such
    entitlement or indulgence, obviously does not fully absolve them from
    explaining the cause for the delay. In the facts and circumstances of the
    present case, the reasons assigned for the delay as has been discussed
    hereinabove, can by no amount of liberal construction be considered as
    sufficient cause for condoning the inordinate delay of 167 days.
    11.     In view of the above, I find no merit in this petition and therefore, the
    prayer for condonation of delay is rejected and the I.A. stands dismissed.
                                                                           JUDGE
Mkk


