                                                 I.A (Civil) No.1924 of 2017
                                                        In WA Sl. No.292756
                                      BEFORE
                  HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
26-07-2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
             Mr. S Sarma, learned counsel for the applicant.
             Mr. S Saikia and Mr.P Saikia, learned counsel for the respondent.
             Heard on admission.
            This is an application for condonation of delay of 206 days in filing
writ appeal against the order dated 27.7.2016 passed by the learned Single
Judge of this High Court, whereby he has allowed WP(C) No.2357/2014 of
non-applicant No.1 – Abdus Shahid.
2.     By order under challenge, the applicant has been directed to issue
consequential appointment order in favour of non-applicant No.1 as Assistant
Teacher in New Lower Primary Schools [Upgraded Education Guaranteed
Scheme (EGS) Centres]. The learned Single Judge, after hearing the applicant
and non-applicant No.1, by giving cogent reasons in a detailed order has held
that non-applicant No.1 has illegally been denied appointment as Assistant
Teacher in the New Lower Primary Schools [Upgraded Education Guaranteed
Scheme (EGS) Centres].
3.     As there is delay of 206 days in filing the appeal against the order of
learned Single Judge, we shall examine whether there is “sufficient cause” for
condonation of such a huge delay.
4.     The application for condonation of delay is filed by the applicant along
with an affidavit of Sri Dhruba Jyoti Das, Executive Director, Government of
                                                                     Page 1 of 5

Assam, Elementary Education Department. The relevant paragraphs 2 to 7 of
the application read as under:
      “2. That the present applicant immediately on receipt of the judgment
      and order dated 27.7.2016 referred the matter to the Consultant (Legal)
      SMO, SSA for his comment on the issue and sought his suggestion for
      filing Writ Appeal. The Consultant (Legal) submitted his views vide note
      dated 18.10.2016 and forwarded to the M.D. SSA. On 19.10.2016 the
      matter was referred to the SPO (TT) for opinion. The case was
      thereafter referred to the Senior Administrative Officer and Executive
      Director SSA for detailed discussion of the entire matter by the
      concerned authority vide note dated 25.10.2016. On 26.10.2016 it was
      decided to consult the concerned officials who have been involved in the
      case. The concerned authority after detailed study vide his note dated
      7.11.2016 decided to find out the grounds of appeal and accordingly
      same has been prepared and put up for further consideration.
      3.      That as stated above the matter was discussed in detail by the
      competent authority regarding filing of appeal before the Hon’ble Court
      and in the course of such process there has been some delay in filing
      the Writ Appeal. It is stated that vide note dated 21.11.2016 it was
      decided to file writ appeal. On 1.12.2016 the concern officials were
      provided with the opportunity of hearing and their statement were
      recorded for the purpose of filing the writ appeal. On 30.12.2016
      grounds of writ appeal has been re-verified and sent to the counsel for
      drafting the appeal. On 2.2.2016 the draft has been prepared and on
      18.02.2017 it has been sent for finalization of the appeal. Thereafter the
      writ appeal has been filed before the registry of this Hon’ble Court.
      4.That as stated above the official procedure and the issue involved in
      the case took some time to finally come to the conclusion of filing the
      present writ appeal and accordingly it has been filed along with the
      Interlocutory Application for condonation of delay.
      5. That the applicants beg to state that delay occasioned in filing the
      writ appeal is unintentional and it is caused due to the official procedure
      coupled with the issue involved in the matter. As indicated above the
      matter has taken its due care and at no point of time there was any
      intention to delay the matter.
      6. That the applicants state and submit that there is no latches or
      negligence on the part of the applicant and the delay caused in filing
      the appeal is beyond the control of the applicant and unless the delay is
      condoned the applicant will suffer irr5eparable loss and injury.
      7. That this application is made bonafide and in the interest of justice.
                                                                       Page 2 of 5

                          In the premises aforesaid, it is most respectfully
                      prayed that Your Lordships would graciously be pleased to
                      admit this application and on consideration of the matter
                      be pleased to condone the delay of 206 days in filing the
                      connected Misc Case for restoration of WP(C) No.2963/03
                      which was dismissed for default vide order dated
                      16.09.2014 for non-prosecution by the Hon’ble Court
                      and/or pass any such further order or orders as Your
                      Lordships may deem fit and proper.”
5.      The decision of Supreme Court in Office of Chief Post Master General v.
Living Media India Ltd. AIR 2012 SC 1506 is directly on the point. In this case
there was a delay of 427 days in filing the appeal before the Supreme Court
against the judgment of the High Court and the certified copy of the High
Court Judgment was applied after four months with no explanation why it was
not applied for within a reasonable time. The Supreme Court after examining
other dates mentioned in the affidavit of the person-in-charge of the case to
justify the delay found that there was delay at every stage with no explanation
for the cause of delay. The Supreme Court also took serious note of the casual
manner in which the Government departments are functioning showing
virtually no respect to the law of limitation. And, while dismissing the appeal
on the ground of delay, the Supreme Court has made the following
observation:
        “The claim on account of impersonal machinery and inherited
        bureaucratic methodology of making several notes cannot be accepted
        in view of the modern technologies being used and available. The law of
        limitation undoubtedly binds everybody including the Government.
        In our view, it is the right time to inform all the Government bodies,
        their agencies and instrumentalities that unless they have reasonable
        and acceptable explanation for the delay and there was bona fide effort,
        there is no need to accept the usual explanation that the file was kept
        pending for several months/years due to considerable degree of
        procedural red-tape in the process. The Government departments are
        under a special obligation to ensure that they perform their duties with
        diligence and commitment. Condonation of delay is an exception and
        should not be used as an anticipated benefit for Government
        department. The law shelters everyone under the same light and should
        not be swirled for the benefit of a few.”
                                                                      Page 3 of 5

6.      In yet another decision, the Supreme Court in Maniben Devraj Shah v.
Municipal Corporation of Brihan Mumbai AIR 2012 SC 1629 has held that in
cases involving the State and its agencies/instrumentalities, the Court can take
note of the fact that sufficient time is taken in the decision making process but
no premium can be given for total lethargy or utter negligence on the part of
the officers of the State and/or its agencies/instrumentalities and the
applications filed by them for condonation of delay cannot be allowed as a
matter of course by accepting the plea that dismissal of the matter on the
ground of bar of limitation will cause injury to the public interest.
7.      It is to be noted that although order dated 27.7.2016 was passed in the
presence of learned counsel for the applicant, the application for its certified
copy was made as late as on 19.3.2017 i.e. after 7 months. This fact is
evident from the certified copy of the order filed along with the application for
condonation of delay. No explanation is given why application for obtaining
certified copy was not made within a reasonable time. It is further clear from
the averments made in the application for condonation of delay that decision
to file appeal was taken on 21.11.2016 i.e., after 3 months of passing of the
impugned order and even then the appeal was filed as late as on 10.3.2017.
8.      Though it is stated that the delay in filing the appeal is bonafide, the
fact remains that from day one the authorities concerned have not evinced
diligence in pursuing the matter by taking appropriate steps. The applicants
have miserably failed to give any acceptable and cogent reason to condone
the delay in filing the writ appeal required to be filed in the same High Court
building.
9.      Having regard to the above referred decisions of the Supreme Court in
Office of the Chief Post Master General (supra) and Maniben Devraj Shah
(supra) in the fact situation of the present case, we find no sufficient cause to
condone the delay of 206 days.
                                                                       Page 4 of 5

10.     The application is, accordingly, dismissed. In the result, the appeal also
fails and is dismissed on the same ground of delay.
                JUDGE                                       CHIEF JUSTICE
Skd/-
                                                                        Page 5 of 5


