                                     I.A.(Civil) No.2137 of 2017
                              BEFORE
        HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
20.6.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Mr.NC Das, learned senior counsel, assisted by Mr.U Sarma,
       learned counsel for the applicant.
       None for the respondent.
       Heard on admission.
       Heard on I.A. (Civil) No.2137/2017, which is an application
for extension of time to comply with the order dated 21.03.2017
passed by us in W.A. No. 64/2015.
       By our aforesaid order dated 21.03.2017, we had set aside
the decision of Executive Council dated 30.07.2010 rejecting the
recommendation of Selection Committee for appointment of
respondent on the post of Lecturer in Assamese. We had also
directed the Executive Council to decide the matter afresh within
three months.
       It is to be noted that the post of Lecturer in Assamese was
reserved for Scheduled Caste category to which the respondent
belong. She was selected by the Selection Committee but its
recommendation was rejected by the Executive Council on the
ground that she did not have “uniformly consistent good academic
record”. Since this condition was neither mentioned in the
advertisement nor in the recruitment rules, the decision of the
Executive Council was set aside by us with a direction to
reconsider the matter afresh within three months.
       Prayer for extension of time to comply with the order has
now been made by the Gauhati University on a plea that for
                                                          Page 1 of 2

verification of Scheduled Caste status of the respondent on a
complaint received has been referred to the Deputy Commissioner
for which some time will be needed. We find this ground for
extension of time totally fallacious because validity of the caste
certificate of respondent can be decided only by the High Power
Committee and not by the Deputy Commissioner. Moreover, the
candidature of respondent for the post reserved for Scheduled
Caste category was not rejected on the ground that she does not
belong to that category.
        The application is accordingly dismissed.
           JUDGE                                  CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                         Page 2 of 2


