*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                            Judgment reserved on :         26.04.2013
%                          Judgment pronounced on :        03.05.2013
+                         FAO(OS) 140/2011
LML LTD.                                            ……Appellant
             Through:     Mr.Ravinder Singh, Advocate.
                    Versus
SUNIL MITTAL                                        ……Respondent
             Through:     Mr.Dinesh Goyal and Mr. Rupesh Goyal,
                          Advocates
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. SANJAY KISHAN KAUL
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE INDERMEET KAUR
INDERMEET KAUR, J.
1       This appeal is directed against the order dated 17.01.2011
wherein an application filed by the petitioner (defendant in the suit)
(I.A. No.7089/2009) under Section 22(1) of the Sick Industrial
Companies (Special) Provisions Act,1985 (hereinafter referred to as “the
said Act”) had been dismissed.
2      Record shows that the respondent (plaintiff in the suit) had filed a
suit for recovery of Rs.44,05,803.47 of which the principal amount was
Rs.24,83,409.27; there was an interest figure of Rs.15,39,714.20 and
sales tax was claimed in the sum of Rs.3,82,680/-.          The suit was
numbered as CS(OS) No.2249/2008. The plaintiff claiming himself to
the proprietor of M/s Shree Shyam Packaging Industries, Gulshan Park,
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                         Page 1 of 9

Opposite Rajdhani Dal Mills, Main Rohtak Road, Nangloi, Delhi was
engaged in the business of manufacture and sale of packaging material.
The appellant was a company engaged in the business of manufacture
and sale of two wheeler scooter in the domestic as also in the foreign
market. The appellant had sent a requirement to the respondent for
packaging of its scooters which were meant for export; these crates were
supplied by the respondent. The bills of the respondent remained unpaid
which had culminated in the principal figure of Rs.24,83,409.87. Suit
was accordingly filed for the recovery of the principal amount. Interest
was claimed at 24% per annum; the suit amount also included the
alleged sales tax dues claimed by respondent.
3      Written statement was filed by the appellant. The claim of the
respondent was disputed. The preliminary objection raised was that the
suit of the respondent was not maintainable as the petitioner was a sick
company and in view of the provisions of Section 22(1) of the SICA
without the permission of the Board of Industrial and Financial
Reconstruction (BIFR) suit could not proceed. A separate application
under Section 22(1) of the said Act was also filed; order passed by the
BIFR (case No. 180/2006) on a reference by the appellant company was
placed on record. An affidavit of the appellant company through its
Director D.R.Dogra was also placed before the learned Single Judge to
substantiate the argument of the appellant that the claim made by the
respondent was for a sum of Rs.21,74,490.88 which was clear from the
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                        Page 2 of 9

audited statement of account of the respondent company itself; it was
not Rs.24,83,409.27 .
4      The fact that the company was registered as a sick company
before the BIFR is not in dispute. The fact that a sum of
Rs.21,74,490.88 has been admitted by the appellant as due and payable
to the respondent is also not in dispute. The principal amount claimed in
the suit is, however, a different figure; it is Rs.24,83,409.27 which
figure is noted supra has been disputed by the appellant; submission of
the appellant on affidavit being that figure is not in conformity with the
statement of account of the respondent itself.
5      The short question which had arisen before the learned single
Judge was whether in view of the aforenoted factual scenario i.e. the
appellant company having been declared as a sick company by the
BIFR; could the suit filed by the respondent seeking recovery of money
be proceeded with in the absence of permission from the BIFR.
6      Both the parties had addressed their legal submissions before the
learned single Judge as is evident from the impugned order. The learned
single Judge was of the view that although admittedly the appellant
company is a sick company but the appellant not having placed on
record any document to show the current status of the company i.e. the
stage of its revival/rehabilitation prayer under Section 22 of the said Act
could not be granted. He was of the view that the appellant company
had in fact created a confusion with regard to the actual amount which
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                          Page 3 of 9

was claimed by the respondent; since the entire amount did not stand
admitted by the respondent, the application filed by the petitioner was
misconceived; it was accordingly dismissed. Learned single Judge had
relied upon the ratio laid by the Supreme Court in Dy. Commercial Tax
Officer Vs. Corromandal Pharmaceuticals           AIR 1997 SC 2007 to
return a finding that a suit simplicter for recovery of money need not be
stayed unless the amount is fully covered in the scheme. The legal
enunciation was deduced correctly but the learned single Judge has
faulted in the application of the legal proposition to the facts in the
correct perspective.
7       Appellant is aggrieved by the aforenoted finding.
8       On 22.9.2011 a Bench of this Court had noted the admission
made by the appellant in the affidavit filed before the learned single
Judge that a sum of Rs.21,74,490.88 was payable to the respondent in
the books of account of the appellant and this amount also stood
reflected in the Draft Rehabilitation Scheme (DRS) which had been
circulated by the BIFR. The dispute of Rs.3,00,000/- arose out of certain
C-forms not having been issued by the appellant.
9       On 18.3.2013 it was reiterated by the appellant that the liability to
the respondent of Rs.21,74,490.88 was unequivocal; a further
submission made was that if the C-Forms had not been supplied the
liability towards the same would also be that of the appellant.           The
appellant was directed to file an affidavit in the aforesaid terms i.e.
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                           Page 4 of 9

whether the C-Forms had been supplied and if no, what would be the
effect on the liability qua the said C-Forms. Counsel for the appellant
on that date also assured the court that if any modification is
necessitated qua the amount required to be shown under the DRS an
appropriate application would be filed before the BIFR.
10     The affidavit of the appellant has since been placed on record.
This is the affidavit of Ravinder Kumar Chadha, Division Manager
(Account) of the appellant company. It is reiterated that as per the duly
audited account of the appellant company maintained under the Indian
Companies Act as on 31.3.2006 a sum of Rs.21,74,490.88 is due and
payable to the respondent. It has been clarified that in the suit the
respondent had made a claim of Rs.24,83,409.27 and the difference in
the two figures is on account of the difference in the opening balance as
on 01.5.2005 as also qua bill No.126 dated 23.10.2005 for which
material was not received by the appellant company. The freight charges
have also not been adjusted by the respondent and if the same are
adjusted the figure would reconcile to the same amount of
Rs.21,74,490.88. Qua the C-Forms it has been deposed that the
appellant could not provide the C-Forms in 2006 because of lock out
proceeded by strike but he is ready and willing to provide the C-Forms
and the respondent may take adjustment from the Sale Tax/concerned
authorities. The affidavit further deposes that there is no contractual rate
of interest between the parties. Adjustment of the freight charges had
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                           Page 5 of 9

been detailed in Annexure C. The reconciled statement has also been
filed along with the affidavit.
11     Reply/affidavit has been filed by the respondent. It is pointed out
that as per their Auditor’s report it may not be possible for the
respondent to claim adjustment against the C-Forms as the amount
already stand paid to the concerned authorities in 2006. The rest of the
averments made in the affidavit are not disputed.
12     It is in this background that the question of applicability of
Section 22 of the said Act arises.
13     The said Act had in fact been promulgated by the Legislature in
1985 to provide for a timely determination, by a body of experts, as a
preventive and remedial measure for the revival and rehabilitation with
respect to sick industrial units. The ill-effects of sickness in industrial
companies, such as cessation of production, loss of employment, loss of
revenue to the Central and State Governments and blocking up of
investible funds of the banks and financial institutions, were of a serious
concern to the Government as well as to the society at large; it had
repercussions on the industrial growth of the country. With the passage
of time the number of sick industrial units had also increased rapidly.
Therefore, in order to salvage the productive assets, to the extent
possible, of such sick companies the said Act was enacted.
14     Under Section 22 of the said Act no proceedings for execution,
distress or the like proceedings against any of the properties of the
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                          Page 6 of 9

company shall lie or be proceeded further except with the consent of the
Board. Relevant would it be to extract provisions of Section 22(1) of the
said Act. It reads as under.
       “22. SUSPENSION OF LEGAL PROCEEDINGS, CONTRACTS, ETC.
       (1) Where in respect of an industrial company, an inquiry under section 16 is
       pending, or any scheme referred to under section 17 is under preparation or
       consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under implementation or where an
       appeal under section 25 relating to an industrial company is pending, then,
       notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)
       or any other law or the memorandum and articles of association of the
       industrial company or any other instrument having effect under the said Act
       or other law, no proceedings for the winding-up of the industrial company or
       for execution, distress or the like against any of the properties of the
       industrial company or for the appointment of a receiver in respect thereof
       and no suit for the recovery of money or for the enforcement of any security
       against the industrial company or of any guarantee in respect of any loans,
       or advance granted to the industrial company shall lie or be proceeded with
       further, except with the consent of the Board or, as the case may be, the
       Appellate Authority.
15     The law with regard to Section 22 of the said Act is no longer
re-integra The Apex Court in AIR 2012 SC 1440 Raheja Universal Ltd.
Vs. NRC Limited and Ors. had the occasion to examine the aforenoted
provision. The relevant extract reads herein as under:
       “The said provision, thus, mandates that no proceeding inter alia for
       execution, distress or the like against any of the properties of the industrial
       company and no suit for recovery of money or for the enforcement of any
       security, shall lie or be proceeded with further, except with the consent of the
       Board or as the case may be, the Appellate Authority. The said statutory
       injunction will operate when an inquiry had been initiated under
       Section 16 or a scheme referred to under Section 17 is under preparation
       and/ or inter alia a sanctioned scheme is under implementation. It is not
       disputed before us that the amount awarded in favour of the Respondent by
       the Council finds specific mention in the sanctioned scheme which is under
       implementation.”
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                                    Page 7 of 9

16     The principle of law is thus unambiguous. Where the amount
claimed or the liability sought to be set up is covered under the scheme,
Section 22(1) will be attracted and there would be an automatic
suspension of all legal proceedings including a suit for recovery of
money. In the present case, the amount of 21,74,490.88 is admittedly a
part of the DRS pending before the BIFR. The debt of Rs.3,00,000/- on
account of sales tax dues, the petitioner admits as his liability. Even if
this amount is not permitted to be adjusted at this stage as has been
pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondent, keeping in view
the wide import of the language of Section 22 of the said Act there can
be no question of continuing with the suit proceedings. It also cannot be
lost sight of the fact that the parties were maintaining a running account;
payments were being made from time to time; it would thus not be
possible to segregate the element of debt since the question would be
whether the debt due to the plaintiff is correctly reflected or a lesser
amount is in fact due to him. The language of Section 22 would take
into its sweep a situation even where if the full amount is not a part of
the DRS. The question of continuation of the suit would not arise.
17     In such a situation it would be open to the respondent to approach
the BIFR seeking leave for continuation of the suit qua the balance
amount or in the alternate it may approach the BIFR seeking
enhancement of the amount as included in the scheme if so permitted by
law.
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                           Page 8 of 9

18     The judgment of Corromandal Pharmaceuticals (supra) is
inapplicable in this factual scenario. That judgment related to sales tax
dues of the department; the ratio being noted as under:
        “amounts like sales tax which a sick company is enable to collect after the
       date of sanction scheme legitimately belonged to the revenue could not and
       may not have been founded to be covered within Section 22 of the said Act.”
        This judgment did not relate to the liability against a sick
company. Clearly those facts would be inapplicable in the present case.
19.    The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms. Parties are left to
bear their own costs.
                                           INDERMEET KAUR, J.
                                           SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, J.
MAY 03, 2013
nandan
FAO(OS) No.140/2011                                               Page 9 of 9


