          THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
                        W.P.(C). No.12119 of 2014
          _______________________________________________
       In the matter of an application under Article 226 of the
       Constitution of India.
                                   --------------
       M/s Jindal Steel & Power Ltd.
       and another                                 ……        Petitioners
                                   -Versus-
       State of Odisha & others                    ……        Opp. Parties
                 For Petitioners     :    M/s. Sanjit Mohanty (Sr. Advocate)
                                                S.Nanda, R.R.Swain &
                                                J.K.Naik.
                 For Opp. Parties    :    M/s. S.P.Mishra (Advocate General)
                                                & M.S.Sahoo (A.G.A)
       PRESENT:
            THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE INDRAJIT MAHANTY
                                    &
                 THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE B.K.NAYAK
                         Date of Judgment: 08. 04. 2016
I. Mahanty, J. In the present writ application, the petitioners-M/s
       Jindal Steel and Power Limited (hereinafter referred to as “M/s
       M/S JSPL”) have entered into an agreement with Sarda Mines

                                 2
Pvt. Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as ‘SMPL’) to purchase Lump Ore
(RoM) from SMPL. Pursuant to such agreement, the petitioners-
M/s JSPL had sought for permission from the State of Odisha
and the State Government vide letter dated 27.03.2004 permitted
the petitioners to purchase Iron Ore in the form of RoM from
SMPL (lessee) of Thakurani Iron Ore Mines Block-B. It is further
stated that the M/s JSPL had been procuring Iron Ore (RoM)
from SMPL and have paid the total amount of royalty and other
taxes on the purchase of said Iron Ore (RoM) and thereafter,
processed the same at its processing plant located within the
leasehold area of SMPL and such RoM on being processed into
Lump Ore and Fines, was stored at the despatch point within the
leasehold area of the mine. Such processed Iron Ore/Fine were
being despatched by M/s JSPL to its Pelletisation Plant located at
Deojhar,    Odisha    and   Integrated   Steel   Plant   at  Raigarh,
Chhattisgarh. Such transportation of ore was being permitted by
the mining authority till 31.3.2014, on which date, the Deputy
Director of Mines (DDM) Joda called upon the petitioners to stop
transportation of ore.
2.        The   M/s    JSPL    addressed   various   letters  to  the
appropriate authorities seeking permission to remove such Ore
and Fines. By letter/order dated 23.6.2014 under Annexure-1,

                               3
the petitioners’ representation dated 12.5.2014 under Annexure-
2 seeking grant of permission for transporting Iron Ore procured
from SMPL on which royalty had already been paid and
admittedly, the processed Iron Ore i.e. Lump Ore and Fines have
been stored at the despatch point situated within the leasehold
area of SMPL, was rejected. This letter/order dated 23.6.2014
(under Annexure-1) rejecting the petitioners’ representation is the
subject matter of challenge in this writ petition.
3.        It would be appropriate to take note of the following
facts:
          (i)   The petitioners are engaged in the business of
                manufacture of steel and steel products at
                Pelletisation Plant at Deojhar, Odisha and an
                Integrated Steel Plant at Raigarh in the State of
                Chhattisgarh.
          (ii)  This representation had come to be filed for the
                sole purpose of seeking permission to transport
                the Lump Ore and Fines which have been
                produced by processing of RoM by the petitioners
                purchased from SMPL.
          (iii) The SMPL (lessee) has been granted the mining
                lease vide mining lease dated 14.8.2001 and the

                                4
               said lease remains valid for 20 years i.e. till
               13.8.2021. The SMPL (mining lessee) possessed a
               valid    Forest    Clearance     and    Environment
               Clearance and the respective clearances are noted
               as hereunder:
                   (a) The Ministry of Environment and Forest,
                       Govt. of India (in short “MoEF”) vide Letter
                       dtd.21.06.2001 conveyed its approval for
                       diversion of 865.276 Ha. of forest land out
                       of the total lease hold area of 947.046 Ha.
                       of SMPL, under Section 2 of the Forest
                       (Conservation) Act, 1980. Under the said
                       approval SMPL was permitted to conduct
                       mining operation in 249.276 Ha. (where
                       94.024 Ha. is broken up prior to
                       25.10.1980, 155.252 Ha. is to be broken up
                       afresh in phases) and 616 Ha. interspersed
                       area to be maintained as forest out of the
                       total diverted forest land of 865.276 Ha;
                       And
                   (b) Environment Clearance (in short “EC”) was
                       granted by MoEF vide Letter dtd.22.09.2004
                       for 4 MTPA Iron Ore (lumps) with a validity
                       for 20 years. The said EC dated 22.9.2004
                       is co-terminus with the period of the mining
                       lease.
         Copies of Forest Clearance and Environment Clearance
have been annexed as Annexures-17 and 18 respectively.
4.       The SMPL had sought for permission from the State
Government (O.P. Nos.2 and 3) to sell the Iron Ore (RoM) on ex-
mine basis within the leasehold area to M/s JSPL for crushing

                                5
and sizing as per conditions specified therein. The State
Government     while   granting   approval    under   letter dated
27.03.2004 and 5.4.2004 had permitted SMPL to sell the Iron Ore
to M/s JSPL subject to payment of royalty at the “highest rate”
prescribed for the lumpy Iron ore containing 65% Fe and above for
the entire quantity of RoM supplied to the M/s JSPL. It is also an
admitted fact that permission as sought for transportation of
processed ore/fines has already suffered royalty at the highest
rate as approved by the State Government and the same has been
duly paid.
          It would also be relevant here to note that M/s JSPL has
a valid trading licence (Annexure-5) under the Orissa Minerals
(Prevention of Theft, Smuggling and Illegal Mining and Regulation
of Possession, Storage, Trading and Transportation) Rules, 2007
(in short “OMPTS Rules”) for procurement, processing, storage
and selling of Iron Ore, from the despatch point within the
leasehold area of SMPL and the State Government have from time
to time issued necessary “transit permits” under Rule-10 of
OMPTS Rules for transportation of minerals from within the
leasehold area of SMPL.
5.        In the light of the facts as noted hereinabove, while
transactions were being effected in the manner as noted above,

                                6
Opposite Party No.3 (Deputy Director of Mines, Joda) issued letter
dated 31.3.2014 directing the SMPL (lessee) to stop all mining
activities within the mines with effect from 1.4.2014, on the
ground    of  Environmental    Clearance   dated   29.10.2008   for
enhancement of production from 4 MTPA Iron ore (Lumps) to 15
MTPA RoM had expired on 31.03.2014.
           In  view   of  the  said   order, the   opposite   party
consequently also refused to grant the petitioner (M/s JSPL)
“transit permit” for transporting the procured and processed Iron
ore (CLO and Fines) from the despatch point to its Pelletisation
Plant at Keonjhar, Odisha as well as the Steel Plant at Raigarh in
the State of Chhattisgarh.
6.         The   M/s   JSPL   made   various   representations   on
9.4.2014, 15.4.2014, 12.5.2014, 4.6.2014 and 18.6.2014 under
Annexure-2 series requesting the opposite parties for grant of
permission to transport the processed minerals which had been
purchased from SMPL on which, royalty and all taxes had already
been paid/collected.
7.         Opposite Party No.3 (Deputy Director of Mines, Joda) on
receipt of such representation made by M/s JSPL by letter dated
15.04.2014     under   Annexure-8    series, sought    for  certain
instructions from the Director of Mines, Odisha and the Director

                                  7
of Mines in turn, under letter dated 23.04.2014 (Annexure-7),
sought for clarification from the Deputy Director of Mines in
respect of the representation made by M/s JSPL.
          The Deputy Director of Mines, Joda enquired into the
matter and submitted its clarification vide its report dated
3.5.2014 under Annexure-8 series and in response to Point Nos.3
and 4, the following report was submitted:
                  “No.3        xxx The details         of  annual
            statement of ROM procured, processed and
            despatched by the Petitioner since 2004-05 to 2013-
            14 and closing balance as on 31.03.2014 as per the
            register (FORM E) and monthly returns in Form E
            were provided by the Petitioner
                  No.4         x           x             x
                  In view of the above submissions, it is
            requested to kindly consider the representation of
            M/S JSPL for lifting of the applied quantity of iron
            ore as recommended in this office letter
            no.1693/Mines dtd.15.04.2014 from their crusher
            unit through downhill pipe conveyor belt to their
            pellet plant located at Deojhar as the stocks lying at
            the crusher site are royalty paid iron ore.”
          It is further submitted on behalf of M/S JSPL that the
entire processed Iron Ore (29978 MT of Lump and 12205328 MT
of Fines) in terms of the report of the Deputy Director of Mines-
O.P.3 dated 3.5.2014 are lying stocked after processing, prior to
31.03.2014 at the despatch point.
8.        The Director of Mines-Opposite Party No.2 vide his
impugned letter dated 28.5.2014 addressed to the Commissioner-

                                8
cum-Secretary, Steel & Mines Department-Opposite Party No.1
while recommending the rejection of the representation made by
the petitioners seeking permission for transportation of Iron Ore
made the following observation:
          “xxx In view of the above legal provisions, despatch of
          the materials in question from the crusher point
          within the leasehold area of M/s Sarda Mines Pvt.
          Ltd. is to be considered as part of the mining
          operation within the leasehold area which can not be
          allowed without the valid statutory clearances. Thus
          the permission cannot be given for transporting of the
          above minerals, although legally procured, processed
          and stocked in the leasehold area.
          As a consequence of such non-recommendation, the
impugned order/letter dated 23.6.2014 and 26.6.2014 came to be
issued by the opposite parties-State, rejecting the prayer of the
petitioners. Hence necessitating the present challenge.
9.        M/s JSPL (petitioners herein) filed the present writ
application with the following prayers:
          (i)    Direct the Opp. Parties to grant permission to the
                 petitioner to transport the entire processed ore
                 (CLO & Fines) from the dispatch point within the
                 lease area to its Pelletisation Plant at Deojhar
                 and/or to the railway siding from where it can be
                 transported by rakes to its Integrated Steel Plant
                 at Raigarh in Chattisgarh;

                                    9
             (ii)   For   setting   aside   the  letters/orders   dated
                    23.06.2014 and 26.06.2014 (Annexure-1; Page-
                    25. to 26) passed by the Opposite Parties.
10.          At this stage, it would be important to take note of the
stand of the State Government in its counter affidavit dated
28.7.2014 wherein it is stated that “mining activities/operations”
includes transportation and that transportation of such minerals is
not permissible after the expiry of Environmental Clearance. At
Para-25 of the counter affidavit, it has been stated as follows:
             “xxx Moreover, considering the fact that the processed
             Ore is within the lease area of Sarda Mines, the
             Petitioner ought to have known that Environmental
             Clearance of the said mine is valid until 31.03.2014
             and drawn up plan for evacuation of the processed
             ore within the said date. xxx”
11.          At this stage, it would be most relevant to take note of
the fact that during pendency of the writ petition, SMPL (lessee) has
obtained the necessary clarification/permission from the Ministry of
Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Govt. of India (in short
“MoEF & CC”) vide letter dated 15.01.2015 to operate its mine for
production up to 4 million ton Iron Ore (Lumps) per annum as per
the EC dated 22.9.2004 and was also clarified in the said letter that,
the EC dated 22.9.2004 for mining of 4 MTPA of Iron ore lump is
valid for 20 years (Annexure-16).

                                   10
              It is submitted on behalf of M/s JSPL that the ground of
objection for issue of “transit permit” for transportation of Ore as
narrated     hereinabove,    no   more     exists in   view    of the
clarification/permission issued by the MoEF dated 15.1.2015 under
Annexure-16.
12.           The State Government filed a further affidavit on
23.02.2015 stating that the SMPL (lessee) cannot be allowed to
operate the mines in view of the interim order dated 16.05.2014
passed in W.P.(C) No.114 of 2014 (Common Cause vrs. Union of
India and others) by Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.
13.           The M/s JSPL (petitioners herein) responded to the
aforesaid objection by stating that this subsequent stand of the
State Government is of no relevance, inasmuch as, insofar as
W.P.(C) No.114 of 2014 (Common Cause vrs. Union of India and
others) is concerned, the interim order was with regard to
“resumption of mining operation” by SMPL and has nothing to do
with the request made by M/s JSPL (purchaser) for “transportation
of the processed Ore (Lumps) produced by them after processing the
RoM and sold to M/s JSPL by SMPL, during the validity of the
mining lease and after payment of royalty and taxes thereon.
              It is further submitted that grant of permission to the
petitioners (M/s JSPL) for transporting the processed Ore already

                                  11
purchased by it from the SMPL, cannot be termed as “mining
operations/activities”. In this respect, reliance is placed on the
definition of term “mining operation” under Section 3(d) of the Mines
and Minerals (Development & Regulation) Act, 1957 (in short
“MMDR Act”) which does not include transportation of minerals by a
buyer, who also possesses the necessary licence to transport under
the OMPTS Rules. It is submitted that the State in its additional
affidavit had attempted to expand the definition of “mining
operation” by relying upon the definition given in Section 2(j) & (h) of
the Mines Act, 1952. In this respect, it is submitted that the
enactment of Mines Act, was essentially a welfare legislation and the
objective of such statute was to ensure welfare and safety to the
persons who are working in the mines and consequently, the object
of extended meaning of the “mining operation” in the Mines Act, was
to give a wide scope to the applicability of the said Act, with the
object of extending the beneficial sweep of the enactment to the
maximum number of people associated with the mining operations.
             It is submitted that the definition of the provision under
the Mines Act, 1952 cannot be imported to defeat the specific
definition provided under Section 3(d) of the MMDR Act,1957 and it
is well settled that, since the MMDR Act, itself, contains the
definition of the term “mining operation” for the purpose of MMDR

                                  12
Act, it is no longer open for the State    to attempt to import the
definition by attempting to rely upon any other Act including the
Mines Act. It is further stated that “transportation” of the procured
and processed minerals by the petitioners who possess the
necessary license under the OMPTS Rules and who have purchased
the RoM from the mining lessee, is clearly permissible under law and
further that the clarification given by the MoEF under its
communication dated 15.1.2014, that the EC dated 22.9.2004
granted to SMPL (lessee) continues to be valid and that SMPL also
possessed the valid lease deed which would expire only in the year
2021. Therefore, the objection raised by the State Government
regarding transportation of Ore by the petitioners is wholly
untenable.
            It is submitted on behalf of the petitioners (M/S JSPL)
that since the petitioners possess a valid licence under the OMPTS
Rules and has already paid the necessary royalty for procured and
processed Ore lying at the despatch point, within the mine of SMPL,
“transportation” thereof cannot come under the purview of “mining
operations” since the same was covered under the OMPTS Rules. In
other words, it is submitted that the OMPTS Rules comes into
operation the moment the licencee procures/purchases ore and
such transportation of ore from the selling mining leaseholder,

                                  13
cannot come within the perview of “mining operation/activities”. In
this respect, the petitioners placed reliance on the judgments in the
case of Bihar Mines Ltd. vs. Union of India (AIR 1967 SC 887);
Shri Shri Tarakeshwar Sio Thakur Jiu v. Dar Dass Dey & Co. &
others (AIR 1979 SC 1669) and BanarsiDass Chadha and Brothers
vs. Lt. Governor, Delhi Administration & others (AIR 1978 SC
1587) and submit that the term “mining operation” have been
specifically defined under Section 3(d) of the MMDR Act, 1957 which
means any operation undertaken for the purpose of “winning”.
Consequently, the term “winning” would clearly encompass the
activity of extracting the mineral from the mines to the pithead. In
conclusion, it is submitted that whereas the original objection raised
by the State Government and its authority, was for the purported
lack of the authority and EC on the part of SMPL and once such
objection no longer be said to have existed in view of the subsequent
issue of letter dated 15.1.2015 by the MoEF (Annexure-16).
             Learned counsel for the petitioners further reiterated
that the present writ application does not seek any right to carry out
any mining operation by SMPL and the only relief sought for is with
regard to seeking transportation of ore already purchased by the
petitioners prior to 31.3.2014 and permission to transport the

                                   14
processed ore since payment of royalty and taxes have already been
made in respect thereof.
14.         At this point, it would be relevant to take note of the
decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court cited by the petitioners as
referred hereinabove.
            In the case of The Bihar Mines Ltd. (supra), the
Constitutional Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court has dealt with
Section 3(d) of the MMDR Act, 1957 and in particular, the scope of
the expression “winning” in Para-21, it has been noted as follows:
            “xx xx In a popular sense, winning a mineral means
            getting or extracting it from the mine. This is one of its
            dictionary meaning, see The Shorter Oxford
            Dictionary xx xx”.
            In the case of Shri Shri Tarakeshwar Sio Thakur Jiu
(supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court has dealt with the rights of
mining lessee under the MMDR Act, 1957 and in particular
Paragraphs-23 and 24, which are quoted as hereunder:
            “23. The Agreement (Ex.I) is not a very lengthy
            document. The material part of this document may be
            extracted as below:
            This deed of Agreement is executed to the effect
            following:-
            ……….. We the First Party, have been carrying on the
            business of sand near Haripal Station. Sand was
            necessary for carrying on the said business and the
            sand lying inside the land described in the schedule
            below should be taken out and proposal having been
            made to the second parties for the purpose of

                       15
business, the second parties agreed to take
settlement to the effect that we can take out the
sands of the said lands and become bound by the
agreement on the following terms and conditions of
taking out the sand from the said land only. xxxx”
24. From what has been extracted above, the
following characteristics of the transaction are clear:-
(i) A right to “raise” and “take out” and remove sand
“lying inside” the land in dispute was granted by the
plaintiff to the defendant. The words “raise” and
“take out sand” from “inside” the land are wide
enough to include not only the “right to carry out all
the operations” necessary for “extracting” sand, but
also to take it away and appropriate it. Construed in
the context of the document as a whole, these words
put it beyond doubt that rights to carry out “mining
operations” (within the definition in clause (d) of
Section 3 of the Central Act 67 of 1957) for winning
sand and to appropriate it, were granted.
(ii) These rights were granted for a period of 9 years,
commencing from April 27, 1950.
(iii) These rights were granted for a “price” fixed on
yearly basis, irrespective of the quantity of sand
extracted. The “price” fixed is Rs.66/- per annum.
This consideration is payable in the month of Chaitra
every year. In case of default, the First Party (grantee)
shall not be entitled “to raise the sand next year” and
the Second Party (grantor) shall have a right to
recover the arrears of rent together with interest at
12% by bringing a suit against the First Party.
(iv) “The Second Party will be entitled to take khas
possession of the land” “at the end of the stipulated
period”. This condition, (contained in paragraph 4 of
Ex.I) read along with the other parts of the
documents, necessarily implies that if the First Party
continues to pay the “price” as stipulated (a) he shall
be entitled to enter into and remain in exclusive khas
possession of the land for the purpose of carrying out
the mining operations for the full stipulated period of

                                    16
             9 years and (b) the Second Party (plaintiff) will not be
             entitled to retake khas possession of the land and
             revoke the so-called ‘license’ before the end of the
             said period of 9 years.”
15.          The State in support of its contentions placed reliance
on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Goa
Foundation, (2014) 6 SCC 590 wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court
placed reliance upon an earlier judgment rendered by it in the case
of Samaj Paribartan Samudaya, (2013) 8 SCC 154 in which it is
held as follows:
             “xxx inasmuch as the activity of dumping mineral
             wastes will pollute the environment, it will come
             within the meaning of activity of mining included in
             the schedule to the notification issued under Sub-
             rule(3) of Rule-5 of the Environment (Protection) Rules,
             1986 xxx”
16.          In this respect, learned counsel for the petitioners
submitted that the mining-lessee (SMPL) as on date, possesses the
necessary Environmental Clearance (EC) which remains valid up to
the year 2021 as clarified by MoEF in its letter dated 15.1.2015
under Annexure-16 and, therefore, there exists no legal impediment
in this regard.
17.          On a consideration of the facts and law as advanced by
the learned counsel for the respective parties, the facts that clearly
emanate are as follows:

                                  17
            (i)   M/S JSPL had entered into an agreement with
                  SMPL (mining lessee) for purchase of Iron Ore
                  (RoM).
            (ii)  The State of Odisha have granted permission to
                  SMPL for sell of Iron Ore (RoM) to the petitioners-
                  M/S JSPL to examine within the leasehold area
                  for crushing and sizing and SMPL was required to
                  pay royalty at the highest rate prescribed for the
                  lumpy Iron ore containing 65% Fe (irrespective of
                  the actual quality of the ore), which have been
                  paid.
18.         The   impugned      order/letter  directing  stoppage   of
transportation issued by the Deputy Director of Mines, Joda on
31.3.2014 as well as rejection of the petitioners’ representation by
the   Opposite   Parties-State   dated    23.6.2014   and   26.6.2014
proceeded on the ground that SMPL (mining lessee) did not possess
the necessary Environmental Clearance. This ground is no longer
valid in view of the clarification issued by the MoEF under letter
dated 15.1.2015 under Annexure-16.
19.         Admittedly, the petitioner-M/S JSPL holds a valid
licence under the OMPTS Rules, 2007 which entitles the petitioners

                                  18
to procure, process, store and sale of Iron Ore from the despatch
point within the leasehold area of SMPL.
             The essential issue which is contested by the parties is
the definition of term “mining operation”. While the State have
placed reliance on the definition of the aforesaid words as available
under the Mines Act and in particular in Section 2(i) and (h) thereof,
the petitioners have placed reliance on the definition of term “mining
operation” as given in Section 3(d) of MMDR Act, 1957, which means
any operations undertaken for the purpose of winning any mineral.
The expression has been dealt with by Hon’ble the Supreme Court of
India at various occasions and is no longer res integra. The term
“mining operation” under the MMDR Act read with OMPTS Rules,
are only legislations under which, the lessee’s activities within the
leasehold area are to be controlled.
20.          The fact situation as noted hereinabove is looked into
from another point of view that, there is no dispute that the
petitioners-M/s JSPL had a contract for purchase of ore with the
lease (SMPL) with agreement for sale. Such an agreement is
obviously covered under the Indian Contract Act, 1872 as well as the
Sale of Goods Act, 1930. In Chapter IV of the Sale of Goods Act,
1930, Section 33 needs to be noted as hereunder:
                    “33. Delivery.- Delivery of goods sold may be
             made by doing anything which the parties agree shall

                                   19
             be treated as delivery or which has the effect of
             putting the goods in the possession of the buyer or of
             any person authorized to hold them on his behalf.”
             In the facts situation of the present case, admittedly, the
seller-SMPL (lease) has effected delivery of RoM (iron ore) to the
petitioners and the petitioners have thereafter processed the ore into
sized iron ore and fine and is seeking permission for transportation
thereof. It would be clear from Section 33 of the Sale of Goods Act,
1930 that, ones SMPL (lease) delivers the goods to the purchaser i.e.
M/s JSPL (petitioners) and the petitioners in turn, has paid the
seller the value thereof including royalty and taxes. The contract is
duly performed and right, title and interest in such property gets to
be vested with the purchaser i.e. the petitioners-M/s JSPL.
Consequently, the attempt made by the Opposite Parties (State)
prevents such transportation after right, title and interest in the
property has been transferred to the purchaser i.e. M/s JSPL,
cannot be justified in law since the petitioners in their capacity as
buyer, is no longer governed by neither the MMDR Act, 1957 nor the
Mines Act, 1952.
21.          We are of the considered view that reference to the
definition of “mining operation” under the Mines Act, 1952 is wholly
misplaced. We are of the further considered view that the facts
situation that has arisen in the present case is not the situation

                                   20
where any reference or reliance can be placed in the Mines Act
which is clearly a beneficial legislation for the welfare of the
workman.
22.           The next point of issue relates to the reliance placed by
the State on the interim orders passed by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of Goa Foundation (supra). We are of the clear and
considered view that since MoEF have issued EC on 15.01.2015
under Annexure-16 clarifying that Environmental Clearance of SMPL
remains valid and coterminous within its lease up to the year 2021,
the said judgment has no application to the fact situation of the
present case.
23.           In the light of the discussion made hereinabove, we
hereby quash the letter dated 31.03.2014 issued by the Deputy
Director   of   Mines,   Joda   (O.P.  No.3)   directing   stoppage  of
transportation of Ore and consequently, we also direct quashing of
the letters/orders dated 23.6.2014 and 26.6.2014 under Annexure-1
by which order the petitioners-M/s JSPL’s representation was
rejected. We further direct that the Opposite Parties shall grant
permission to the petitioners-M/s JSPL to transport the entire
processed Ore (Lump and Fines) already stacked from the despatch
point located within the leasehold area of SMPL to its Pelletisation

                                           21
        Plant at Deojhar, Odisha and/or to the railway site from where it can
        be transported by the petitioners.
        24.            The writ application is thus allowed. No order as to
        costs.
                                                          …………………….
                                                            I.Mahanty, J.
B.K.Nayak, J. -              I agree.
                                                         ..……..……………...
                                                            B.K.Nayak, J.
        ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
            8th April, 2016/Ranjan


