     THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
          O.J.C. Nos.14184 of 1999 & 12616 of 2001
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                           --------------
In O.J.C. No.14184 of 1999
The Management of State Bank of India           …….      Petitioner
                              -Versus-
The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal,
Orissa & Another                                …….      Opp. Parties
         For Petitioner             : M/s. P.V.Ramdas &
                                            P.V.Balakrishna
         For Opp. Party No.1        : None.
         For Opp. Party No.2        : M/s. S.K.Pattanaik &
                                            U.C.Mohanty.
In O.J.C. No.12616 of 2001
Umacharan Behera                                …….      Petitioner
                              -Versus-
State Bank of India & Another                   …….      Opp. Parties
         For Petitioner             : M/s. S.K.Pattanaik &
                                            U.C.Mohanty.
         For Opp. Party No.1        : M/s. P.V.Ramdas &
                                            P.V.Balakrishna
         For Opp. Party No.2        : None.

                                           2
                                            ---------------
         P R E S E N T:
                    THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE INDRAJIT MAHANTY.
                              Date of Judgment: 15.07.2014
I. Mahanty, J.     On the consent of the learned counsels representing the
         respective parties, both the writ applications noted hereinabove are
         taken up together for hearing and disposed of by this common
         judgment. O.J.C. No.14184 of 1999 came to be filed by the petitioner-
         Management of State Bank of India seeking to challenge an award
         passed    by   the   Presiding  Officer,   Industrial Tribunal,  Orissa,
         Bhubaneswar in Industrial Dispute Case No.18 of 1996 (Central). In
         the said dispute, the following issue was referred to by the Union of
         India under Section 10(2A)(1)(d) of the Industrial Dispute Act, 1947
         vide their order dated 26.03.1996 for adjudication.
                             “Whether the action of the management of
                   State Bank of India in dismissing the services of Shri
                   U.C. Behera, Clerk of Rayagada Branch is lawful and
                   justified and if not, to what relief the workman is
                   entitled to?”
                   O.J.C. No.12616 of 2001 was filed by the petitioner-
         U.C.Behera seeking modification of the award passed by the learned
         Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Orissa, Bhubaneswar         vide
         order dated 22.09.1999 in Industrial Dispute Case No.18 of 1996
         (Central).
         2.        In the impugned award, the tribunal famed two issues:

                                    3
           (i)   Whether the action of the management of State Bank
                 of India in dismissing the services of Sri U.C. Behera,
                 Clerk of Rayagada Branch is lawful and justified?
           (ii)  To what relief, the workman is entitled?
           Insofar as issue No.I is concerned, after discussing the rival
claims as well as the evidence produced in course of the proceeding,
the Tribunal in para-12 of the judgment concluded the said issue in
favour of the opposite party-workman in the following manner:
                     “In the result, I hold that the enquiry
          suffered from denial of reasonable opportunity to the
          second party workman in his defence and the report
          of enquiry is wholly unreasoned and unsustainable in
          law being devoid of a dispassionate appreciation of
          evidence. Non-appreciation of show cause by the
          disciplinary authority recording the order of dismissal
          rendered such order questionable. In the facts and
          circumstances, the order of dismissal is not
          supportable in law.”
           Insofar as Issue No.II is concerned, the Tribunal came to
conclude as follows:
                     “In the facts and circumstances, while
          directing reinstatement, I hold that the second party
          is entitled to half the back wages. He is also entitled
          to refund of Rs.1500/- representing the shortage
          recovered from him.”
3.         In the light of the findings arrived at by the Industrial
Tribunal as recorded hereinabove, the management of the State Bank
of India have sought to challenge the award on the ground that the
opposite party-workman had approached this Court earlier in O.J.C.

                                   4
No.295 of 1984 and this Court in the said judgment had arrived at the
following findings:
                    “…..This being, however, a pure question of
           fact and nothing having been brought to our notice
           relating to perversity of the finding, we are not
           inclined to examine this submission of the learned
           counsel in the present proceeding…..”
           Placing reliance on the above, it is submitted that the
opposite party-workman produced no materials to show about any
error of law and/or non-adherence of natural justice and it is alleged
that the Tribunal had gone beyond the direction issued by this Court
in the aforesaid writ application.
4.         The next contention advanced on behalf of the petitioner-
management was that, although a criminal case had been initiated
against the opposite party-workman, which had ended by way of a
final report, the Criminal court not having recorded any evidence, law
is well settled that the Departmental Proceeding can proceed with its
rules and instructions. It is submitted that a strict rule of evidence is
not applicable to departmental enquiry and since the Enquiry Officer
found the workman guilty on the basis of evidence and ample
opportunity having been afforded to the workman in the course of
departmental enquiry, no reference ought to have been made to the
criminal case which had ended in submission of a final report. The
further contention has been advanced by the petitioner-management
that as per provisions of the Sastry Award and as per para-521(10)(c),

                                     5
when there is a previous grave misconduct committed by the self same
workman, the said workman in the particular issue being close to the
occurrence of the event, suspicion can be drawn and when the
workman      being    found   guilty   of grave     misconduct   necessary
punishment can be given. This assertion is made basing on the fact
that the customer had lodged a complaint for non-withdrawal of the
amount and the same cannot be denied from the evidence on record.
5.         It is further pleaded on behalf of the petitioner-management
that the learned Tribunal had not taken the pleadings of the Bank into
account and delivered the award in favour of the workman basing on
the evidence and the Enquiry Report. As per the law laid down by the
Apex Court, interference with the decision of departmental authorities
can be permitted when there is violation of statutory regulations or
violation of the principles of nature justice. It is further submitted that
law is well settled that if there is some legal evidence on which the
findings can be based, than the workman cannot canvass before the
court or the tribunal.
           Lastly it is submitted on behalf of the petitioner-management
that the opposite party-workman had been found guilty based on
clinching evidence produced before the Enquiry Officer by the
Handwriting Expert, who in his report has shown that the conduct of
grave misconduct has been committed by the workman. Thus, no
leniency in punishment should be shown as the banking business

                                   6
needs absolute devotion, diligence, integrity and honesty by each and
every employee. The fraud committed by the workman should certainly
be dealt with heavily and thus, the punishments awarded by the
authorities of the bank are correct.
6.        Learned counsel appearing for the workman, on the other
hand, submitted that in course of the suspension/disciplinary enquiry
the workman had approached this Court on several occasions. The
reference made by the petitioner-management to the observation of
this Court in O.J.C. No.295 of 1984, is wholly inaccurate and
inappropriate. The opposite party-workman had filed the aforesaid writ
application   challenging   his  suspension   since  03.08.78    pending
enquiry. In para-5 of the said judgment this Court took note of the fact
that the order of suspension of the petitioner was revoked on
28.07.1983 and concluded as follows:
                    “But then, the observations have to be
          confined to the period of suspension. In the present
          case, the order of suspension having been revoked
          and the petitioner having been directed to report for
          duty as stated in Annexure-13, it has to be held that
          the suspension came into an end and the petitioner
          got reinstated in service by virtue of the decision to
          revoke the order of suspension. This decision,
          therefore, cannot stand in the way of the petitioner in
          getting his full pay and allowances for the aforesaid
          period.”
7.        It is further submitted that the quotation made by the
petitioner-management insofar       as O.J.C.   No.14184    of  1999   is

                                   7
concerned, is incomplete. The portion quoted by the petitioner-
management is followed with the following words:
                    “ Though it is also faintly submitted that the
          enquiry proceeding was vitiated for violation of the
          principles of natural justice, nothing specific is
          brought to our notice in this regard.”
8.        In view of the aforesaid facts, learned counsel for the
opposite party-workman submitted that since O.J.C. No.295 of 1984
pertain to challenge to the order of suspension and not to the order of
dismissal, no reliance on the same beyond the extent covered by the
said judgment can be placed. He further submitted that the workman
though reinstated on 26.07.1983 was issued with the order of
dismissal on 29.07.1983 and the workman submitted a representation
to the Chief Regional Manager to revoke the order of dismissal on
16.08.1983 and with a further representation on 17.08.1983 alleging
that Enquiry Report had not been supplied to him but, no response
had been received against such representation. Therefore, after
disposal of O.J.C. No.295 of 1984 on 18.05.1990, the opposite party-
workman received his salary till his date of termination i.e. on
29.07.1983 and, thereafter, filed a fresh representation on 13.07.1990.
Not getting any response thereof, the petitioner filed a Civil Review
No.7 of 1991 and such review application came to be disposed of by
the order dated 26.07.1991 with a direction that the delinquent will file
a fresh representation before the appellate authority and the appellate

                                   8
authority was directed to pass a reasoned order without being biased
by the dismissal of O.J.C. No.295 of 1984. Accordingly, the workman
field a fresh appeal on 04.10.1991 calling upon the appellate authority
to provide copy of the documents sent to Handwriting Expert, copy of
the preliminary report, inquiry report and copies of various        other
documents as well was permission to engage a lawyer. Ultimately, the
appeal came to be rejected purportedly without recording any reasons
vide order dated 02.04.1992 compelling the petitioner to challenge the
same before this Court in O.J.C. No.9251 of 1992.
           In the aforesaid writ application, this Court vide order dated
08.04.1993 quashed the appellate order dated 02.04.1992 and
directed the appellate authority to re-dispose the representation of the
workman by a speaking order. Before the appellate authority, the
workman prayed for a personal hearing and to be supplied with the
documents such as Enquiry Report etc. and ultimately the Enquiry
Report was supplied to him on 01.09.1993. The appeal was heard on
01.10.1993 and came to be dismissed purportedly by placing reliance
solely on the evidence of one A.R.Samajdar, a private Handwriting
Expert, who had been examined by the management in course of the
disciplinary proceeding.
9.         On dismissal of the aforesaid appeal, the workman again
filed O.J.C. No.2615 of 1994 which came to be withdrawn with liberty
to agitate the matter before the appropriate labour authority.

                                  9
Thereafter the Government of India in the Ministry of Labour in
exercise of power under Section 10(2a)(1)(d) of the Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947 referred the disputes to the Industrial Tribunal for
adjudication.
          The learned counsel for the workman thereafter made the
following submissions on factual situation of the dispute.
          (i)   One Sri P.C. Padhi, holder of S.B. Account of Rayagada
                Branch of State Bank of India claim to have handed
                over Rs.250/- with deposit slip and his pass book
                No.2121 to one Sri Banchhanidhi Mishra, Cashier of
                the branch to deposit the same in his account. It is
                alleged that the said Sri Mishra did not deposit the
                same on 07.06.1977 and only deposit the same on
                08.06.1977.
          (ii)  It is further alleged by the account holder that on
                09.06.1977, a sum of Rs.1500/- was withdrawn from
                his Savings Bank Account and on that date, one
                B.Murali Mohan was working as the Savings Bank
                Counter Clerk and one T.S. Achary was the Paying
                Cashier.
          (iii) On 15.06.1977, the account holder P.C. Padhi made a
                complaint with the bank that the said withdrawal had
                not been made by him and basing on his complaint,

                       10
     the Branch Manager, V.S.S. Rao made a preliminary
     enquiry, copy of which has never been served on the
     workman.
(iv) It further appears that the Branch Manager lodged an
     F.I.R. on 05.07.1977 before the Rayagada Police
     Station without naming any accused. The police seized
     all the connected documents in original and took up
     the investigation and called upon five staff members to
     the Police Station and recorded their statements. The
     I.O. obtained the opinion of the Handwriting Expert on
     12.12.1977 basing on photo copies wherein, the
     Handwriting Expert opined that in the withdrawal slip
     dated 09.06.1977, the account holder’s signature was
     not genuine and that on the reverse of the withdrawal
     slip, the signature of one P.K.Ratha was indicated and
     the opinion expressed was that, the person who signed
     as P.C.Padhi (Account Holder) and the person who
     signed as P.K.Rath (withdrawer) was by the same
     person in his own handwriting though in different
     names.
(v)  The said Handwriting Expert by further report dated
     18.02.1978 stated that the signature of P.C. Padhi
     (Account Holder) on the reverse are in the handwriting

                       11
     of U.C. Behera (opposite party-workman) but he
     further pointed that a thorough investigation was
     required to establish the fact. On account of such
     report of the Handwriting Expert, the opposite party-
     workman was suspended on 03.08.1978.
(vi) While    the    criminal  proceeding     was    pending
     investigation, in the meanwhile charge sheet for the
     departmental proceeding was initiated on 07.12.1978
     and on 28.01.1980 the enquiry commenced. Sri Murali
     Mohan, the Savings Bank Counter Clerk was examined
     and he stated that he had paid the money to the
     bearer of the withdrawal slip i.e. Sri P.K. Rath but he
     denied having paid the said amount to Sri U.C. Behera
     (opposite party-workman). He has further stated that
     the savings bank account has cheque facility and
     ordinary withdrawal forms are not allowed to be used
     and he would not have allowed the payment of money
     if the pass book had not been produced and since the
     pass book with the withdrawal slip was produced by
     the said P.K. Rath, there were two signatures on the
     withdrawal slip resembling P.K.Rath the bearer of the
     instrument, who signed in the presence of the said
     Savings Bank Counter clerk. He further stated that no

                        12
      token was given to any staff member since in the case
      of withdrawal slip; the pass books are insisted upon
      and pass books must be presented along with the
      withdrawal   slip.  The   person  who    presented   the
      withdrawal form after taking payment had asked for
      the pass book and the said counter Clerk, Sri Murali
      Mohan returned the same to him.
(vii) It is further submitted that Sri T.S. Achary, the
      Cashier   who    made   payment,   was    examined    on
      30.01.1980. The Cashier stated that he paid the
      money to one Sri P.K. Rath on presentation of token.
      The Cashier claims to have asked the name of the
      bearer of the token since he generally insists the exact
      person to come and take payment when both the
      depositor and the person taking payment are well
      acquainted. Then in some specific case they allowed
      other person other than the bearer and he insist that
      he has not paid to any third party. Thereafter on
      14.08.1980    Sri  A.R.Samajdar    claiming   to  be   a
      Handwriting     Expert   submitted    a   report   dated
      12.12.1977, copy of which was never supplied to the
      delinquent-workman and only at the time of cross-
      examination, the documents relied on i.e. the S.S.

                                 13
                Cards was not supplied to the delinquent. It is
                asserted that the writing and the signature with the
                withdrawal slip compared with the leave application of
                the delinquent-workman and some salient points of
                agreement in writing habits were found. The said
                witness in his evidence has stated that similarities of
                form are likely to occur in some cases and bound to
                occur between the writings of two or more people when
                the writing is in the same language and script.
                Although the workman requested the inquiry officer to
                supply the documents produced by the Handwriting
                Expert under cover of his letter dated 27.8.1988 the
                same was never supplied.
10.      It is most important to note that the Branch Manager was
duly examined and produced copy of the S.S. Card, but copies thereof
was never supplied to the delinquent-workman and since no document
was supplied to the delinquent, he could not cross-examine the said
witness and it is submitted that the photo copies of the specimen
signature of Sri Padhi and photo copies of the withdrawal form were
produced but, the Enquiry Officer refused to give the said documents
to the delinquent-workman although by an earlier order dated
09.01.1980, the Enquiry Officer directed the Presiding Officer to
supply copy of the statements of the Branch Manager in the

                                  14
preliminary enquiry. Therefore, it is submitted that the delinquent was
seriously prejudiced for non-supply of the said documents and the
Enquiry Officer also refused to give the same vide order dated
11.11.1980.
11.        One Sri B.N. Mishra, Casher was examined on 02.12.1980
and he admitted that he had received a sum of Rs.250/- from the
account holder-P.C. Padhi on 07.06.1977 and deposited the same on
08.06.1977 but he was on leave on 09.06.1977 i.e. the date on which
the alleged fraudulent withdrawal of Rs.1500/- was made from the
account holder’s account.
12.        It is now most relevant to take note of the fact that P.C.Padhi
(Account Holder) was examined as a defence witness on 03.12.1980
and he stated that he never withdrew money through anyone else. He
further stated that he had paid the money to Sri B.N.Mishra on
06.06.1977. Thereafter the enquiry was concluded but no Enquiry
Report was supplied to the delinquent. Thereafter the investigating
officer in G.R. Case No.256 of 1977 submitted final report before the
court of the learned S.D.J.M., Rayagada in which Sri U.C. Behera-
delinquent workman had been originally shown as an accused and the
said final report was finally accepted and the proceeding was closed
due to lack of evidence.
13.        While   no  Enquiry    Report   was   ever   supplied   to  the
delinquent, a second show cause notice was called for vide letter dated

                                 15
02.05.1983 which the delinquent received on 23.05.1983 and
ultimately on 07.07.1983 show cause was duly submitted. On
26.07.1983 the order of suspension was revoked and the delinquent-
workman joined in the Rayagada Branch, State Bank of India on
29.07.1983 and on the same day, order of dismissal was issued to the
delinquent-workman although the show cause reply had been filed by
the delinquent and the same was never taken into consideration while
imposing punishment of dismissal.
14.       Learned counsel for the opposite party-workman submitted
that insofar as the evidence of A.R. Samajdar, a private Handwriting
Expert is concerned, the same was contradictory to the opinion
expressed by the police Handwriting Expert whose opinion formed the
basis of submission of final report. Learned counsel for the opposite
party-workman submitted that the Presiding Officer of the Industrial
Tribunal    considered   each  and   every   averment  made    by the
management as well as the workman and dealt with the evidence of
the Handwriting Expert in detail as follows:
                    “The Hand Writing Expert is examined as a
          witness by the management who supported his
          version borne out in the reports, marked Exts.2 & 3.
          The Hand Writing Expert has claimed that he was
          trained as a Hand Writing Expert in the Bengal C.I.D.
          between the years 1940 and 1942 on completion of
          training he was declared as a Hand Writing Expert.
          He worked as a Hand Writing Expert in the C.I.D. till
          the end of 1947 whereafter he left the branch to join
          the general police. He was eventually promoted to the
          I.P.S. On retirement he resumed practice as a Hand

                                 16
         Writing Expert and was enrolled in the L.Rs panel. He
         has been examining cases since then. He admitted in
         cross-examination that he does not have any
         certificate that he was an Expert in Hand Writings.
         Despite the absence of a certificate the version of the
         Hand Writing Expert merits credence to the extent it
         is worth. As has been indicated he noticed similarities
         of form in respect of four letters appearing in the
         admitted writings of the second party with the
         writings appearing in the questioned documents,
         namely, the withdrawal slip. In cross-examination he
         admitted that similarities of form are likely to occur
         and in some cases bound to occur between the
         writings of two or more people when the writing is in
         the same hand or script. He further explained that
         similarities of form may be accidental or simulated
         but similarities of features promoted and guided by
         the writing habit are the personal habits of the writer
         and are sure to identify him and distinguish him from
         others. He further deposed that agreement in
         movement, style etc. does not indicate identity of the
         writer. Explaining the concluding remarks given in
         Ext.3 that further investigation into the matter was
         indicated, he has stated that it was the departmental
         enquiry which was meant by his observation
         regarding further investigation. Whatever be the
         explanation tendered during enquiry by the Hand
         Writing Expert the two reports Exts.2 & 3 do not and
         cannot conclusively establish the authorship of the
         second party in the impugned documents. The
         disciplinary enquiry is ex-facie shorn of any
         corroborative feature implicating the second party as
         the perpetrator of the fraud and this has not any way
         driven home the charges of guilt of the delinquent.”
15.      The Industrial Tribunal took into consideration the evidence
of B.Murali Mohan, the savings bank counter Clerk as well as the
evidence of T.S. Achary the Cashier as well as the evidence of Sri
P.C.Padhy account holder-complainant and has succinctly taken into
consideration those evidence as follows:

                                   17
                     “The version of B.Murali Mohan and
          T.S.Achary completely excludes the possibility of the
          second party handling the withdrawal slip and
          drawing the proceeds thereunder Ext.F, the report of
          the enquiry bears clear recitals that the complicity of
          the second party in the alleged fraud could not be
          established by any eye account of the incident. Mere
          past acquittance of the second party with the drawer,
          namely, Prafulla Chandra Padhi does not lead to an
          un-irresistible conclusion that it is the second party
          alone and none else who was responsible for the
          fraud.”
16.       Having come to the aforesaid findings, the Tribunal came to
the following conclusion in para-8 which is quoted hereunder.
                     “In such circumstances, there is no escape
          from the conclusion despite the fact that the
          adjudication relates to a disciplinary proceeding that
          the management, the accuser has failed to discharge
          the onus of proof required in the case of major
          misconduct. The acceptance of the final report in the
          criminal case as borne out in Ext.31 without protest
          is a piece of circumstance suggestive of absence of a
          prima facie case against the second party-workman
          and viewed in that angle the charge must be held
          unfounded so far as the workman is concerned.”
          In view of the aforesaid findings, with which this Court most
respectfully agrees, the second contention advanced on behalf of the
petitioner also fails. Insofar as the third and fourth contention of the
petitioner-management are concerned, the said are merely recorded to
be rejected essentially because while there can be no two issues on the
point that, if there exists some legal evidence on which the findings
can be based, the order passed by the disciplinary authority ought to
be accepted.

                                  18
17.        In the case at hand, the award passed by the Industrial
Tribunal clearly establishes the contrary that there exists no legally
tenable or acceptable evidence produced in course of the enquiry to
justify the conclusion of any finding against the delinquent-workman
and conversely in the absence of any legal evidence, the Tribunal, in
this Courts considered view, has correctly answered the reference in
favour of the workman and against the management. Insofar as the
last contention of the petitioner-management is concerned, this is not
a case where any leniency is being shown to a person who lacks
devotion, diligence or integrity but, on the contrary, this is a case,
where the Tribunal has concluded that, it is a case of no evidence and
consequently while there can be no doubt that every employee
including a bank employee is required to show devotion, diligence,
integrity and honesty in every possible manner. The present case is
one, where the Tribunal has assessed and gone into in detail all the
evidence produced in course of the departmental proceeding both, by
the management as well as the delinquent-workman and came to
conclude and answer the reference in favour of the workman.
18.        Insofar as the challenge made by the workman to the award
vis-à-vis limiting the back-wages to 50% is concerned, on perusal of
the award, it appears that the Tribunal has considered the inordinate
delay on the part of the workman to raise the dispute and approach
the Tribunal and such conduct was found to be adequate justification

                                     19
for limiting back-wages to 50%. This Court is in respectful agreement
with the views expressed by the Tribunal in this regard.
19.          In view of the aforesaid factual situation, this Court finds no
error whatsoever in the award passed by the Industrial Tribunal,
Orissa, Bhubaneswar and consequently the writ applications i.e.
O.J.C. No.14184 of 1999 filed by the management seeking to challenge
the award and O.J.C. No.12616 of 2001 filed by the workman praying
for full back-wages, are dismissed and the order of the Tribunal is
affirmed. The interim order passed earlier stands vacated. The Registry
is directed to intimate this order to the Tribunal forthwith.
                                            …………………….……
                                                 I.Mahanty,J.
 ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
 15th July, 2014/PKP


