                     HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
                             CRLMC NO.3078 OF 2012
           In the matter of an application under Section 482 of the Code of
           Criminal Procedure.
                                              --------------
           Aditya Kumar Nag                                 ……        Petitioner
                                             -Versus-
           State of Orissa
           (Vigilance Department)                          ……         Opp. Party
                     For Petitioner           : M/s. T. Nanda & S.N. Mishra
                    For Opp. Party            : Mr. P.K. Pani,
                                                  Additional Standing Counsel
                                          ---------------
           PRESENT:
                   THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE INDRAJIT MAHANTY.
                           Date of judgment: 15.07.2014
I. Mahanty, J.       The present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has come
           to be filed by the petitioner-Aditya Kumar Nag, Junior Clerk at
           Collectorate, Balangir, Dist. Balangir seeking to challenge an order of
           cognizance dated 02.08.2005 passed by the learned Special Judge
           (Vigilance), Sambalpur in C.T.R. Case No.39/83 of 2005-07, inter alia,

                                  2
on the ground that the composite order of cognizance and issuance of
process passed by the learned Special Judge (Vigilance), Sambalpur
had been passed in a mechanical manner without prima facie
satisfaction regarding the complicity of the petitioner in the alleged
commission of the offence and as such the impugned order indicates
non-application of judicial mind.
2.        Mr. T. Nanda, learned counsel for the petitioner contended
that Section 190 Cr.P.C. which stipulates the requirement of taking of
cognizance and Section 204 Cr.P.C. deals with the requirement for
issue of process and consequently contends that an order of
cognizance cannot be equated with the issuance of process and an
order of cognizance does not ipso facto require issuance of process
which can only be issued by a Magistrate taking cognizance of an
offence to form an opinion whether there is sufficient ground for
proceeding or not. Accordingly, it is submitted that it would be clear
from the order impugned that the court below has formed no opinion
regarding his subjective satisfaction about commission of alleged
offences by the petitioner and the court below has erroneously
equated the order of cognizance with that of issuance of process in a
mechanical manner without recording his prima facie satisfaction. In
this respect, reliance has placed by the learned counsel for the
petitioner on the judgment rendered by this Court in the case of Saroj

                                  3
Kumar Mahapatra V. State of Orissa, (2008) 39 OCR 895 as well as
several other judgments referred therein. In the aforementioned case,
this Court came to conclude that the order of taking cognizance
impugned therein did not disclose the prima facie satisfaction of the
trial court regarding availability of materials for taking cognizance
against the petitioner, inasmuch as the subjective satisfaction of the
trial court with regard to the complicity of the petitioner in the alleged
offence has not been disclosed while proceeding to take cognizance of
the offence under Section 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the P.C.
Act. Accordingly, the order of cognizance was set aside and the matter
was remitted back to the trial court to peruse the materials on record
and thereafter to arrive at prima facie satisfaction as to whether
materials were available for taking cognizance of the offence against
the petitioner.
3.        Mr. P.K. Pani, learned Additional Standing Counsel for the
Vigilance Department, on the other hand, contended that the fact
situation that arose for consideration in the case of Saroj Kumar
Mahapatra (supra) and the case at present hand are distinct and,
therefore, the earlier judgment of this Court would have no
application to the present circumstances of the case. In this respect, it
would be relevant to quote the order of cognizance in the case of Saroj
Kumar Mahapatra (supra), which is as follows:

                                   4
                 “Case    record   is   received   from   C.J.M.,
          Berhampur. Register. Cognizance U/s.13(1)(d) r/w
          Sec.13(2) of P.C. Act is taken against the accused-
          Prahalad Palo and others. Issue summons to the accd.
          Persons, fixing 12.9.2002 for appearance of accd.”
And, in the present case, the impugned order reads as under:
                 “Case record is received from C.J.M., Sambalpur
          and taken to my file. Register.
                 Charge sheet U/s.13 (2) R/W 13(1)(d)/7 P.C.
          Act, 1988. Perused the F.I.R., C.S., C.D. and other
          documents and found that there is prima facie case
          against the accused Aditya Kumar Nag. Cognizance
          U/s.13(2) R/W 13(1)(d)/7 P.C. Act is taken.
                 Issue summon to accused. Call on 5.9.05 for
          appearance.”
          It is submitted on behalf of the State that in the case at
hand, the trial court has applied its judicial mind and in its order
taking cognizance and the same would be clearly visible from the
words “perused”, “reveals commission of offence” and “found that
there is prima facie case”.
4.        In the light of the submissions as recorded hereinabove, it
would be relevant at this stage also to take note of the basic
allegations against the present petitioner which would appears from
the records appended to the application. It appears that Sambalpur
Vigilance P.S. Case No.19 of 2005 came to be registered on
03.04.2005 under Section 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d)/7 of the P.C. Act, 1988
purportedly on the basis of an alleged demand for bribe made by the
petitioner to the complainant pursuant to which a trap was formed by

                                              5
            the vigilance with witnesses and it would appears from the records
            that demand was made seeking the bribe and payment was made with
            the tainted notes and the petitioner allegedly accepted the money and
            put it in his office almirah.
            5.        On perusal of the records of the case here, it is clear from
            the impugned order that it is not necessary for a Court to record a
            detailed discussions on the merits of a case so as to find out if the
            allegations and the charges are true or not, but the Court has to apply
            its judicial mind and test the materials on records. In the case at
            hand, I am satisfied that the order of cognizance in the present case
            which indicates perusal of the F.I.R. as well as charge sheet, seizure
            list and sanction order itself clearly establishes the existence of a
            prima facie case and, therefore, I am of the considered view that the
            judgment of this Court in the case of Saroj Kumar Mahapatra (supra)
            do not apply the fact situations that arise for consideration in the
            present case and are distinct on facts. Consequently, the present
            CRLMC has no merits and stands dismissed.
                                                           ………………………….
                                                               I.Mahanty,J.
ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
15th July, 2014/RKMishra

6

