             THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA : CUTTACK
                           W.P.(C). No.25211 of 2013
             _______________________________________________
       In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
       Constitution of India.
                                 --------------
       MGM Minerals Ltd. & another                  ……          Petitioner
                                     -Versus-
       State Environment Impact Assessment
       Authority (SEIAA) & another                  ……          Opp. Parties
                 For Petitioners     :     Mr. Y.Das (Sr. Advocate)
                                            M/s. Rajjeet Roy & S.K.Singh
                 For Opp. Parties :        Mr.D.Panda (Addl. Govt. Advocate)
                                           Mr.A.K.Bose (Asst. Solicitor General)
       PRESENT:
              THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE INDRAJIT MAHANTY
                                        &
                 THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE B.N.MAHAPATRA
           Date of hearing: 19.11.2014          Date of Judgment: 24.12.2014
I. Mahanty, J. In the present writ application the petitioner (MGM Minerals
       Ltd.) have sought to challenge the order/letter dated 11.12.2009
       issued by the State Environment Impact Assessment Authority
       (hereinafter referred to as ‘SEIAA’), Odisha (Opposite Party No.1)

                                  2
whereby, the Environmental Clearance in respect of the petitioner
(mining project) have granted for a period of five years only, which it is
alleged is not in consonance with the provisions of Environmental
Impact Assessment Notification. 2006.
2.          Mr.Y.Das, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
petitioners asserted that the SEIAA have granted the petitioner-
company “Environmental Clearance” for a period of 5 years for its
mining project at village Patabeda vide letter dated 11.12.2009 even
though the Union of India in the Ministry of Environment and Forest
(Opposite Party No.2) grants Environmental Clearances in respect of
the mining projects for the “entire project life subject to a maximum
period of 30 years” under the self-same notification of 2006.
3.        Shorn of unnecessary details, suffice it is to note herein that
the petitioner-company has been granted with a mining lease over an
area of 28.397      hectare at   village-Patabeda in the      district of
Sundergarh for a period of 20 years w.e.f. 8th March 2006 for mining of
iron ore by the Government of Odisha vide lease-deed dated 8.3.2006.
In   terms    of  the   Environment    Impact    Assessment     Authority
Notification,   1994  framed   by   the   Union   of   India  under   the
Environment Protection Act, 1986, the petitioner-company was
mandatorily required to obtain “Environmental Clearance” before
starting operation of new mines and/or subsequent increase in

                                   3
production. The petitioner-company had applied for “Environmental
Clearance” for the mining lease for the purpose of production of iron
ore of 0.16 Million Ton Per Annum (MTPA). The Union of India,
Ministry of Environment and Forest (O.P.2) vide his letter dated
21.7.2005 granted “Environmental Clearance” in respect of the leased
area basing upon the mining plan duly approved by the Indian Bureau
of Mines (hereinafter referred to as ‘IBM’) on 8.11.2002. In terms of
such mining plan, the life of the mine was conceptualized for a period
of 20 years basing on the projected quantum of production and date
available regarding the quantum of iron ore reserve.
4.        On the basis of such “Environmental Clearance” obtained
from Opposite Party No.2 (Union of India), the petitioner-company
commenced its mining operation on its lease hold and thereafter
sought to enhance its production capacity of iron ore from 0.16 MTPA
to  0.8    MTPA.   Prior  to   giving  effect to  such    enhancement,
“Environmental Clearance” once again was required and in the
interregnum, the Central Government had issued a Notification dated
14.9.2006 creating a “State Level Environment Impact Assessment
Authority” (SEIAA)-Opposite Party No.1 in exercise of its power vested
under the Environment Protection Act, 1986 and in terms of such
Notification, persons desirous for expansion of their existing mining
projects, (below 50 hectare of land area) were required to approach the

                                  4
SEIAA (O.P.1) instead of the Union of India (O.P.2). In other words, all
mining projects which were for less than 50 hectares fell under
Category ‘B’ and they could seek approvals from the State-SEIAA and
the projects which came under Category ‘A’ i.e. above 50 hectares of
land, would have to approach the Union of India (Ministry of
Environment and Forest and the Expert Appraisal Committee) thereof
constituted by the Central Government. Since the petitioners’ lease
area was below 50 hectares of land and since the petitioners sought to
enhance its production from 0.16 MTPA to 0.8 MTPA, in view of
Notification dated 14.9.2006, it filed an application for Environmental
Clearance for seeking enhancement of production through the State
(SEIAA).
5.        The application filed by the petitioner-company to the SEIAA
(Odisha) for grant of “Environmental Clearance” for enhancement of
production from 0.16 MTPA to 0.8 MTPA at Patabeda was granted on
11.12.2009 for a period of 5 years. It appears that the petitioner-
company thereafter had sent representation to the SEIAA objecting to
limiting the Environmental Clearance for 5 years and in response to
the representation of the petitioner-company, the SEIAA vide letter
dated 2.3.2010 informed the petitioner-company that its request for
extension of validity period of Environmental Clearance was not
considered by the authority, on the ground that, the mining scheme

                                   5
submitted by the petitioner-company was valid for a period of 5 years
and the petitioner had not furnished any Environmental Management
Plan beyond 5 years.
6.        The petitioner-company once again sought for a fresh mining
approval from the IBM and such approval was obtained from the IBM
on 1.4.2011 and in terms of such mining plan, the average rate of
production of 5.84,008 MT as planned in the scheme period, the
deposit would last for 19 years and consequently, once again the
petitioner made a representation to the SEIAA for extension of the
period of “Environmental Clearance” to cover the ”entire project life”.
Since in terms of the Environment Impact Assessment Notification,
2006 and Clause-9 thereof, “that prior Environmental Clearance
granted for a project or activity shall be valid for a period of ten years
in the case of River Valley projects [item 1(c) of the Schedule], project
life has been estimated by the Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) or
State Level Expert Appraisal Committee subject to a maximum of 30
years for mining projects and 5 years in the case of all other projects
and activities.”
          Although the petitioner-company submitted the mining plan
dated 1.4.2011 signifying life of the mines for atleast 19 years to the
Opposite Party No.1 and send reminder on 18.3.2013 seeking

                                    6
extension of the “Environmental Clearance”, no response thereto was
received. Consequently, the present writ application came to be filed.
7.          When notices were issued by this Court to the opposite
parties, Opposite Party No.2-Union of India (MOEF) filed its affidavit
and in Para-5 thereto is quoted hereunder:
          “That in respect of the issue raised by the petitioner
          Respondent No.2 submits that the issue or grievances is
          caused of the decision of the SEIAA i.e. Respondent
          No.1 as mentioned by the petitioner. The answering
          Respondent No.2 has no comments to offer on the
          decision of SEIAA, Odisha. Para-9 of the EIA notification
          2006 deals with the validity of EC which is annexed at
          annexure-2 of the petition. The Para reads as follows:
          The “Validity of Environmental Clearance” is meant the
          period from which a prior environmental clearance is
          granted by the regulatory authority, or may be
          presumed by the applicant to have been granted under
          sub-paragraph (iv) of paragraph 7 above, to the start of
          production operations by the project or activity, or
          completion of all construction operations in case of
          construction projects (item 8 of the Schedule), to which
          the application for prior environmental clearance refers.
          The prior environmental clearance granted for a project
          or activity shall be valid for a period of ten years in the
          case of River Valley projects (item 1(c) of the Schedule),
          project life as estimated by Expert Appraisal Committee
          or State Level Expert Appraisal Committee subject to a
          maximum of thirty years for mining projects and five
          years in the case of all other projects and activities.”
          Since the EC has been granted by SEIAA Odisha and
          the subject matter is project specific, Respondent 1 may
          state the position with regard to validity of EC granted.”
          The SEIAA (Opposite Party No.1) also filed its counter
affidavit through its Member Secretary and sought to justify the issue

                                  7
of Environmental Clearance and limiting the same to 5 years in the
following manner:
          “6.. That, the EC issued for a period of 5 years is in
         consonance with the provision and spirit of the EIA
         Notification, 2006 because EC granted for longer period
         gives rise to the possibility of unscientific mining and
         excess extraction of minerals over and above the limit
         prescribed.
          That, the validity period of EC for mining projects can
         have a maximum validity period of 30 years but cannot
         have a uniform applicability as the decision of the
         Authority is based on the recommendation of the State
         Expert Appraisal Committee, which is composed of
         technical experts who undertake screening and appraisal
         of the project and after necessary scientific deliberation
         recommends the period for which the EC is to be
         granted.”
8.        Mr.A.K.Bose, learned Asst. Solicitor General representing
both the opposite parties placed reliance on Para-6 of the affidavit of
SEIAA as quoted hereinabove. The Court asked the Asst. Solicitor
General to peruse the terms and conditions under which the SEIAA
had granted “Environmental Clearance” to the petitioner-company
dated 11.12.2009 and further enquired as to whether the terms and
conditions stipulated therein were inadequate for the purpose of
seeking effective control over the mining operation of the petitioner-
company.
          In his usual fairness, the learned Asst. Solicitor General
considered that the terms were extremely rigorous in nature and the
SEIAA continued to possess pervasive control over the operation of

                                    8
mine even though the “Environmental Clearance” had been granted to
it.
9.        Mr. Y.Das, learned Sr. Advocate for the petitioners submitted
that the Union of India for Category ‘A’ cases where mining leases were
much     more      than    50   hectares,  have   consistently    granted
Environmental Clearances either for the project life or 30 years
whichever was lesser. He also asserted that after SEIAAs were
constituted in various States of the country, all such SEIAAs have
been granting mining projects with Environmental Clearances either
for the project life or for 30 years whichever was lesser and it was only
in Odisha that the State (SEIAA) have limited grant of “Environmental
Clearance” to 5 years. The justification sought to be made by the
SEIAA for limiting such clearances to 5 years of mining projects as
explained from Para-6 of the counter affidavit, quoted hereinabove,
clearly shows an ambivalent response and the Union of India as well
as various other State-SEIAAs have been following the Government of
India Notification both in letter and spirit. The period of 5 years as
mentioned in the Ministry of Environment Notification, 2006 was
clearly meant for non-mining projects and vis-à-vis mining projects,
the Notification is clear and categorical, indicating that the said
“Environmental Clearance” ought to be granted for the project life as
estimated by the State Level Expert Appraisal Committee subject to a

                                    9
maximum of 30 years and 5 years in the case of all other projects and
activities.
10.        In view of the aforesaid facts situation that has arisen, we are
of the considered view that the State Level Expert Appraisal Committee
has not acted in compliance of the direction issued by the MOEF in its
Notification, 2006. Therefore, we are of the view that as far as the
mining projects are concerned, the State Level Expert Appraisal
Committee ought to have considered the “project life” of the mines
upto maximum 30 years and not limited the same for 5 years only.
Limiting the same to 5 years only appears to us to be wholly arbitrary
and not in consonance with the direction issued by the MOEF. In the
present case, we find that the petitioners had submitted the mining
plan duly approved by the IBM on 1.4.2011 to Opposite Party No.1
(SEIAA) and the said mining plan ought to have been acted upon by
the SEIAA for the purpose of suitably extending the Environmental
Clearance granted to the petitioners to cover the period of 19 years
mentioned therein.
11.        Accordingly, the writ application is allowed directing the
Opposite Party No.1 (SEIAA) to grant extension of “Environmental
Clearance” granted to the petitioner-company for a period of 19 years
from 1.4.2011 in terms of the approval of mining plan granted by the
Indian Bureau of Mines dated 1.4.2011 forthwith.

                                           10
                     By interim order dated 10.12.2014, this Court had directed
          the petitioners that the mining operation shall not be impeded on
          account of the “Environmental Clearance” till delivery of this judgment
          and consequently, this Court directs that till the orders in compliance
          of these directions are issued by Opposite Party No.1 (SEIAA), within a
          period of four weeks from today, the aforesaid interim order shall
          remain in operation.
                                                          …………………….
                                                            I.Mahanty, J.
B.N.Mahapatra, J. -        I agree.
                                                         …………..………….
                                                          B.N.Mahapatra, J.
       ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
             24th December, 2014/RKS


