$~J-
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                   Judgment Reserved on : 02.08.2019
%                                  Judgment Pronounced on: 22.08.2019
+      CS(OS) 53/2017
       PANKAJ OSWAL                                             ..... Plaintiff
                            Through       Mr.Sanjeev Puri, Sr.Adv. with
                                          Mr.Mayank Mishra and Mr.Raghav
                                          Sabharwal, Advs.
                            versus
       ARUNA OSWAL & ORS                                  ..... Defendants
                            Through       Mr.Sandeep Sethi, Sr.Adv. with
                                          Mr.Sanjiv Kakra, Mr.Bharat Arora
                                          and Mr.Gaurav Arora, Advs. for D-1
                                          & D-2.
                                          Mr.Ajay Sondhi, Adv. for D-3.
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE JAYANT NATH
JAYANT NATH, J.
IA No.14656/2018
1.     This application is filed by defendants No. 1 and 2 under Order 6
Rules 17 CPC for amendment of the written statement. The plaintiff has filed
the accompanying suit seeking a preliminary decree of partition declaring
that the plaintiff is entitled to 1/4th share in the suit properties listed in the
schedule as also the properties belonging to the Oswal family. A decree of
rendition of accounts with respect to the profit and proceeds realized by the
defendants from the suit properties as also the properties belonging to the
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                      Page 1 of 14

Oswal Family after the demise of Sh.Abhey Kumar Oswal is also sought.
Other connected reliefs are also sought in the plaint.
2.     It is stated that the plaintiff is the eldest son of Late Sh.Abhey Kumar
Oswal. It is further stated that plaintiff‟s father was a Hindu by religion and a
substantial shareholder, director and chairperson of the Board of Directors of
Oswal Agro Mills Ltd. and Oswal Greentech Ltd. In addition to the above,
the father owned large number of movable and immovable properties. It is
stated that Sh.Abhey Kumar Oswal died intestate on 29.03.2016. Hence, the
present suit.
3.     The defendants filed the written statement where they have denied the
claim of the plaintiff. It has been stated that defendant No. 1 was appointed
by Late Sh.Abhey Kumar Oswal as his nominee in his demat account and
that the said nomination constitutes the last testament of late Sh.Abhey
Kumar Oswal. Other such defences are also taken.
4.     Issues have yet to be framed. Defendants No. 1 and 2 have now filed
the present application seeking amendment in their written statement.
Broadly by the amendment what is sought to be added is that on account of
the activities of the plaintiff including certain forgery, etc. late Sh.Abhey
Kumar Oswal had in October 2006 decided to completely expel, disown,
disinherit the plaintiff from his estate. It is stated that late Sh.Abhey Kumar
Oswal categorically stated that defendant No. 1 shall be entitled to inherit his
estate and the plaintiff will have no right, title or interest in the estate of Late
Sh.Abhey Kumar Oswal. An oral family settlement was arrived at in October
2006 in the Oswal Family and as such plaintiff is not entitled to inherit any
part of the estate of Late Sh. Abhay Kumar Oswal. It is further stated that
Late Sh. Abhay Kumar Oswal took various steps like removal of the
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                     Page 2 of 14

plaintiff‟s name from the HUF account held in HDFC bank. He also
included defendant No. 1 and 2 as Coparceners in the HUF account held by
him. Late Sh.Abhey Kumar Oswal also appointed defendant No. 1 as his
sole nominee in his demat account.
5.     The plaintiff has strongly opposed the above application.
6.     I have heard learned senior counsel for the parties.
7.     Learned senior counsel for defendants No. 1 and 2 has urged that there
was nothing in the original written statement to show that the answering
defendants had conceded to the plea of the plaintiff that Late Sh.Abhey
Kumar Oswal died intestate. It is stated relying upon the paras of the written
statement that it was clearly spelt out in the same that Late Sh.Abhey Kumar
Oswal in his demat account had nominated defendant No. 1 to the complete
exclusion of other parties showing his intention that defendant No. 1 would
succeed and inherit the estate. Based on subsequent facts now made
available, reliance is also sought to be placed on the family settlement which
was inadvertently not mentioned. Hence, the need to amend the written
statement. Reliance is placed on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the
case of Baldev Singh & Ors. Vs. Manohar Singh & Anr., (2006) 6 SCC 498
and Usha Bala Shahed Swami & Ors. vs. Kiran Appaso Swami & Ors.,
(2007) 5 SCC 602 to contend that while amending a written statement even
contradictory statements or statements substituting or altering a defence or
inconsistent pleas are allowed to be added.
8.     Learned senior counsel for the plaintiff has however strongly urged
that there are clear admissions in the written statement by defendants No. 1
and 2 which would have led to passing of a decree in favour of the plaintiff.
He also relies upon para 9 of the written statement where it is stated that
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                Page 3 of 14

before partition of the estate of Late Sh.Abhey Kumar Oswal all his debts
and liabilities are liable to be settled. He states that these admissions cannot
be retraced by the defendants by amendment to the written statement.
Reliance is placed on the judgment of a Coordinate Bench of this court in
Gurcharan Kaur & Ors. vs. Ranjeet Singh Sandhu, 2017 SCC OnLine Del.
11489 and of the Supreme Court in the case of Modi Spinning & Weaving
Mills Co. Ltd. & Anr. vs. M/s. Ladha Ram & Co., (1976) 4 SCC 320. He
also relies upon the pleadings of defendant No. 1 in the suits filed by her,
namely, CS(COMM) 1206/2018 and CS(COMM) 1208/2018 for recovery of
the alleged dues from third parties being the LR of Late Sh.Abhey Kumar
Oswal. He points that in the said proceedings the plaintiff has been
impleaded as one of the LRs of Late Sh.Abhey Kumar Oswal.
9.     I may first see the legal position regarding the amendment of the
written statement. Order 6 Rule 17 CPC reads as follows:-
     “ORDER VI : PLEADINGS GENERALLY
     xxx
     17. Amendment of pleadings
     The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow either party
     to alter or amend his pleadings in such manner and on such terms
     as may be just, and all such amendments shall be made as may be
     necessary for the purpose of determining the real questions in
     controversy between the parties.
     xxx”
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                  Page 4 of 14

10.    The Supreme Court in Baldev Singh & Ors. vs. Manohar Singh &
Anr.(supra) noted the legal position regarding the amendment of the written
statement as follows:-
     “15. Let us now take up the last ground on which the application
     for amendment of the written statement was rejected by the High
     Court as well as the trial court. The rejection was made on the
     ground that inconsistent plea cannot be allowed to be taken. We
     are unable to appreciate the ground of rejection made by the High
     Court as well as the trial court. After going through the pleadings
     and also the statements made in the application for amendment of
     the written statement, we fail to understand how inconsistent plea
     could be said to have been taken by the appellants in their
     application for amendment of the written statement, excepting
     the plea taken by the appellants in the application for amendment
     of written statement regarding the joint ownership of the suit
     property. Accordingly, on facts, we are not satisfied that the
     application for amendment of the written statement could be
     rejected also on this ground. That apart, it is now well settled that
     an amendment of a plaint and amendment of a written statement
     are not necessarily governed by exactly the same principle. It is
     true that some general principles are certainly common to both,
     but the rules that the plaintiff cannot be allowed to amend his
     pleadings so as to alter materially or substitute his cause of action
     or the nature of his claim has necessarily no counterpart in the
     law relating to amendment of the written statement. Adding a
     new ground of defence or substituting or altering a defence does
     not raise the same problem as adding, altering or substituting a
     new cause of action. Accordingly, in the case of amendment of
     written statement, the courts are inclined to be more liberal in
     allowing amendment of the written statement than of plaint and
     question of prejudice is less likely to operate with same rigour in
     the former than in the latter case.
     16. This being the position, we are therefore of the view that
     inconsistent pleas can be raised by the defendants in the written
     statement although the same may not be permissible in the case
     of plaint. In Modi Spg. and Wvg. Mills Co. Ltd. v. Ladha Ram &
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                 Page 5 of 14

     Co.[(1976) 4 SCC 320] this principle has been enunciated by this
     Court in which it has been clearly laid down that inconsistent or
     alternative pleas can be made in the written statement.
     Accordingly, the High Court and the trial court had gone wrong
     in holding that the defendant-appellants are not allowed to take
     inconsistent pleas in their defence.”
11.    Similarly reference may be had to the judgment of the Supreme Court
in Usha Bala Shahed Swami & Ors. vs. Kiran Appaso Swami &
Ors.(supra) where the Supreme Court stated as follows:-
     “21. As we have already noted herein earlier that in allowing the
     amendment of the written statement a liberal approach is a
     general view when admittedly in the event of allowing the
     amendment the other party can be compensated in money.
     Technicality of law should not be permitted to hamper the courts
     in the administration of justice between the parties. In L.J. Leach
     & Co. Ltd. v. Jardine Skinner & Co. [AIR 1957 SC 357] this
     Court observed
        “that the courts are more generous in allowing amendment
        of the written statement as the question of prejudice is less
        likely to operate in that event”.
     In that case this Court also held
        “that the defendant has right to take alternative plea in
        defence which, however, is subject to an exception that by
        the proposed amendment the other side should not be
        subjected to serious injustice”.
      22. Keeping these principles in mind, namely, that in a case of
     amendment of a written statement the courts would be more
     liberal in allowing than that of a plaint as the question of
     prejudice would be far less in the former than in the latter and
     addition of a new ground of defence or substituting or altering a
     defence or taking inconsistent pleas in the written statement can
     also be allowed, we may now proceed to consider whether the
     High Court was justified in rejecting the application for
     amendment of the written statement.”
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                Page 6 of 14

12.     The legal position that follows from the above judgments is that law is
more liberal when an application for amendment to a written statement is
filed and that while amending a written statement, adding a new ground of
defence or substituting or altering a defence is permissible. The courts are
more liberal regarding amendment to a written statement.
13.     I may also refer to the judgment relied upon by the learned senior
counsel for the plaintiff. In the case of Modi Spinning & Weaving Mills Co.
Ltd. & Anr. vs. M/s. Lodha Ram & Co.(supra) the Supreme Court was
dealing with a matter where in the written statement the defendant had stated
that the agreement in question is applicable to transactions in which the
plaintiff works as a stockiest-cum-distributor of the defendant and is not
applicable to the transaction to which the plaintiff acts as a principle. Three
years after the filing of the written statement an application was filed for
amendment of the written statement where deletion of paragraphs 25 and 26
were sought and substitution of new paragraphs. The proposed amendments
sought to add that the plaintiff throughout acted as an agent of the defendant
and hence has no locus standi to file the suit. In those facts the Supreme
Court held as follows:-
      “9. The decision of the trial court is correct. The defendants
      cannot be allowed to change completely the case made in paras
      25 and 26 of the written statement and substitute an entirely
      different and new case.
      10. It is true that inconsistent pleas can be made in pleadings but
      the effect of substitution of paras 25 and 26 is not making
      inconsistent and alternative pleadings but it is seeking to displace
      the plaintiff completely from the admissions made by the
      defendants in the written statement. If such amendments are
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                  Page 7 of 14

     allowed the plaintiff will be irretrievably prejudiced by being
     denied the opportunity of extracting the admission from the
     defendants. The High Court rightly rejected the application for
     amendment and agreed with the trial court.”
14.    Hence, the Supreme Court held that by the proposed amendment in the
written statement, the defendant was seeking to displace the plaintiff
completely from the admissions made by the defendant in the written
statement. It further held that if such amendments were allowed, it would
mean that the plaintiff would irretrievably be prejudiced.
15.    The question is whether factually there is any admission contained in
the written statement which is sought to be retraced by the defendants by the
proposed amendments. Admissions is defined in the Indian Evidence Act as
follows:-
       “17. Admission defined.—An admission is a statement, oral or
       documentary or contained in electronic form, which suggests
       any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which
       is made by any of the persons, and under the circumstances,
       hereinafter mentioned.”
16.    Reference may be had to the judgment of the Division Bench of this
court in the case of Daljit Singh & Anr. vs. Hari Steel & General Industries
Ltd. & Ors., 2018 SCC OnLine Del. 13327 wherein this court explained
Admissions. The Court held as follows:-
     “What is an admission and what would be the effect thereof -
     legal position
         57. Before considering the factual matrix, we may briefly
     allude to the applicable law thereon. The expression „admission
     of execution of a party to attest document’ has been statutorily
     defined in Section 17 of the Evidence Act, 1872 as follows:
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                 Page 8 of 14

        “17. Admission defined.— An admission is a statement,
        oral or documentary 1[or contained in electronic form],
        which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or
        relevant fact, and which is made by any of the persons, and
        under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.”
     58. The Black's Law Dictionary explains the expression
     „admission‟ as follows:
            “Any statement or assertion made by a party to a case
        and offered against that party; an acknowledgment that
        facts are true.”
17.    In this context, I may have a look at paras 10 and 12 of the plaint. As
per these paras, it is stated that Late Sh.Abhey Kumar Oswal, a Hindu died
intestate without leaving a will or testamentary document. Para 12 of the
plaint states that the interest in the two family companies devolved upon the
plaintiff and the defendants as class 1 legal heirs. Paras 10 and 12 of the
plaint read as follows:-
     “10. The Plaintiffs father. Late Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal, a
     Hindu by religion, was a substantial shareholder, director and
     chairperson of the board of directors of Oswal Agro Mills
     Limited ("OAML") and Oswal Greentech Limited ("OGL"), the
     two main holding companies of the Abhey Oswal Group.
     Unfortunately, he died on March 29, 2016. The sudden demise
     came as a shock to the family as he was hale and hearty and was
     touring Russia on a business trip. He died intestate, i.e. without
     leaving behind any will or testamentary document regarding
     disposition of his assets, interest in businesses, movable and
     immovable properties.
     xxx
     12. On April 2, 2016, while the family, friends and well-wishers
     of the Oswal family were mourning the sudden demise of Late
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                Page 9 of 14

     Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal, board meetings of OAML and OGL
     were clandestinely convened behind the back of the Plaintiff. The
     Plaintiff has recently (and much after the Board Meetings were
     held) come to know that a board resolution was passed in the said
     meetings of Board of Directors of OAML and OGL appointing
     Defendant No. 1 as the additional Director and Chairperson of
     both the companies. Further, Defendant No. 1 and Mr. Anil
     Bhalla, who is a Director of OAML; and CEO and Managing
     Director of OGL, were severally authorized to act as authorized
     signatories and manage bank accounts of both the companies.
     Pertinently, Late Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal held substantial
     beneficial interest in OAML and OGL which has devolved upon
     the Plaintiff and Defendants, as his Class I legal heirs.
     Shareholding of late Mr.Abhey Kumar Oswal as on date of his
     death in OAML and OGL stood as under:
      S. No.      Particulars                 Shares of late Mr.
                                              Abhey Kumar Oswal
      1.          Oswal Greentech Limited     28540318
      2.          Oswal Agro Mills Limited    53530960
      It is pertinent to state that OAML and OGL have considerable
     assets and hold substantial shares in other companies, inter alia,
     PC Media Systems Ltd., New Delhi Television Ltd., News
     Nation Network Pvt. Ltd., Monnet Ispat &Energy Pvt. Ltd. and
     other group companies.
18.    The written statement of defendants No. 1 and 2 in response states as
follows:-
     “10. That the contents of the paragraph No. 10 to the extent of
     averments with respect to Late Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal being
     the shareholder, director and chairperson of M/s Oswal Agro
     Mills Limited and M/s Oswal Greentech Limited and as to his
     demise on 29.03.2016 are not disputed. It is, however, denied
     that Late Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal died intestate, as alleged. It is
     submitted that the Answering Defendant No. 1 has been duly
CS(OS) 53/2017                                             Page 10 of 14

     appointed by Late Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal as his nominee in
     his DEMAT accounts. Such nomination constitutes the legal
     testament of Late Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal with Answering
     Defendant as the sole beneficiary holding the same to the
     exclusion of all others.
       xxx
     12. That the contents of paragraph No. 12 of the plaint are false,
     frivolous and misconceived and hence denied. It is specifically
     denied that the meetings of M/s Oswal Agro Mills Limited and
     M/s Oswal Greentech Limited were clandestinely convened, as
     alleged. It is submitted that holding of meeting of Board of
     Directors of M/s Oswal Agro Mills Limited and M/s Oswal
     Greentech Limited has nothing to do with estate of Late Mr.
     Abhey Kumar Oswal. Further, the Plaintiff has no role in these
     meetings and the said meetings were held as per law and in best
     interest of the Companies. It is denied that any interest of Late
     Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal in M/s Oswal Agro Mills Limited and
     M/s Oswal Greentech Limited has devolved upon the Plaintiff, as
     alleged. It is reiterated that the Answering Defendant No. 1 has
     been duly appointed by Late Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal as his
     nominee in his DEMAT accounts. Such nomination constitutes
     the valid and legal testament of Late Mr. Abhey Kumar Oswal
     with Answering Defendant as the sole beneficiary. Further, a
     shareholder is merely a creditor of a company and as such is
     entitled only to dividends if any or paid up value of the shares.
     Shareholders do not have any beneficial interest in the assets of
     the company.”
19.    Hence, a perusal of the written statement shows that there are prima
facie no obvious admissions about any right having been inherited by the
plaintiff. Reliance is sought to be placed on the nomination in the demat
account to counter the contention of the plaintiff that he has inherited 1/4 th
share in the estate of Late Sh. Abhey Kumar Oswal. The claim of the
CS(OS) 53/2017                                              Page 11 of 14

plaintiff that he has inherited 1/4th share in the estate of Abhay Kumar Oswal
has been rebutted.
20.    By the present application the applicant/defendant seeks to add
preliminary submissions where various pleas are raised about the alleged
misdeeds of the plaintiff. It is also pointed out that late Shri Abhay Kumar
Oswal decided to expel and disown the plaintiff and an oral family
settlement was arrived at in the month of October 2006. In the family
whereby it was agreed that the plaintiff would not be entitled to inherit any
estate. Reliance is reiterated on the nominations made in favour of defendant
No.1 by late Shri Abhay Kumar Oswal in the Stockholding Corporation of
India. The applicant also seeks to add paras 4(a) to (d) stating details about
the acts done by the plaintiff including filing of a petition before the NCLT.
Chandigarh Bench. No part of the written statement is sought to be deleted.
21.    Clearly, what is sought to be added are only additional grounds and
additional defences which have not been taken. At best, it can be said that
the original written statement is now sought to be amended by adding
additional grounds to show why the plaintiff is not entitled to inherit the
estate of late Sh.Abhay Kumar Oswal. It cannot be said that these grounds
which are sought to be added take away any admissions made in the earlier
written statement. Nothing from the original Written Statement is sought to
be deleted.
22.    Reliance of the learned senior counsel for the plaintiff on the
averments made in CS(COMM) 1206/2018 and CS(COMM) 1208/2008
adding the plaintiff as one of the LRs of Late Sh. Abbey Kumar Oswal does
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                  Page 12 of 14

not in any manner have any bearing on the present amendment application.
While considering the amendments sought to be added it is not for this court
to dwell on the merits of the proposed additions sought to be made in the
pleadings. If there is any admission in the pleadings of the said suit as
claimed by the plaintiff, the plaintiff is free to urge the same at an
appropriate stage. Reference in this context may be had to the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of Raj Kumar Bhatia vs. Subhash Chander
Bhatia, (2018) 2 SCC 87 wherein the Supreme Court held as follows:-
     “12. This being the position, the case which was sought to be set
     up in the proposed amendment was an elaboration of what was
     stated in the written statement. The High Court has in the
     exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution
     entered upon the merits of the case which was sought to be set up
     by the appellant in the amendment. This is impermissible.
     Whether an amendment should be allowed is not dependent on
     whether the case which is proposed to be set up will eventually
     succeed at the trial. In enquiring into merits, the High Court
     transgressed the limitations on its jurisdiction under Article 227.
     In Sadhana Lodh v. National Insurance Co. Ltd. [Sadhana
     Lodh v. National Insurance Co. Ltd., (2003) 3 SCC 524 : 2003
     SCC (Cri) 762] , this Court has held that the supervisory
     jurisdiction conferred on the High Court under Article 227 is
     confined only to see whether an inferior court or tribunal has
     proceeded within the parameters of its jurisdiction. In the
     exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 227, the High Court does
     not act as an appellate court or tribunal and it is not open to it to
     review or reassess the evidence upon which the inferior court or
     tribunal has passed an order. The trial court had in the considered
     exercise of its jurisdiction allowed the amendment of the written
     statement under Order 6 Rule 17 CPC. There was no reason for
     the High Court to interfere under Article 227. Allowing the
     amendment would not amount to the withdrawal of an admission
     contained in the written statement (as submitted by the
     respondent) since the amendment sought to elaborate upon an
CS(OS) 53/2017                                                 Page 13 of 14

     existing defence. It would also be necessary to note that it was on
     21-9-2013 that an amendment of the plaint was allowed by the
     trial court, following which the appellant had filed a written
     statement to the amended plaint incorporating its defence. The
     amendment would cause no prejudice to the plaintiff.
23.    There is no merit in the opposition of the plaintiff to the present
application. The amendments sought are necessary for the purpose of
determining the real question in controversy between the parties.
24.    In view of the above, the application is allowed subject to cost of
Rs.25,000/-
                                                    JAYANT NATH
                                                       (JUDGE)
AUGUST 22, 2019
rb/n
CS(OS) 53/2017                                               Page 14 of 14


