$~
* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                 Date of Decision: 17thAugust , 2018
+      CS(COMM) 897/2018
       GLOBAL CAR GROUP PTE. LIMITED & ANR ..... Plaintiffs
                           Through: Mr.Anil Sapra, Senior Advocate with
                                       Mr.Ajay Kohli, Ms.Bhumika Kapoor,
                                       Ms.Pooja Vohra, Mr.Jaideep Singh,
                                       Mr.Sarthak Katyal, Advocates.
                           versus
       DROOM TECHNOLOGY PRIVATE LIMITED ..... Defendant
                           Through: Mr.Amit Sibal, Senior Advocate with
                                       Mr.Nitin Bhatiam, Advocate.
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE J.R. MIDHA
                                JUDGMENT
I.A.7047/2018
1.     The plaintiffs are seeking interim injunction against the defendant
from publishing and circulating the impugned advertisement comprising of
the “Pop up”, “Second Link” and “Third Link”. According to the plaintiffs,
the defendant‟s advertisement disparages and denigrates the business,
services, goodwill, reputation and trademark/tag line of the plaintiffs.
2.     The plaintiffs are carrying on the business of sale of used/pre-owned
cars in the name of “Cars24”. The plaintiffs have developed an
advertisement campaign in which Mr. Boman Irani, a Bollywood celebrity
appears in their advertisement as their brand ambassador. The advertisement
uses the phrase „Car Becho Best Price Mein‟ with „Cars24‟.
CS (COMM) 897/2018                                                     Page 1 of 6

3.     The defendant is circulating an advertisement campaign in which they
use the catch phrase “Car Becho Sahi Price Mein” in the same colour
combination of orange and blue, font and style and a gentleman is shown
with goat‟s face and the hand gesture is shown in the same manner as that of
Boman Irani.
4.     The plaintiffs claim their advertisement with its brand ambassador and
the catch phrase “Car Becho Best Price Mein” was in existence much prior
in time since July 2017 whereas the disparaging advertisement of the
defendant was started on or about 27th April, 2018.          According to the
plaintiffs, the disparaging advertisement has been created keeping the
plaintiffs‟ advertisement in mind, with malafide and dishonest intention to
ridicule, slander, disparage and show the plaintiffs and its brand ambassador
in bad light by similar tagline/catch phrase in the same colour combination,
font and style of the tagline as that of the plaintiffs‟; body language and
posture of their mascot in the impugned advertisement is identical to that of
the brand ambassador in the plaintiffs‟ advertisement; the manner of
pointing index finger of the right hand towards the viewer of the
advertisement is also identical; and the mascot in the defendant‟s
disparaging advertisement is donning an identical black colour blazer as that
of the plaintiffs‟ brand ambassador.
5.     During the course of hearing dated 03rd July, 2018, the parties agreed
to make an endeavour to resolve the matter. The parties met on 06 th July,
2018 and 09th July, 2018. On 10th July, 2018, both the parties informed this
Court that they have narrowed down their differences and the defendant
agreed to modify their advertisement to the proposed advertisement marked
as Annexure „A‟. However, the plaintiffs insisted that the defendant should
CS (COMM) 897/2018                                                   Page 2 of 6

delete the words “DON‟T BE A BAKRA” which was not acceptable to the
defendant. Relevant portion of the order dated 10th July, 2018 is reproduced
hereunder:
       “1. Learned senior counsels for the parties submit that the parties
       had a meeting with their counsels yesterday in which the differences
       have further narrowed down.
       2.     Learned senior counsel for the defendant submits that without
       prejudice to the defendant‟s rights and contentions, the defendant
       proposed to modify their advertisement to put an end to this litigation.
       The copy of the modified advertisement is handed over and taken on
       record. The copy of the proposed advertisement handed over by the
       defendant is marked as “Mark A”.
       3.     Learned senior counsel for the plaintiff submits that the words
       “DONT BE A BAKRA” in the proposed modified advertisement is not
       acceptable to the plaintiff.
       4.     Since the parties are not able to agree on the
       inclusion/exclusion of the words “DONT BE A BAKRA”, learned
       senior counsels for the parties submit that the matter be heard and
       adjudicated.”
6.     Mark „A‟ mentioned in the order dated 10th July, 2018 is reproduced
hereunder:
7.     Mr.Anil Sapra, learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs urged at the
time of the hearing that use of words “DON‟T BE A BAKRA” refers to the
CS (COMM) 897/2018                                                    Page 3 of 6

plaintiffs and disparages the plaintiffs‟ advertisement and would give an
impression to the public that the plaintiffs are fooling them with false
promises. The disparaging advertisement prompts the public not to become a
„Bakra‟, which means not to be fooled with false promises by the plaintiffs
and its brand ambassador are making false promises and fooling the
customers. Insistence of the defendant to refer to catch phrases and similar
tagline as that of the plaintiffs reflects the malafide and dishonest intentions
of seeking to continue the disparagement. Reliance is placed on Reckitt
Colman of India Ltd. v. M.P. Ramchandran, MANU/WB/0476/1998,
Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd. v. Kiwi T.T.K. Ltd., MANU/DE/0744/1996,
Pepsi Co., Inc. v. Hindustan Coca-Cola Ltd., MANU/DE/0896/2003 and
Dabur India Ltd. v. Colgate Palmolive India Ltd., MANU/DE/0657/2004.
8.     Mr. Amit Sibal, learned senior counsel for the defendant urged at the
time of the hearing that the defendant has the registered trademark of a
cartoon goat of 5.5 feet carrying a placard on which its written, “DON‟T BE
A BAKRA” „OBV‟ and the defendant is using its registered mark since
2016 in various print and digital advertisements. The registered trademark of
defendant is reproduced hereunder:
CS (COMM) 897/2018                                                     Page 4 of 6

9.      The plaintiffs contention that the defendant‟s advertisement only ran
from July 2017 onwards, is disputed by the defendant. The use of the word
„Bakra‟ with the placard creates an association with the defendant‟s services
and in no manner disparages the plaintiff‟s services.          The impugned
advertisement did not make a reference to the plaintiffs‟ services, even the
proposed modified advertisement does not denigrate the plaintiffs‟ services.
The placard, which is a part of the defendant‟s registered trademark, is
intended to give a positive message to the public at large and to encourage
potential users of its services to make an informed choice in the unorganized
market. There is no comparison with the plaintiffs‟ services or any reference
to it and there can be no disparagement. The defendant by its proposed
advertisement only seeks to use its registered mark with the tagline “Car
Becho Sahi Price Mein” comprising of words which are generic and
common to the trade of used or second hand car business/market and have
changed the font style and colour scheme and do not refer to the services of
the plaintiffs in any manner. In any case, no statement has been made which
is untrue or misleading. The parties cannot be hypersensitive and advertisers
should be granted creative latitude to ensure promotion of a robust market
for trade. Due credit is to be given to the public to discern and differentiate
between products/services as today‟s consumers are vigilant and aware of
their rights. Reliance is placed on Reckitt Benckiser v. Cavin Kare Pvt. Ltd.,
2007 (35) PTC 317 (Del.), HUL v. Cavincare Private Limited, 2010 (44)
PTC 270 (Del.), Dabur v. Colortek Meghalaya Pvt. Ltd., 2010 (44) PTC
254 (Del.) (DB), Marico v. Adani Wilmar , 2013 (54) PTC 515 (Del.) and
Dabur India Ltd. v. Wipro Limited, 2006 (32) PTC 677 (Del.).
CS (COMM) 897/2018                                                    Page 5 of 6

10.    On careful consideration of the rival contentions of the parties, this
Court is of the view that the defendant has fairly given up colour
combination, font and style of the tagline, body language and posture of
their mascot in the impugned advertisement and the proposed advertisement
Mark-A submitted by the parties before this Court on 10 th July, 2018 does
not disparage or denigrate the business services, goodwill, reputation and
trademark/trade line of the plaintiffs. The defendant‟s use of the words
“DON‟T BE A BAKRA” does not refer to the plaintiffs and does not
denigrate the plaintiffs‟ services. Rather the words “DON‟T BE A BAKRA”
is a part of the defendant‟s trademark. The defendant has not made any
reference to the plaintiffs in the proposed advertisement, Mark-A.
11.    The defendant is permitted to continue with the proposed
advertisement Mark-A, reproduced in paragraph 5 above during the
pendency of the suit. Defendant is also permitted to use the words “DON‟T
BE A BAKRA” in their advertisement during the pendency of the suit.
Application is disposed of in the above terms.
AUGUST 17, 2018                                              J.R. MIDHA
dk                                                             (JUDGE)
CS (COMM) 897/2018                                                  Page 6 of 6


