$~
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                            Judgment delivered on: 4.09.2013
+       CRL.A. No.432 /2010
        NARESH KUMAR                                               ..... Appellant
                                Through:    Ms.AshaTiwari, Advocate
                                     versus
        STATE                                                   ..... Respondent
                                Through:    Mr. Sunil Sharma, Additional Public
                                            Prosecutor for the State
+       CRL.A. No. 321/2010
        ARUN KUMAR @ HANNI                                         ..... Appellant
                                Through:    Mr. M.L. Yadav, Advocate
                                     versus
        STATE                                                   ..... Respondent
                                Through:    Mr. Sunil Sharma, Additional Public
                                            Prosecutor for the State
                                AND
+       CRL.A. No. 717/2010
        SANJIV @ SANJAY @ MANJAN                         ..... Appellant
                                Through: Ms.Sangeeta Chandra, Advocate
                                     versus
        STATE                                            ..... Respondent
                                Through:    Mr. Sunil Sharma, Additional Public
                                            Prosecutor for the State
        CORAM:
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR
         HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE INDERMEET KAUR
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                                    Page 1

                                 JUDGMENT
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
1.      By this order we propose to decide three separate Criminal Appeals
preferred by Naresh Kumar, Arun Kumar and Sanjeev, accused in FIR No.
965/07 to challenge the judgment dated 11.02.2009 and order on sentence
dated 20.02.2010, whereby all the three appellants were convicted for
committing an offence punishable under Section 302 of Indian Penal
Code,1806, (hereinafter referred to as IPC) read with Section 34 IPC and
sentenced to imprisonment for life with fine of Rs. 4000/- each and in
default of payment of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of
nine months each. Appellant–Naresh has also been convicted for
committing an offence punishable under Section 397 of the IPC for which
he has been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of
seven years. Appellant – Arun and Sanjeev have also been convicted for
committing an offence punishable under Section 392 read with Section 34
of IPC, for which they have been sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for a period of five years and to pay fine of Rs.1,000/- each
and in default thereof, to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period
of three months each.
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                          Page 2

2.      “Honesty pays, but it doesn't seem to pay enough to suit some
people”- F. M. Hubbard. The aforesaid quote rightly reveals what persuades
people to indulge into unlawful acts, corrupt and criminal means to acquire
riches, it is the quest for money but one cannot ignore that honesty and hard
work are the verisimilitude of life that enables oneself to survive even in
adverse conditions. Majority of people even today imbibe virtues of hard
work and honesty in them, but the only gap that needs to be abridged is the
difference in the thought process which varies from one man to another. All
life demands struggle. Those who have acquired riches by corrupt means
cannot brook the same for lifetime ignoring the clutches of law.
3.      Tremendous increase in cases of robbery and dacoity has been
noticed especially in the metropolitan cities. Robbery is considered as the
easiest way to grab money, jewellery and valuable articles of others. To way
lay people on deserted places, on highways and other isolated roads has
become a very common practice for these criminals. Usually while
committing offence of robbery or dacoity, these criminals end up
committing more serious and horrendous offence of eliminating the victim
of his life or attempting to murder such victim or causing grievous hurt. It is
also an acknowledged fact that these criminals keep committing these
crimes as their normal routine job till they are convicted and appropriately
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                           Page 3

sentenced and even thereafter. A wave of these grisly crimes is sweeping
across swathes of urban and small-town India. The continually rising graph
makes us queasy. National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) statistics show
that incidents and rates of violent crimes—murder, kidnapping, dacoity,
robbery, arson, dowry deaths — have gone up dramatically in the past five
years. Although 2010-2011 itself witnessed a 5-6 per cent spurt (National
Crime Records Bureau). These numbers are also growing because it is one
of the easiest ways to satisfy one’s lust for money. Cases like chain
snatching and pick pocketing have become so prominent in almost all the
localities and neighborhoods. Undoubtedly, the State has to share its blame
for not being able to provide good education to its citizens and to secure
proper job opportunities or to settle the unemployed youth in small time
avocations but at the same time the hard reality is that such kind of persons
develop the habit of making easy and fast money instead of putting any hard
work for their sustenance and livelihood. It is high time that the State should
adopt some kind of measures to educate and sensitize the methods in
regards to these criminals who keep indulging and repeating these crimes to
earn their livelihood and also to start with some employment avenues and
schemes for their proper rehabilitation so that they do not indulge or repeat
such dreadful acts.
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                            Page 4

4.      The case in hand relates to one of such horrendous crime of mugging
and eventually killing one Mahesh @ pappu on a much celebrated evening
of ‘Deepawali’. It was the evening of 9th November 2007, when Mahesh @
pappu alongwith his nephew, Ashu went out to celebrate the said festival of
lights, especially to enjoy the merriment in their vicinity that the tragic death
of Mahesh @ pappu took place. Their lust for easy money through robbery,
in quest of achieving their motive provoked one of the accused/ appellant
Naresh to kill Mahesh by stabbing him. As per the prosecution case,
appellant – Naresh had attacked the victim in his chest with the help of a
sharp edged knife which proved to be fatal.
5.      Instead of celebrating the light of festivity with the relatives, friends,
and nears and dear ones, these three appellants committed an intrepid act of
robbery where one of the accused /Naresh tried to snatch Mahesh’s
valuables by filchingaway his life. The exact prosecution story as has been
unfolded in the charge sheet is as under:-
6.      Prosecution case stanches from the fact that on 09.11.2007, DD No.
26 A was handed over to ASI Bhupinder Singh, which was pertaining to the
assault by knife over a scuffle in H. No. 148, Block No. 18, Nand Nangri.
When Bhupinder Singh ASI was inquiring the matter in the meanwhile
another DD No. 29A was received by him which was pertaining to assault
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                               Page 5

by a knife in B-3 Primary School, Nand Nagri, Delhi. When Bhupinder
Singh ASI along with Constable Narender reached at B-4, Primary School,
Nand Nagri, they came to know that injured was already removed to the
hospital. There was no public witness at the spot. Blood in profuse quantity
was seen lying at the spot. When Rakesh, watchman of the school was
inquired about the incident, he told that he saw a few boys beating another
boy. When he raised alarm, those boys ran away from there. ASI Bhupinder
Singh left Constable Narender at the spot and left for GTB Hospital. He
obtained MLC No. B- 4522/07 of injured and doctor informed that the
patient was brought dead and was sent to mortuary for postmortem. Later
on, he came to know that deceased was known as Mahesh @ pappu, which
was brought to his knowledge by Mukesh, the brother of the deceased who
was bereaving near the dead body. Mukesh told ASI Bhupinder Singh that
Mahesh @ pappu went out of his house along with his nephew Ashu.
Mukesh came to know that his brother Mahesh @ pappu had an altercation
with some boys. Case for offence punishable under section 302/34 IPC was
registered.          Thereafter, investigation was taken up by Bachu Singh,
Inspector. He called the crime team at the spot and got it photographed.
Blood, blood stained earth, earth control, blood stained locket having
engraved lord Hanumanji, besides a blood stained ring of iron were lifted
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                        Page 6

from the spot. Same were seized and taken into possession. Scaled site
plan of the spot was also prepared. Ashu, nephew of deceased Mahesh @
pappu, joined in the investigation. On 10.11.07, postmortem on the dead
body was got conducted by Inspector Bachu Singh.                Dead body was
released in favour of relatives of the deceased. Besides Ashu, Krishan was
also made to join the investigation, who also had the knowledge of incident.
Krishan @ Gola informed that two boys, who are wanted in connection with
the murder of Mahesh @ pappu, are available at B-5 Park. Attaining this
information, Inspector Bachchu Singh along with other staff reached at B-5
Park and arrested accused Arun @ Hanni and Sanjeev @ Sanjay @ Manjan
at the instance of Ashu and Krishan. During the course of investigation,
Arun was found in possession of purse, Rs. 100/- and identity card of
deceased Mahesh @ pappu. On interrogation, Arun divulged that Naresh
showed knife to Mahesh @ pappu, while, he himself and Sanjeev dragged
Mahesh @ pappu towards the gate of the Primary School. At the instance
of the accused Sanjeev and Arun, their associate Naresh was also arrested
from his house at B-4/353, who got recovered the knife from the roof of
primary school.              On 20.11.07, Inspector Bachu Singh got recorded the
statement of Krishan under sector 164 Cr.P.C, and the statement of Ashu u/s
164 Cr.P.C on 21.11.07. Exhibits of the case were sent to FSL. Charge for
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                             Page 7

offences punishable under sections 302 and 392 read with section 34 IPC
was framed against the accused persons, besides a separate charge for
offence u/s 397 IPC against the accused Naresh was framed, to which
charges they pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. To substantiate the charge,
prosecution examined 20 witnesses.
7.      In order to afford an opportunity to explain circumstances appearing
in evidence against the accused persons, they were examined under section
313 Cr.P.C. Their case has been of denial simplicitor. They claimed their
implication in the instant case to be false and fabricated at the hands of
investigating agency. However, they have examined Sumer Chand (DW1)
in support of their defence.
8.      Ashu (PW1) is the nephew of deceased Mukesh and is an eyewitness
of incident and is also a witness to the recovery of purse and knife.
Krishan@ Gola (PW2) is an independent witness, who witnessed the
occurrence and is also a witness to the recovery of purse and knife. Rakesh
(PW3) was on duty as watchman in MCD Primary School, B-4 Nand Nagri,
Delhi, on 09.11.07., when incident took place. Mukesh (PW4) identified
dead body of his brother Mahesh @ pappu at Mortuary, GTB Hospital, vide
identification memo Ex.PW4/A. After postmortem, dead body was handed
over to him vide handing over memo Ex.PW4/B. Rajpal (PW5) had also
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                           Page 8

deposed that dead body of Mahesh @ pappu was handed over to them vide
handing over memo Ex.PW4/B. Govind Ram (PW6), brother-in-law (sala)
of deceased Mahesh @ pappu had also identified dead body of Mahesh @
pappu. His statement Ex.PW6/A was recorded to this effect.
9.      Ms. Asha Tiwari, Advocate addressed arguments on behalf of
appellant – Naresh in Criminal Appeal No. 432/2010; Mr. M.L. Yadav,
Advocate addressed arguments on behalf of appellant – Arun Kumar in
Criminal Appeal No. 32/2010 while Ms.Sangeeta Chandra, Advocate
pleaded the case of appellant – Sanjeev in Criminal Appeal No.717/2010.
10.     Ms. Asha Tiwari, Counsel for the appellant- Naresh while addressing
arguments, mainly questioned the conduct of PW-1 Ashu, nephew of the
deceased in leaving the injured at the spot without getting any medical aid
whatsoever and thereafter, not informing anybody including the parents of
the injured, his own parents or relatives or the police and then ultimately
going off to sleep at his aunt’s house as most unnatural and improbable act
on his part creating serious doubt about his presence at the spot of incident.
Learned counsel for the appellant –Naresh also argued that PW-1 in his
deposition before the court did not talk about the presence of PW-2 –
Krishan @ Gola at the time of incident except casually mentioning that he
saw Krishan @ Gola on the following day at around 6 P.M. Learned counsel
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                           Page 9

for the appellant also argued that the statements recorded under Section 161
and 164 of Cr.P.C. are used only to corroborate and confront the witness
and the same are not a substantive piece of evidence. Learned counsel for
the appellant further argued that PW-2 – Krishan @ Gola was not an
eyewitness and the truth clearly emerged from his cross-examination to
disbelieve his presence at the spot. As per the counsel for the appellant this
witness also admitted that his signatures were taken by the police on blank
papers. Learned counsel for the appellant further argued that the place of
incident was a populated residential cum commercial area and the time of
incident was Diwali night but the prosecution has failed to advance any
reason as to why they could not join any independent witnesses to support
the said incident of crime. Learned counsel for the appellant further argued
that there was a material inconsistency in the deposition of PW-1, Ashu
when he stated that the knife was recovered from the roof of the school and
at that time police officials were with him and then in his cross-examination,
stated that he did not remember as to which of the accused were with him
besides stating that the knife was not sealed in his presence. Learned
counsel for the appellant further submitted that the alleged disclosure
statement of the accused / Naresh and alleged recovery of knife is false and
enthused when                even PW-2, Krishan @ Gola in his statement clearly
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                           Page 10

mentioned that the police had taken his signatures on blank papers. Pointing
out at the contradiction between the statement of PW-8 and PW-18, learned
counsel for the appellant emphasized that PW-8 in his deposition stated that
he alongwith Naresh went to the roof of the school where a button actuated
knife was lying and he handed over the same to the Investigating Officer
Bachu Singh. However, PW-18, Sub Inspector Bachu Singh deposed that
the knife was recovered from the roof of the school and he alongwith Ashu,
Krishan @ Gola, Head Constable Mahavir Singh and Naresh had gone to
recover the same. Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that
when evidence of these witnesses if considered as a whole, it creates a doubt
about the credibility of the prosecution case and the contradictions on the
part of this witness are substantial in nature. Learned counsel for the
appellant also submitted that at best, the prosecution case falls under
exception 4 to Section 300 of IPC, as the alleged act was committed by the
accused with pre-meditated mind, in a sudden fight in a head of passion,
upon a sudden quarrel. In support of his arguments, learned counsel for the
appellant – Naresh relied upon the following judgments:
        a)         State of U.P. Vs. Bhagwant & Ors., JT 2003 (4) SC 131
        b)         Toran Singh vs. State of M.P., 2002 SCC (Cri) 1377
        c)         Din Dayal vs. Raj Kumar @ Raju& Ors, 1998 III AD (SC)
                   378
        d)         Kalu vs. State of U.P. & Ors., JT 1994 (3) SC 440
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                          Page 11

        e)         Shivaji Dayanu Patil vs. State of Maharashtra, JT 1989 (3)
                   SC 166
11.     Addressing arguments on behalf of the appellant – Arun Kumar, Mr.
M.L. Yadav, Advocate submitted that there is no legal evidence on record to
justify the conviction of Arun Kumar as none of the eye witnesses have
supported the prosecution version in a clear and unambiguous manner.
Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that PW-3 Rakesh
(Chowkidar) has pleaded ignorance about any such incident and thus failed
to support the prosecution version and while PW-2 Krishan @ Gola in his
cross-examination has categorically stated that he was not an eye witness of
the occurrence and whatever he had stated in his examination-in-chief was
deposed by him at the instance of the police. Pointing out the discrepancy of
PW-1 Ashu, learned counsel for the appellant argued that this witness in his
statement under Section 164 of Cr. P.C. does not name Arun, one of the
appellants herein as perpetrator of the crime and therefore, no weightage
can be given to his court deposition making improvement in his earlier
statement. Learned counsel for the appellant also reiterated the argument
taken by the counsel for the appellant – Naresh that the conduct of PW-1
Ashu was totally unnatural and unrealistic having made no efforts to save
the deceased or to report the matter to his relatives and police etc. Learned
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                          Page 12

counsel for the appellant further argued that the learned trial court has erred
in law and has completely ignored the defence evidence adduced through
DW-1 Sulekh Chand Jain, who in his deposition stated that the school
building where the alleged incident took place initially was ‘L’ shaped and,
thereafter, four rooms were constructed and it took a ―U’ shape whereas the
Investigating Officer/ Bachu Singh said that the building was straight in
shape. Learned counsel for the appellant further argued that neither PW-1
nor PW-2, who claimed themselves to be the eye witnesses, reported the
matter to the police after having witnessed the incident of crime themselves
and this fact by itself completely wobbles the case of the prosecution.
Learned counsel for the appellant without prejudice laid main stress on his
argument that, PW-1 attributed to the appellant only the role of catching
hold of the deceased and with this limited role assigned to the appellant, he
cannot be held liable as perpetrator of the crime of murder with the aid of
Section 34 of IPC. Learned counsel for the appellant further argued that the
post mortem report also falsifies the stand of the eye witness as the post
mortem report discloses infliction of five injuries on the body of the
deceased while the eye witnesses have deposed only about two injuries
inflicted by the appellant – Naresh. On the alleged recovery of the purse
from the possession of the appellant – Arun, learned counsel for the
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                           Page 13

appellant argued that the same is highly improbable and the same is planted
one as nobody will procure the looted purse alongwith ID proof of any other
person with him till the next day. Learned counsel for the appellant further
argued that without prejudice to the defence raised by the appellant, the
intention of the appellant was only to robe the deceased and not to kill him
at any point of time. Learned counsel for the appellant pleaded for showing
leniency to accused/ Arun as at the time of incident, the appellant – Arun
Kumar was aged about 18 and half years and presently he is a married
person with zilch criminal records. In support of his arguments, learned
counsel for the appellant placed reliance on the following judgments:
        a)         Din Dayal vs. Raj Kumar @ Raju & Ors, 1998 SCC (Cri) 892
        b)         Malempati Pattabinarendra vs. Ghattamaneni Maruthi
                   Prasad and others, 2000 (2) JCC (SC) 702
        c)         RamashishYadav and others vs. State of Vihar, 1999 (2) JCC
                   (SC) 471
12.     Pleading the case of appellant – Sanjeev, Ms. Sangeeta Chandra,
Advocate and amicus curiae, argued that it is an admitted case of the
prosecution that this appellant neither inflicted any injury on the body of the
deceased nor any weapon of offence or any other article was recovered from
him on personal search and seizure being conducted and the only role
attributed to him is that he was the one amongst the two who caught hold of
the deceased and with such a limited role, as assigned to him, it cannot be
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                           Page 14

held that this appellant had shared any common intention with the accused –
Naresh to commit the crime of murder. Learned counsel for the appellant
further submitted that the learned trial court has gravely erred in taking a
view that the appellant had shared a ‘common intention’ of killing the
deceased with the Accused Naresh and Arun. Explaining the parameters, as
envisaged under Section 34 of the IPC, learned amicus curiae for the
appellant argued that for the applicability of Section 34 of the IPC, it is
necessary that the accused has participated in the commission of the
crimeand such intention was known to each one of them before the
commission of such a crime. Learned amicus curiae also submitted that in
drawing such an inference the principle of law which is to be applied is the
principle which requires that guilt is not to be inferred unless that is the only
inference which follows in the specific circumstances of the case. Learned
amicus curiae also argued that at best, the intention of the appellant could be
as that of accused Naresh of committing robbery and not the murder of the
deceased. Learned amicus curiae further argued that the case of the
appellant does not fall under the purviewof any of the four clauses of
Section 300 of the IPC as there being no common intention to commit the
murder and admittedly, there is no motive to commit the murder even as
per the prosecution case. Learned amicus curiae also espoused the argument
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                              Page 15

canvassed by the other counsel with regard to the alleged unnatural and
improbable conduct of PW-1 Ashu having gone to sleep without reporting
the incident of crime to anyone or to arrange for providing the medical help
to the victim. In supportof her arguments, learned amicus curiae placed
reliance on the following authorities:-
        a)         RamashishYadav and others vs. State of Vihar, 1999 (2) JCC
                   (SC) 471
        b)         Harbans Nonia and another vs. State of Bihar, 1992 Cri.LJ
                   105
        c)         Din Dayal vs. Raj Kumar @ Raju& Ors, 1998 SCC (Cri) 892
        d)         Malempati Pattabinarendra vs. Ghattamaneni Maruthi
                   Prasad and others, 2000 (2) JCC (SC) 702
13.     Refuting the arguments of counsel appearing for the appellants, Mr.
Sunil Sharma, learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State submitted
that the learned trial court has passed a well-reasoned judgment and order
on sentence after fully evaluating the evidence on record. Learned APP
further submitted that PW-1 Ashu gave graphical description of the full
incident and his testimony remained unrebutted and uncontroverted leaving
no scope to disbelieve him. Learned APP further submits that besides the
eye witness PW-1, PW-2, Krishan @ Gola also supported the prosecution
case in his examination-in-chief although he deviated from his stand in his
cross-examination. Placing reliance on the judgment of Apex Court in
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                           Page 16

Khujji @ Surender Tiwari vs. State of M.P., reported in 1991 Cri.LJ
2653(1), learned APP submitted that in this judgment the Apex Court took a
clear view that in a case where the cross-examination of the witness takes
place after some gap and the witness takes an undue advantage of the time
gap and turns hostile in his cross-examination, then the statement given by
such witness in his examination-in- chief will be believed and not the one
given in his cross-examination. Learned Additional Public Prosecutor
further submitted that so far as the contradictions in the evidence of PW-2 in
his cross-examination and examination-in-chief under Section 164 of Cr.
P.C. are concerned, the same can be ignored as the stand taken by the said
witness in the cross-examination cannot efface or wash off the truthful stand
taken by him in his court deposition and under Section 164 of Cr. P.C.
Learned APP further submitted that the statement of PW-1 and PW-2 is
further corroborated by the medical evidence and this fact also fortifies the
statements made by PW-1 and PW-2. Learned APP further argued that all
these appellants in well designed and premeditated manner had not only
committed the offence of robbery but had also brutally and valiantly
murdered Mukesh, only because he has resisted to part away with the
money and mobile, so demanded by them. Based on these submissions,
learned APP for the State urged that this Court may upheld the judgment
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                          Page 17

passed by the learned trial court whereby these appellants have been
convicted under the offences charged and also upheld the order on sentence.
14.     We have heard learned counsel for the appellants as well as learned
Additional Public Prosecutor for the State at a considerable length. We have
also perused the trial court record and the judgments cited by both the sides
at bar.
15.     As per the case of the prosecution, the incident in question was
witnessed by PW-1 Ashu, nephew of the deceased Mahesh @ pappu and by
PW-2Krishan @ Gola, an independent witness who was present at the scene
of crime. PW-3 Rakesh, chowkidar in MCD Primary School was not exactly
a witness of the crime but had noticed one man lying in the pool of blood in
an injured condition and three appellants out of which one had blood stained
knife in his hand standing there. As per initial statement recorded under
Section 161 of Cr. P.C., this witness was threatened by the accused to
immediately budge from the place and thereafter, he entered in school
premises out of fear. This witness had turned hostile, when entered into the
witness box. The common ground raised by the counsel representing these
appellants is that the conduct of PW-1 Ashu was extremely unnatural and
improbable as he left his maternal uncle after his maternal uncle was
grievously injured without either reporting the matter to the police or his
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                         Page 18

relatives but peacefully went to his aunt’s (bua) house and slept. Counsel
appearing for the appellants argued that the said witness was an adult and as
per the case of the prosecution he had consumed liquor along with his
maternal uncle prior to the said incident and thus, was capable enough of
taking a decision to report the crime to the police or to at least the family
members of his maternal uncle.
16.     It is prudent to say that in normal circumstances, it is quite grotesque
of any person who is a witness of a crime to not inform the police or the
relatives of the victim of the crime reporting the incident and such a
behavior on the part of such eye witness normally would be considered
unnatural, abnormal and ludicrous. Nevertheless, no straight-jacket
formulae or principle can be laid down as to how a particular witness will
react at such a situation. It may depend upon couple of circumstances
depending upon the facts of each case. It is not always necessary that at a
given situation similarly placed person will react in a same fashion. Much
will depend on the fact situation of each incident and also the individual
behavior of the person including his psyche. One may be timid or may be
very bold and it is also possible that a person otherwise timid in his life may
turn out to be bold at a particular moment or vice versa. The prompt reaction
or the immediate outcry whether being bold or timid of the person is an
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                             Page 19

important aspect which has to be taken care of while dealing with such
terrifying crimes. In the facts of the present case, PW-1 Ashu was about 17
years of age on the date of the said crime and it has come in his evidence
that accused Naresh had threatened him while pointing out blood stained
knife at him by stating that in case he dare inform about the incident to
anyone, then he would kill him. It is also an admitted fact that the accused
Naresh is a brother of Parvesh, who was a known bad character of the area
and both these facts were good enough to instill enough fear in the mind of
boy of 17 years to save his life and this is what PW-1 Ashu in fact did, when
he went to his aunt’s house to sleep there without reporting the matter of
crime to the police or any other relatives of his maternal uncle.
17.     The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Vemireddy Satyanarayan
Reddy and Three Ors. Vs. The State of Hyderabad, AIR 1956SC379, has
clearly mentioned that it requires a very courageous man, foreseeing and
ignoring all the consequences in order to reveal the truth. What law requires
is that there should be such corroboration of the material part of the story
connecting the accused with the crime as will satisfy the reasonable minds
that the man can be regarded as a truthful witness. The germane portion is
quoted below:
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                          Page 20

          “6. …….It is true he did not divulge the secret of the murder
          to anyone else except to his own father. But who would, in
          view of the atrocities and terrorism that prevailed in that
          region during the relevant time? It required a very
          courageous man to have proclaimed the truth, needless of
          consequences to himself, and we cannot credit the dhobi boy
          with so much of fearlessness. The learned counsel urged
          that if a man sees the perpetration of a crime and does not
          give information of it to anyone else, he might well be
          regarded in law as an accomplice and that he could be put in
          the dock with the actual criminals. There is, however, no
          warrant for such an extreme proposition. On the other hand,
          the following short passage from Russell on Crime, 10th
          Edition, page 1846, will show its untenability :-
          "But a person may be present, and, if not aiding and
          abetting, be neither principal nor accessory; as, if A,
          happens to be present at a murder and takes no part in it,
          nor endeavours to prevent it, or to apprehend the murderer,
          this course of conduct will not of itself render him either
          principal or accessory".
          Indeed, there can be no doubt that the evidence of a man
          like P. W. 14 should be scanned with much caution and we
          must be fully satisfied that he is a witness of truth,
          especially when no other person was present at the time to
          see the murder. Though he was not an accomplice, we would
          still want corroboration on material particulars in this
          particular case, as he is the only witness to the crime and as
          it would be unsafe to hang four people on his sole testimony
          unless we feel convinced that he is speaking the truth. Such
          corroboration need not, however, be on the question of the
          actual commission of the offence; if this was the
          requirement, then we would have independent testimony on
          which to act and there would be no need to rely on the
          evidence of one whose position may, in this particular case,
          be said to be somewhat analogous to that of an accomplice,
          though not exactly the same. What the law requires is that
          there should be such corroboration of the material part of
          the story connecting the accused with the crime as will
          satisfy reasonable minds that the man can be regarded as a
          truthful witness. In the leading case of Rex v.
          Baskerville [1916] 2 K. B. D. 658 it was pointed by Lord
          Reading C. J. that
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                          Page 21

          "the corroboration need not be direct evidence that the
          accused committed the crime; it is sufficient if it is merely
          circumstantial evidence of his connection with the crime. The
          nature of the corroboration will depend on and vary
          according to the particular circumstances of each case. What
          is required is some additional evidence rendering it probable
          that the story of the accomplice is true and that it is
          reasonably safe to act upon it".
          Judged by this test, we can say that the evidence given by P.
          W. 14 has been amply corroborated. It was not disputed for
          the appellants that there is abundant evidence consisting of
          the testimony of several witnesses in support of the truth of
          the narrative given by P. W. 14 regarding the abduction of
          the deceased. This evidence was given not by mere
          onlookers but by mean like P. Ws. 3, 4, 5, 6 and 9, who
          were with the deceased when the communist group came
          upon them and who were themselves badly beaten up by the
          gang before being released from impending death at the
          merciful intervention of some one of them. They say that at
          the time of the release the accused retained the deceased
          with them and took him away in the direction of Mulgupad.”
18.     The trial court has also taken sustenance from the judgment of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in Criminal Appeal No.52/1980 in the case of Rana
Pratap Vs. State of Haryana, wherein the Apex Court observed that every
witness who witnesses a murder reacts in his own way. Some are stunned,
became speechless and stand rooted to the spot. Some became hysteric and
start wailing. Some start shouting for help. Others run away to keep
themselves as far removed from spot as possible. Yet others rush to the
rescue of the victim, even going to the extent of counter attaching the
assailants. Everyone reacts in his own special way. There is no set rule of
natural reaction. To discard the evidence of witnesses on the ground that he
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                         Page 22

did not react in any particular manner is to appreciate evidence in a wholly
unrealistic and unimaginative way.
19.     In the light of the aforesaid dicta, considering the facts of the case at
hand based upon the conduct of the witness Ashu in not reporting the crime
to anybody in our view is not unnatural or improbable and therefore,
evidence of PW-1 merely on this count cannot be discarded or disbelieved.
Rather       taking         such a view /would   be   totally  unrealistic    and
incomprehensible in the factual situation of the present case. The judgments
cited by counsel for the appellants are clearly distinguishable due to the
peculiar facts of the present case.
20.     The other contention raised by counsel for the appellant – Naresh
Kumar was PW-1 in his deposition before the court did not talk about the
presence of PW-2 Krishan @ Gola at the time of incident and therefore,
there is complete contradiction between the deposition of PW-1 and PW-2
to disbelieve their court depositions. Here again we areimpelled to reject
this contention as PW-1 in his statement made under Section 164 of Cr. P.C.
clearly stated that PW-2 Krishan @ Gola was also present at the site and
even in his court deposition, he unequivocally stated that after the incident,
he saw Krishan @ Gola, on the following day around 6 PM; meaning
thereby he saw Krishan @ Gola for the second time.
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                             Page 23

21.     We also do not find any force in the contention raised by counsel for
the appellant – Naresh that PW-2 Krishan @ Gola was not an eye witness if
the statement made by the said witness in the cross-examination is taken
into consideration. Undoubtedly, PW-2 Krishan @ Gola took a somersault
in his cross-examination by stating that the statement made by him under
Section 164 of Cr. P.C. before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate and
before the Court were at the instance of the police. He also in his cross-
examination deposed that his signatures on document Ex.PW-1/G were
obtained by the police officials when the said document was blank. This
argument of learned counsel for the appellant has been elaborately discussed
by the learned trial court and it would be appropriate to refer to the relevant
part dealing with this aspect of the case as under:-
               “16.           Examination-in-chief of his witness was
               recorded on 21.08.08 and 10.12.08. However, his cross-
               examination was deferred on request of counsel for
               accused and thereafter he appeared on 06.03.09. On that
               date, when he was cross-examined by the learned defence
               counsel, he took a complete somersault and stated that on
               20.11.07 police officials brought him to the court and he
               made a statement before the court and that statement was
               stated to him by the police officials. He went on stating
               that document Ex.PW1/G was blank, when he signed the
               same. Police officials did not record his statement and
               his signatures were obtained on certain papers, which
               were blank. He further went on stating that whatever
               statement was given on 21.08.08, same was tutored to
               him by police out of the Court and that same was deposed
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                            Page 24

               at the instance of police. He further deposed that
               accused Sanjeev was not apprehended by the police in his
               presence. As regards accused Arun is concerned, he
               deposed that he was playing a match in the park, when he
               was taken by police officials. Since this witness had
               taken somersault, he was re-examined by the ld.
               Prosecutor and at that time, he admitted that he did not
               state before ld. MM, who recorded his statement u/s 164
               Cr.P.C, that he has been tutored by police officials.
               17.            Firstly it may be mentioned that immediately
               after the incident, the investigation officer of the case had
               moved an application before Sh. Shailender Malik, ld.
               MM, for recording statement of this witness u/s 164
               Cr.P.C., vide his application Ex.PW19/A. Sh. Vikas
               Dhall, who was working as MM has testified that after
               ascertaining the voluntary nature of witness Krishan @
               Gola @ Gola, he recorded his statement Ex.PW2/A,
               which bear his signatures at point X. The statement
               contained true and correct account of the incident given
               by Krishan @ Gola before him. A perusal of this
               statement goes to show that witness has given an
               eyewitness account of entire incident and all the accused
               persons were arrested on his identification as well as on
               identification of Ashu. He has further detailed the
               manner in which accused Naresh was apprehended at the
               instance of remaining two accused persons and at his
               instance knife was recovered from roof of the school.
               There is no suggestion to the ld. MM that witness did not
               make any statement voluntarily or that it was under
               pressure of police officials that he had made statement
               before him.            Furthermore, submissions of the ld.
               Prosecutor that this witness was cross-examined, after a
               lapse of about three months of his cross-examination, and
               by that time he was won over by the accused persons
               cannot be lost sight of as the record reveals that
               examination-in-chief of this witness was recorded on
               21.08.08. Further examination was deferred as the case
               property was not received from FSL by that date,
               therefore he was again examined on 10.12.08, when he
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                              Page 25

               identified the case property. Thereafter, his cross-
               examination was deferred. When this witness appeared
               on 06.03.09, that is, after a lapse of three months, then he
               completely took changed version by deposing that
               statement made before ld. MM or before the Court was at
               the instance of police officials.
               18.            1991 Cr.L.J. 2653 (1), Khujji alias Surendra
               Tiwari V. State of M.P is a direct authority on the point in
               hand. In that case also, examination-in-chief of the
               witness was recorded on 16.11.76, when he identified all
               the assailants by name.              His cross-examination
               commenced on 15.12.76. In that cross-examination, he
               stated that since the accused had their backs towards
               him, therefore, he count not see their faces. On the basis
               of that statement, it was submitted that evidence
               regarding identity of the accused was rendered highly
               doubtful and it would be hazardous to convict the
               appellant solely on the basis of identification of such a
               wavering witness. Hon’ble High Court came to the
               conclusion, which was up held by Hon’ble Apex Court
               that during one month period that elapsed since the
               recording of his examination-in-chief, something
               transpired which made him shift his evidence on the
               question of identity to help the appellant. His statement
               in cross-examination on the question of identification of
               the appellant and his companion is a clear attempt to
               wriggle out of what he had stated earlier in his
               examination-in-chief. As such, it was observed that there
               was no material contradiction to doubt his testimony. It
               was further observed that evidence of declared hostile is
               not wholly effaced from record and that part of evidence,
               which is otherwise acceptable, can be acted upon.
               Reliance was placed on well settled decisions of Hon’ble
               Supreme Court-Bhagwan Singh v. State of Haryans,
               (1976) 2 SCR 921 : Air 1976 SC 202; Rabinder Kumar
               Dev v. State of Orissa, (1976) 4 SCC 233: AIR 1977 SC
               170 and Sayed Akbar v. State of Karnataka, (1980) 1 SCR
               95: AIR 1979 SC 1848 – Where it was held that the
               evidence of a prosecution witness cannot be rejected in
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                             Page 26

               toto merely because the prosecution chose to treat him as
               hostile and cross-examined him. The evidence of such
               witness cannot be treated as effaced or washed off the
               record altogether but the same can be accepted to the
               extent their version is found to be dependable on a
               careful scrutiny thereof.
               19.            Substantially, similar view was taken in 2009
               (XI) AD SC 125 Alagarsamy& Ors. Vs. State by Deputy
               Superintendent of Police. In that case also, the witness
               was declared hostile at the fag end of his cross-
               examination. The examination-in-chief of witness was
               recorded on 02.04.01 and on the same day he was cross-
               examined by three defence counsels. Then only later on,
               on 26.06.01, when he was recalled, he was treated as
               hostile witness. Hon’ble High Court commented that
               witness was tried to be won over, after his cross-
               examination and this comment was approved by Hon’ble
               Apex Court and it was observed that law is not well
               settled that merely because witness is declared as hostile
               witness, whole of his evidence is not liable to be thrown
               away. Reference was made to Syed Akbar Vs. State of
               Karnatka, 1980 (1) SCC 30, Rabindera Kumar Dey vs.
               State of Orissa, 1976 (4) SCC 233 and Bhagwan Singh
               Vs. State of Haryana, 1976 (1) SCC 389.
               20.            In view of these authoritative pronouncements,
               keeping in view the fact at the earliest juncture, statement
               of Krishan @ Gola @ Gola was recorded u/s 164 Cr.P.C
               by ld. MM, wherein he narrated entire incident coupled
               with the fact that he even supported the case of
               prosecution in his examination-in-chief and was only
               later on that in his cross-examination he took a
               completely changed stand by stating that his statement
               made earlier was at the instance of the police, as such
               possibility of his winning over cannot be ruled out.
               21.            At this juncture, it will not be out of place to
               reproduce the observations made by Hon’ble Apex Court
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                                Page 27

               in Krishan @ Gola Mochi vs. State of Bihar, 2002 (6)
               SCC 81, which are as under:-
                              “It is a matter of common experience that in
                   recent times there has been a sharp decline of ethical
                   values in public life even in developed countries much
                   less a developing one, like ours, where the ratio of
                   decline is higher. Even in ordinary cases, witnesses
                   are not inclined to depose or their evidence is not
                   found to be credible by courts for manifold reasons.
                   One of the reasons may be that they do not have
                   courage to depose against an accused because of
                   threats to their life, more so when the offenders are
                   habitual criminals or high-ups in the Government or
                   close to powers, which may be political, economic or
                   other powers including muscle power. A witness may
                   not stand the test of cross-examination, which may be
                   sometimes, because he is a bucolic person and is not
                   able to understand the question put to him by the
                   skillful cross-examiner and at the times under the
                   stress of cross-examination, certain answers are
                   snatched from him. When a rustic or illiterate witness
                   faces an astute lawyer, there is bound to be imbalance
                   and, therefore, minor discrepancies have to be
                   ignored. These days, it is not difficult to gain over a
                   witness by money power or giving him any other
                   allurance or giving out threats to his life and/or
                   property at the instance of persons, in/or close to
                   powers and muscle men or their associates. Such
                   instances are also not uncommon where a witness is
                   not inclined to depose because in the prevailing social
                   structure he wants to remain indifferent.”
                              In view of this observation, possibility of wining
                   over of this witness by the time he came for his cross-
                   examination in the Court and PW3 Rakesh cannot be
                   ruled out”
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                                  Page 28

22.     We fully concur with the said finding of the learned trial court giving
due credence to the deposition made by PW-2 in his examination-in-chief
and his statement made before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate under
Section 164 of Cr. P.C. fully supporting and corroborating the testimony of
the other eye witness PW-1 and the medical evidence proved on record. We
also cannot be oblivious of the fact that as per the prosecution case the
appellant – Naresh Kumar happened to be the brother of Pravesh, who is a
known criminal and bad character of the area and it is because of the fear
and threats extended by Naresh, that PW-1 could not muster the courage to
report the matter to the police and how much courage could PW-2 had
gathered that he explicitly in his examination in chief recorded on 21.08.08
deposed about the said incident and even identified the accused persons but
could not relentlessly support the prosecution case in his cross examination
which took place after a gap of time. One cannot obviate the fact of threats
or pressure being extended in that span of time, resultantly turning the said
witness hostile. The part of the evidence of PW-2wherein he has proclaimed
to be the eye witness of the incident in his examination-in-chief and the
statement made by him under Section 164 of Cr. P.C. fully corroborates the
line of prosecution.
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                            Page 29

23.     So far as adjudging the evidentiary value of the eye witness is
concerned, the Hon’ble Apex Court in State of U.P. vs. Smt.Noorie alias
Noor Jahan and others, AIR 1996 SC 3073, has held that “While assessing
and evaluating the evidence of eye witnesses the court must adhere to two
principles, namely whether in the circumstances of the case it was possible
for the eye witness to be present at the scene and whether there is anything
inherently improbable or unreliable.”
24.     Applying the aforesaid dicta in the circumstances of the present case,
we have no hesitation to believe the presence of PW-1 and PW-2 at the site
of crime and moreover, after scrutinizing the depositions of PW-1 , Ashu
and PW-2, Krishan, we do not find any such inherently unreliable or
improbable aspect that barges and cults the entire evidence as useless when
read in entirety.
25.     We also do not find much force in the argument raised by counsel
for the appellant – Naresh that the place of incident was residential-cum-
commercial area therefore, there could have been other independent
witnesses who had witnessed the said incident but the prosecution has
failed to give reason as to why other independent witness did not join as a
witness. It was the evening of Deepawali festival and everybody being in
a festive mood could not have withdrawn from the festival fervourand
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                          Page 30

therefore, non-joining of any public witness by the police cannot create
any suspicion in our mind to disbelieve the incident which stands fully
corroborated by the testimony of PW-1 and PW-2 and other medical
evidence produced on record.
26.     The other discrepancies pointed out by the learned counsel for the
appellant – Naresh on the recovery of the knife and the signatures of the
witnesses on the seizurememosare only a feeble attempt to create
suspicion in the mind of the court. We find ourselves to be fully
unconvinced with the pleas raised by the counsel for the appellants as the
recovery memo of the knife proved on record as Ex.PW-1/L was duly
witnessed by PW-1 and PW-2 and PW-3 and recovery of black purse was
made from the appellant – Arun @ Hanni during his disclosure statement
and this recovery memo was proved on record as Ex.PW1/F, which was
duly witnessed by PW-1 and PW-2. Turning hostile of Rakesh and
contradictory statement made by PW-2 Krishan @ Gola also cannot
discredit the testimony of PW-1 Ashu, who remained firm and undaunted
in his stand throughout and therefore, not much weightage can be given to
the stand taken by PW-2 in his cross- examination stating that he had
signed the blank documents at the instance of police or PW-3 turning
hostile. Moreover, the minor discrepancies as pointed out by counsel for
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                         Page 31

appellant – Naresh are concerned, the learned trial court has extensively
dealt with this aspect after placing reliance on the judgment of the Apex
Court inDeep Chand vs. State of Haryana, 1996 (3) SCC 890, taking a
view that discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and
shake the absolute version of the witnesses cannot be attached any undue
importance.
27.     In               Vidhya     Rani         and        Madan      Lal
Vs. State (Delhi Admn.), Criminal Appeal Nos. 186 and 385/1997, this
Hon’ble Court taking support from the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of
Gujarat (1983) 3 SCC 217in paragraph 22 has held as under:
        “5. Overmuch importance cannot be attached to minor
        discrepancies. The reasons are obvious:
        (1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a
        photographic memory and to recall the details of an incident.
        It is not as if a video tape is replayed on the mental screen.
        (2) Ordinarily it so happens that a witness is overtaken by
        events. The witness could not have anticipated the occurrence
        which so often has an element of surprised. The mental
        faculties therefore cannot be expected to be attuned to
        absorb the details.
        (3) The powers of observation differ from person to person.
        What one may notice, another may not. An object or
        movement might emboss its image on one person's mind,
        whereas it might go unnoticed on the part of another.
        (4) By and large people cannot accurately recall a
        conversation and reproduce the very words used by them or
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                        Page 32

        heard by them. They can only recall the main purport of the
        conversation. It is unrealistic to expect a witness to be a
        human tape-recorder.
        (5) In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time
        duration of an occurrence, usually, people make their
        estimates by guess-work on the spur of the moment at the
        time of interrogation. And one cannot expect people to make
        very precise or reliable estimates in such matters. Again, it
        depends on the time-sense of individuals which varies from
        person to person.
        (6) Ordinarily a witness cannot be expected to recall
        accurately the sequence of events which takes place in rapid
        succession or in a short time span. A witness is liable to get
        confused, or mixed up when interrogated later on.
        (7) A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be overawed
        by the court atmosphere and the piercing cross-examination
        made by counsel and out of nervousness mix up facts, get
        confused regarding sequence of events, or fill up details from
        imagination on the spur of the moment. The sub-conscious
        mind of the witness sometimes so operates on account of the
        fear of looking foolish or being disbelieved though the witness
        is giving a truthful and honest account of the occurrence
        witnessed by him Perhaps it is a sort of a psychological
        defence mechanism activated on the spur of the moment.
        6. Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter
        and shake the basic version of the witnesses therefore cannot
        be annexed with undue importance. More so when the all
        important "probabilities factor" echoes in favour of the version
        narrated by the witnesses.”
28.     It is also a settled legal position that the corroborative evidence of an
eye witness cannot be discarded merely because of some contradictions in
his deposition. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach
must be whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to
have a ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it is undoubtedly
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                             Page 33

necessary for the court to scrutinize the evidence more particularly keeping
in view the deficiencies, draw-backs and infirmities pointed out in the
evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it is against the
general tenor of the evidence given by the witness and whether the earlier
evaluation of the evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief.
Minor discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the core of the case,
hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn out of context here or
there from the evidence, attaching importance to some technical errors
committed by the investigating officer not going to the root of the matter
would not ordinarily permit rejection of the evidence as a whole.(Ref.State
of U.P. v. M.K. Anthony, AIR 1985 SC 48).
29.     Mere understatements or hyperboles per se do not render the evidence
brittle.      Trivial         contradictions, inconsistencies, embellishments     or
improvements on trivial matter without diluting the core of the prosecution
case cannot be made a ground to reject the evidence in its entirety.The trial
Court, after going through the entire evidence, must form an opinion about
the reliability of the witnesses, and the appellate court in the normal course
of action, would not be justified in reviewing the same, without providing
justifiable reasons for doing so.
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                               Page 34

30.     Therefore, the minor contradictions and discrepancies as pointed out
by the learned counsel for the appellant are concerned, the case of the
prosecution cannot be discredited on the basis of such minor
inconsistencies. Finding support from the various judgments as cited above,
we second the reasoning of the learned trial court in this regard. We do not
find any merit in the submissions made by the counsel for the appellants as
one cannot raise any doubt about the commission of the offence, or the
presence of PW-1 or PW-2 at the scene of crime on perusal of the entire
factual matrix.
31.     The victim Mahesh @ pappu had received following anti mortem
injuries on his person, as per the post mortem report proved on record as
Ex.PW14/A:
               a. Reddish grazed abrasion, 4cm x 3.5 cm present over the
               right shoulder tip.
               b. Incised wound measuring 2.4 cm x 0.2 cm x 0.2 cm
               present vertically over the dorsal aspect of left wrist joint.
               c. Incised wound measuring 2.5 cm x 0.2cma x 0.2 cms
               present on anterolateral, aspect of right lower thigh, 3cm
               above the right knee joint.
               d. Incised stab wound measuring 2cm x 0.3cm on surface
               present slightly obliquely over the left chest its upper
               medical angle is blunt and is 3cm from the midline and it
               slower lateral angle is acute and is 6.6 cms above and
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                               Page 35

               vertical to above nipple. The wound goes forward,
               downwards and medially cutting the skin and the tissues
               enters the left chest cavity by cutting through the 1 st
               intercostal space and 2nd costal cartilage , then piercing
               through the upper lobe of the left lung it cuts the arch of
               aorta making a total depth of 7.6 cms.
               e. Incised stab wound measuring 1.6 x 0.2cm on surface
               present slightly obliquely over the ventral aspect of right
               forearm, its upper medial angle is acute and lies 2cm below
               the mid of the right cubitalfossk, its lower lateral angle is
               blunt and 4.5 cm below and lateral to medial epicondyle of
               ulcerous. The wound goes inwards and upwards cutting the
               soft tissue only to a depth of 2.3 cms.
               The injury on the chest was opined to be sufficient to cause
               death in ordinary course of nature.
32.     The blood stained clothes, blood of the deceased, blood stained
material and knife were sent to FSL and as per the FSL report the blood
group detected on these exhibits was opined to be of the same group i.e. of
the deceased i.e. Blood Group ‘A’.
33.     Taking into consideration the unrebutted, reliable and trustworthy
deposition of PW-1, the statement of PW-2 Krishan @ Gola in his
examination-in-chief and his statement recorded under Section 164 of Cr.
P.C., the medical evidence produced on record and the FSL report,
Ex.PW20/B, we are of the view that the learned trial court has rightly come
to the conclusion that all the appellants are guilty of committing an offence
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                              Page 36

punishable under Section 392/34 of the IPC. We also concur with the
finding of the learned trial court holding the appellant Naresh guilty for
committing an offence punishable under Section 397 of IPC. We also find
ourselves in complete agreement with the reasoning given by the learned
trial court to hold the appellant Naresh guilty for the offence punishable
under Section 302 of IPC. However, we differ only to the limited extent of
holding the appellants Arun @ Hanni and Sanjiv @ Sanjay, guilty for
committing an offence punishable under Section 302/34 of IPC.
34.     Now to examine the aspect and adjudge whether the criminal act was
done in furtherance of a common intention, regard must be given not solely
to a particular fact, but to all the facts and circumstances in a given case.
There exists no straight-jacket formula for applying the principles of
common intention. Inference with regard to existence of common intention
in committing a particular act must be drawn from the totality of the facts
and circumstances of each case. For enjoining a constructive liability under
Section 34 IPC on an accused for the criminal act done by the other, it is
necessary to establish that such criminal act was done pursuant to a pre-
arranged design. Undoubtedly, it is not possible to procure direct evidence
to prove the intention of the accused sought to be convicted with the aid of
Section 34, therefore, in most of the cases the intention of such a person is
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                         Page 37

gathered from the relevant facts and circumstances surrounding a particular
case.
35.        It is a trite law that commission of a criminal act by several persons
in furtherance of a common intention of all pre-supposes a prior meeting of
mind. Section 34 IPC which is nothing but a rule of evidence provides that
when a criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of a common
intention, each of that person is liable for that act in the same manner as if it
were done by him alone.
36.     In Brijlal Pd. Sinha v. State of Bihar, 1998 5 SCC 699, the Apex
Court in the following Para held as under:-
                   “11.         ...The liability of one person for an offence
                   committed by another in the course of a criminal act
                   perpetrated by several persons will arise Under
                   Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code only where such
                   criminal act is done in furtherance of a common
                   intention of the persons who join in committing the
                   crime. Direct proof of common intention will, of course
                   be difficult to get and such intention can only be inferred
                   from the circumstances. But the existence of a common
                   intention must be a necessary inference from the
                   circumstances established in a given case. A common
                   intention can only be inferred from the acts of the
                   parties. Unless a common intention is established as a
                   matter of necessary inference from the proved
                   circumstances the accused persons will be liable for
                   their individual act and not for the act done by any other
                   person. For an inference of common intention to be
                   drawn for the purposes of Section 34, the evidence and
                   the circumstances of the case should establish, without
                   any room for doubt that a meeting of minds and a fusion
                   of ideas had taken place amongst difference accused and
                   in prosecution of it the overt acts of the accused persons
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                                Page 38

                   flowed out as if in obedience to the command of a single
                   mind. If on the evidence there is doubt as to the
                   involvement of a particular accused in the common
                   intention, the benefit of the doubt should be given to the
                   said accused person.”
37.        In Dharam Pal & Ors. v. State of Haryana, AIR 1978 SC
1492, this court laid down the following tests for Section 34 IPC to be
applicable against the co-accused and held as under:-
                   “It may be that when some persons start with a pre-
                   arranged plan to commit a minor offence, they may in
                   the course of their committing the minor offence come
                   to an understanding to commit the major offence as
                   well. Such an understanding may appear from the
                   conduct of the persons sought to be made vicariously
                   liable for the act of the principal culprit or from some
                   other incriminatory evidence but the conduct or other
                   evidence must be such as not to leave any room for
                   doubt in that behalf.
                   A criminal Court fastening vicarious liability must satisfy
                   itself as to the prior meeting of the minds of the
                   principal culprit and his companions who are sought to
                   be constrictively made liable in respect of every act
                   committed by the former. There is no law to our
                   knowledge which lays down that a person accompanying
                   the principal culprit shares his intention in respect of
                   every act which the latter might eventually commit. The
                   existence or otherwise of the common intention depends
                   upon the facts and circumstances of each case. The
                   intention of the principal offender and his companions to
                   deal with any person who might intervene to stop the
                   quarrel must be apparent from the conduct of the
                   persons accompanying the principal culprit or some
                   other clear and cogent incriminating piece of evidence.
                   In the absence of such material, the companion or
                   companions cannot justifiably be held guilty for every
                   offence committed by the principal offender.”
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                                Page 39

38.     Seeing the facts of the present case in the light of the legal principles
discussed above, undoubtedly, appellants had the common intention to
commit robbery and it was the co accused Naresh who was carrying a knife
in his pocket at the time of commission of the offence. It is also an admitted
fact that it was Naresh alone who had used the knife and stabbed the
deceased twice, once on his right hand and second on the right side of the
chest. Having said this, the role attributed to appellant Arun @ Hanni and
Sanjiv @ Sanjay, is that they were asked by Naresh to catch hold of the
deceased and thereafter, these accused persons caught hold the hands of the
deceased and pushed him against the wall and then appellant – Naresh
stabbed him on his chest. The said fatal injury on the chest of the deceased
conceivably could not be within the comprehension of Arun and Sanjiv as
Naresh had caused the first injury on his hand with the view to extract
money and mobile phone from him
39.     At this stage, it would be well to recall the observations made by this
Court relating to appreciation of evidence and the duties expected of a Judge
presiding over a criminal trial.In State of U.P. V. Anil Singh, 1988 Supp
SCC 686 : 1989 SCC (Cri) 48 : AIR 1988 SC 1998, it is observed as
under:
          “... in the great majority of cases, the prosecution version is
          rejected either for want of corroboration by independent
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                             Page 40

          witnesses, or for some falsehood stated or embroidery added
          by witnesses. In some cases, the entire prosecution case is
          doubted for not examining all the witnesses to the occurrence.
          The indifferent attitude of the public in the investigation of
          crimes could also be pointed. The public is generally reluctant
          to come forward to depose before the court. It is, therefore,
          not correct to reject the prosecution version only on ground
          that all witnesses to occurrence have not been examined. It is
          also not proper to reject the case for want of corroboration by
          independent witnesses if the case made out is otherwise true
          and acceptable. With regard to falsehood stated or
          embellishments added by the prosecution witnesses, it is well
          to remember that there is a tendency amongst witnesses in
          our country to back up a good case by false or exaggerated
          version. It is also experienced that invariably the witnesses
          add embroidery to prosecution story, perhaps for the fear of
          being disbelieved. But that is no ground to throw the case
          overboard, if true, in the main. If there is a ring of truth in the
          main, the case should not be rejected. It is the duty of the
          court to cull out the nuggets of truth from the evidence unless
          there is reason to believe that the inconsistencies or falsehood
          are so glaring as utterly to destroy confidence in the
          witnesses. It is necessary to remember that a Judge does not
          preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent
          man is punished. A Judge also presides to see that a guilty
          man does not escape. One is as important as the other. Both
          are public duties which the Judge has to perform.”
40.     Thus, in the present case, appellant Arun @ Hanni and Sanjiv @
Sanjay cannot be enjoined with constructive liability for the criminal act of
committing murder of the deceased by the accused Naresh under section 34
IPC.
41.     Thus, in light of the above discussion, we do not find any illegality,
perversity or infirmity in the finding of the learned Trial Court as far as the
conviction and sentence u/s 302, 397 IPC awarded to appellant Naresh is
concerned. Therefore, the same is left undisturbed and the appeal filed by
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                               Page 41

the accused Naresh challenging the order of conviction and sentence dated
11.02.2009 and 20.02.2010 respectively is dismissed and the order of the
learned Trial Court is upheld. So far as the appeal filed by the accused Arun
@ Hanni and Sanjiv @ Sanjay is concerned, the same is allowed limited to
the extent that they stand acquitted under Section 302 IPC, and accordingly
the order of conviction and sentence dated 11.02.2009 and 20.02.2010
respectively are set aside with regard to the offence under Section 302 IPC,
however, the conviction under Section 392 read with Section 34 of IPC, for
which they have been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of five years and to pay fine of Rs.1,000/- each and in default thereof,
to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of three months each
is left undisturbed. These appellants are directed to surrender and serve the
remainder of their sentence. For this purpose, they shall appear before the
trial court on 27th September 2013. The registry shall transmit the trial court
records forthwith to ensure compliance of the judgment.
42.     The appeals stands disposed of in the above terms.
                                                  KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
                                                    INDERMEET KAUR, J.
September 04, 2013
pkb
CRL.A. Nos.432 /321/717 of 2010                                           Page 42


