 IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                      W.P(C) No. 4152/2007
                       Judgment delivered on: 5th August,2010
Naseeruddin                                  ..... Petitioner
                          Through: Ms. Shobhna Takiyar, Adv.
                          Versus
State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.              ..... Respondents
                          Through: Mr.Vinod Wadhwa, Adv.
                      W.P(C) No. 4164/2007
Shaffique Ahmed                      ..... Petitioner
                          Through: Ms. Shobhna Takiyar, Adv.
                          Versus
State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.              ..... Respondents
                          Through: Mr.Vinod Wadhwa, Adv.
                      W.P(C) No. 4166/2007
Rajinder Singh                ..... Petitioner
                          Through: Ms. Shobhna Takiyar, Adv.
                          Versus
State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.              ..... Respondents
                          Through: Mr.Vinod Wadhwa, Adv.
                      W.P(C) No. 4160/2007
Satpal Monga                         ..... Petitioner
                          Through: Ms. Shobhna Takiyar, Adv.
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                       Page 1 of 20

                          Versus
State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.              ..... Respondents
                          Through: Mr.Vinod Wadhwa, Adv.
                      W.P(C) No. 4153/2007
Raja Ram Kamra                       ..... Petitioner
                          Through: Ms. Shobhna Takiyar, Adv.
                          Versus
State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.              ..... Respondents
                          Through: Mr.Vinod Wadhwa, Adv.
                          And
                      W.P(C) No. 4163/2007
Ansar Ahmed                   ..... Petitioner
                          Through: Ms. Shobhna Takiyar, Adv.
                          Versus
State of Andhra Pradesh & Anr.              ..... Respondents
                          Through: Mr.Vinod Wadhwa, Adv.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may              Yes
    be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to Reporter or not?                     Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported                Yes
     in the Digest?
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                     Page 2 of 20

KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
1.             This order shall dispose of a batch of six writ
petitions      bearing  Nos.   W.P.(C)   4152/2007,    4153/2007,
4160/2007, 4163/2007, 4164/2007 & 4166/2007.
2.             In these petitions filed  under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the petitioners seek quashing of the
common order dated 9.5.2007 passed by the learned ADJ in
PPA     No.    87/2005   in  exercise   of appellate   jurisdiction
conferred under Section 9 of the Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorized Occupants) Act 1971.           The petitioners also
seek quashing of the common eviction order dated 25th April,
2005 passed by the learned Estate Officer in respect of the
premises under the occupation of the present petitioners.
3.             Brief facts relevant for deciding the present
petitions are that in 1947 the petitioners were allotted their
respective shops on rent by the Nizam of Hyderabad for
running different trades like meat shop, barber shop,
tailoring shop, fair price shop, grocery shop, etc. On
2.3.1994, a termination notice was served on the petitioners
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                 Page 3 of 20

on the ground that the said premises were being used for
commercial         purposes   whereas   they   were   allotted      for
residential purpose. The petitioners had filed a suit for
permanent injunction bearing no 240/1994 which was
disposed of with the direction of restraining the respondents
from taking possession except in accordance with law.
Thereafter a notice dated 23.9.2000 under section 4 of the
Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act,
1971 was served on the petitioners and consequently an
eviction order dated 25.4.2005 was passed by the Estate
Officer. The petitioners preferred an appeal against the order
of the Estate Officer whereby vide judgment dated 9.5.2007,
the learned ADJ upheld the order of the Estate officer.
Impugning the order dated 25.4.2005 and judgment dated
9.5.2007,       the   petitioners have    preferred  the    present
petitions.
4.             Ms. Takiyar, counsel for the petitioners, submits
that both the courts below i.e. Estate Officer as well as the
learned ADJ failed to consider        the fact that the notice of
termination served by the respondent as well as show cause
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                  Page 4 of 20

notice issued by the Estate Officer under Section 4 of the
Public Premises Act itself      are illegal and void as the only
ground disclosed in the legal notice for declaring the
petitioners       as  unauthorized occupants in respect of their
premises is that they were using their premises contrary to
the letting out purpose.       The contention of the counsel for
the petitioners is that the premises were let out by the
predecessor of the respondent i.e. Nizam of Hyderabad for
running of various shops, small time trades, business etc. in
favour of the petitioners right from the inception of the
letting. Counsel further submits that in the rent receipts the
specific trades were duly disclosed. Inviting attention of this
court to some of the receipts filed in W.P.(C) 4152/2007 the
counsel point out that the letting purpose has been clearly
mentioned as running of a meat shop.           Similarly in other
cases also, counsel submits that the letting purpose has
been disclosed indicating the name of the trade for which the
shops were let out in favour of the petitioners.          Counsel
further submits that the petitioners had placed on record
these receipts before the Estate Officer as well as before the
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                Page 5 of 20

Appellate Court and         these receipts pertain to the period
from 1955 onwards but both the courts below have
overlooked the said receipts and wrongly held the letting
purpose as residential.       Counsel further submits that once
the documentary evidence clearly indicating the letting
purpose was placed on record, the same could not have been
ignored by the courts below. Counsel further submits that no
documentary         evidence   was  placed   on   record   by     the
respondent to contradict or rebut the said documentary
evidence placed by the petitioners in the shape of rent
receipts.       In support of her arguments counsel for the
petitioners has placed reliance on the following judgments:
        1.     M/s. Jain Ink Manufacturing Co. Vs. LIC of India &
               Anr., AIR 1981 SC 670.
        2.     Ex. Havaldar Kailash Singh & Sons. Vs. UOI & Anr.,
               106(2003) DLT 660.
        3.     Pyare Lal Vs. Estate Officer & Anr.,2006 II AD
               (Delhi) 28.
        4.     Dr. Yash Paul gupta Vs. Dr. S. S. Anand & Ors. AIR
               1980, Jammu & Kashmir
        5.     Mrs. S. Premlata Bhatia Vs. Union of India, 108
               (2003) DLT 346.
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                 Page 6 of 20

5.             Refuting the said submissions of the counsel for
the petitioners, counsel for the respondent submits that this
court while exercising writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India will not re-appreciate the findings of
facts arrived at by both the courts below. He further submits
that in the legal notice the letting purpose was clearly
spelled out which was residential and therefore, now the
petitioners cannot be heard to say that the letting purpose
was commercial. Counsel further submits that the petitioners
were admittedly grantees in respect of the shops in question
and therefore, their licenses     were terminated on account of
the breach committed by them. During the course of his
arguments counsel has produced photo copy of one draft
lease deed and states that the same was executed between
Naseerudeen as lessee and the Nizam of Hyderabad as
lessor through one Mr. M. Edward. On being questioned as
to why this draft lease deed was not placed on record before
the Estate Officer and before the Appellate Authority, counsel
states that the same being very old, the officials of the
respondent with great difficulty could lay their hands on the
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                               Page 7 of 20

same. Counsel further submits that the petitioners were in
unauthorized occupation of the premises in question from 2nd
March, 1994 when the grant in their favour was revoked by
the respondent. Counsel further submits that the           learned
Estate Officer has carefully gone into the question of letting
purpose but did not find merit in the pleas raised by the
petitioners. Counsel further submits that both the courts
below have gone in depth to deal with the contentions raised
by the petitioners and no illegality or perversity can be found
in the reasoning given by them.
6.             In support of his arguments, counsel for the
respondent placed reliance on the following judgments :
        1.     The Indian Bank Vs. M/s. Blaze and Central (P) Ltd.
               & Ors. AIR 1986 Karnataka 258.
        2.     New India Assurance Co.Ltd.Vs. KLM Engineering
               Co.Pvt. Ltd. & Ors., AIR 2008 SC 876.
        3.     Hardwari Lal Verma Vs. The Estate Officer & Ors.,
               AIR 1977 Delhi 268.
        4.     Ruby     Advertisers    Vs.   Delhi   Development
               Authority, 105(2003)DLT 92.
        5.     Rajvaidya Gune’s Shahu Aryoushadi Karnataka
               Ltd. & Anr. Vs. The Collector of Kolhapur, JT
               1996(9) SC 437.
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                 Page 8 of 20

7.      I have heard learned counsel for the parties at
considerable length and given my thoughtful consideration to
the pleas raised by them.
8.      Vide     legal  notice    dated   2nd   March,   1994       the
Government of Andhra Pradesh, successor-in-interest of the
Nizam of Hyderabad called upon these petitioners to hand
over the vacant possession of the premises under their
occupation within a month’s time, whereafter they will be
deemed        to   be  considered     as  trespassers/unauthorized
occupants in the premises under their occupation. The main
ground for termination of the said lease was that these
petitioners have been using the premises under their
occupation for running their respective trades although as
per the grant/lease, these premises were let out to them for
residential      purpose    only.  It  would   be   appropriate      to
reproduce below the following paragraphs taken from one of
the legal notice here:-
                “1. By virtue of a lease deed, a quarter behind
               Dhobi Ghat in the premises of Hyderabad House has
               been leased out for your own residence on monthly
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                   Page 9 of 20

               rental and on such terms and conditions as contained
               in the said Deed of Lease.
               2. xx xx
               3. xx xx
               4. xx xx
               5. xx xx
               6. In spite of the fact that the said grant/lease was
               for your residential purposes only, you had been using
               the said quarter for running the Meat Shop, in clear
               violation of the terms of the grant. In spite of the
               notice earlier issued to you, you have not desisted
               from using the quarter for running the Meat shop.
               7.     In terms of the said grant/lease, the Lessor, the
               Government of Andhra Pradesh shall not wish to allow
               you to continue in the said quarter.”
9.      Pursuant to the said legal notice, the Estate Officer
issued a show cause notice under Sub-Section (1) and Clause
(b)(ii) of Sub-Section (2) of Section 4 of the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1971. The ground
given in one of such notices is reproduced as under:-
               1.     The grant/lease/licence/permission granted to
               Shri Naseeruddin to occupy and use the premises
               mentioned in the Schedule below has been
               revoked/terminated by the State of Andhra Pradesh;
               and your present occupation of the said premises is
               an unauthorized occupation within the meaning of
               the said Act.
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                         Page 10 of 20

               2.     Proceeding against you for evicting you from
               the said premises “by due process of law” is
               permissible and warranted in law.”
10.     All these petitioners contested the proceedings before
the Estate Officer and vide order dated 25.4.2005, the Estate
Officer found all these petitioners to be in unauthorized and
illegal occupation of the premises. Accordingly they were
directed to hand over peaceful vacant possession of the
premises to the respondent within a period of 15 days.
Aggrieved with the said order, the petitioners preferred an
appeal before the learned Additional District Judge under
Section 9 of the Public Premises Act and vide order dated
9.5.2007 the learned ADJ did not find any merit in the said
appeals and consequently dismissed the same.
11.     The principal contention raised by the counsel for the
petitioners is that both the Courts below failed to appreciate
that the ground for declaring the petitioners as unauthorized
occupants itself was non-existent as the respective premises
in favour of the petitioners were let out to them for
commercial purposes and, therefore, there was no question
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                       Page 11 of 20

of any kind of breach on the part of the petitioners so far the
letting purpose of the same was concerned. Counsel for both
the parties did not raise any other controversy, but confined
their arguments to the said limited issue as to whether the
show cause notice served by the Estate Officer was itself
illegal and void as the petitioners could not have been
declared unauthorized occupants in respect of the premises
under their occupation within the meaning of Section 2 (g) of
the Public Premises Act.
12.     Before proceeding in the matter further it would be apt
to reproduce Section 4 of the Public Premises Act as under:-
               “4. Issue of notice to show cause against order
               of eviction. - (1) If the estate officer is of opinion
               that any persons are in unauthorised occupation of
               any public premises and that they should be evicted,
               the Estate Officer shall issue in the manner
               hereinafter provided a notice in writing calling upon
               all persons concerned to show cause why an order of
               eviction should not be made.
               (2) The notice shall-
               (a) specify the grounds on which the order of
               eviction is proposed to be made; and
               (b) require all persons concerned, that is to say, all
               persons who are, or may be in occupation of, or
               claim interest in, the public premises,-
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                         Page 12 of 20

               (i) to show cause, if any, against the proposed order
               on before such date as is specified in the notice,
               being a date not earlier than seven days form the
               date of issue thereof, and
               (ii) to appear before the Estate Officer on the date
               specified in the notice along with the evidence which
               they intend to produce in support of the cause
               shown, and also for personal hearing, if such hearing
               is desired.]
               (3) The Estate Officer shall cause the notice to be
               served by having it affixed on the outer door or
               some other conspicuous part of the public premises,
               and in such other manner as may be prescribed,
               whereupon the notice shall be deemed to have duly
               given to all persons concerned.”
The aforesaid provision clearly envisages that in a case
where the Estate Officer was of the opinion that any persons
are in unauthorized occupation of any public premises and
they deserve to be evicted then the Estate Officer shall issue
notice in writing calling upon such persons to show cause as
to why an order of eviction shall not be made against them.
The clear mandate of the above provision is that such a
notice should specify the grounds based on which the order
of eviction is proposed to be made. In the case in hand, the
ground given in the notice as reproduced above is that the
grant/lease/permission granted in favour of these petitioners
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                        Page 13 of 20

have been revoked/terminated by the State of Andhra
Pradesh and, therefore, their occupation of the premises in
question became unauthorized within the meaning of the
above provision. Clearly no specific ground on which the
order of eviction was proposed by the Estate Officer has
been mentioned in the said notice. It appears that the
formation of such an opinion on the part of the Estate Officer
is based upon the legal notice dated 2nd March, 1994 sent by
the respondent to the petitioners. Although the notice of
show cause issued by the Estate Officer should have clearly
spelt out the ground of eviction, but since this issue has not
been addressed by the counsel, therefore, this Court is
proceeding in the matter taking the said formation of opinion
by the Estate Officer based on the legal notice dated 2nd
March, 1994 wherein the reason for declaring the petitioners
as unauthorized occupants was that they were using the
premises contrary to the terms of the grant/lease. As per the
legal notice, the premises in favour of the petitioners were
let out for their own residence but they started using the
premises for commercial purposes in breach of the terms of
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                              Page 14 of 20

the lease. It is not in dispute that the respondent did not
place on record any lease deed or any other document to
show the purpose of letting being residential. In the legal
notice also, it was vaguely mentioned that by virtue of the
lease deed, the premises were let out for residential
purposes. No date or particulars of such lease deed have
been given by the respondent in the legal notice. No such
lease deed was also placed on record by the respondent
before Estate Officer or the Appellate Court and not even
before this Court. It is only during the course of arguments
that counsel for the respondent sought to produce a
photocopy of the draft lease agreement which too does not
inspire any confidence in the absence of any proper details of
the premises etc. given in the draft lease deed.             The
petitioners on the other hand have placed on record the rent
receipts wherein the predecessor of the respondent i.e.
Nizam of Hyderabad has clearly indicated the purpose for
which the premises were let out to the petitioners. For
example, in the case of Naseeruddin, petitioner in W.P. (C)
No. 4152/2007, in the rent receipts issued in his favour the
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                             Page 15 of 20

purpose spelt out has been for running a meat shop.
Likewise, in the case of petitioner Rajinder Singh in W.P. (C)
No. 4166/2007 the purpose of letting has been disclosed as
running of a tailoring shop. These receipts are old receipts
pertaining to the period from 1955 onwards and, therefore,
in the absence of any other documentary evidence to the
contrary there is no reason to disbelieve these receipts. Even
the respondent has not denied the said receipts or to raise
any plea contrary to the letting purpose disclosed in the said
receipts. It is a settled legal position that in the teeth of
documentary evidence, oral evidence contradicting such
documentary evidence cannot be looked into unless the
party setting up oral evidence successfully proves any
novation of the contract between the parties. Once the said
documentary         evidence was placed   on  record    by     the
petitioners right from the stage of the proceedings before the
Estate Officer, the oral stand of the respondents pleading
execution of some lease deed wherein the purpose of letting
was disclosed as ‘residential’ deserves outright rejection.
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                              Page 16 of 20

13.     As already discussed above, the only ground for
declaring these petitioners unauthorized occupants is that
these petitioners were using the premises for commercial
purposes in breach of the terms of their lease, but since no
such lease was placed on record or any other documentary
evidence to substantiate the said plea was produced on
record by the respondent, therefore, the legal notice dated
2nd March, 1994 and the show cause notice served by the
Estate Officer under Section 4 of the PP Act becomes illegal,
void and without jurisdiction. It is quite surprising that
neither the Estate Officer nor the Appellate Court have taken
any pain to look at these receipts and at least to discuss the
import and effect of these receipts on the controversy
involved. It would be pertinent to refer to the judgment in
the case of New India Assurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Nusli
Neville Wadia (2008)3SCC 279 where the Apex Court has
held that:
               “Where an application is filed for eviction of an
               unauthorised occupant it obligates the Estate Officer to
               apply his mind so as to enable him to form an opinion
               that the respondent is a person who has been in
               unauthorised occupation of the public premises and that
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                           Page 17 of 20

               he should be evicted. When a notice is issued in terms of
               Section 4 of the Act, the noticee may show cause.
               Section 5 of the Act postulates that an order of eviction
               must be passed only upon consideration of the show
               cause and any evidence produced by him in support of
               its case also upon giving him a personal hearing, if any,
               as provided under Clause (ii) of sub-section (2) of
               Section 4 of the Act.
               ………………………
               The Estate Officer with a view to determine the lis
               between the parties must record summary of the
               evidence. Summary of the evidence and the documents
               shall also form part of the record of the proceedings.
               Procedure laid down for recording evidence is stated in
               the Rules. The Estate Officer being a creature of the
               statute must comply with the same. When a notice is
               issued, the occupant of the public premises would not
               only be entitled to show cause but would also be entitled
               to produce evidence in support of the cause shown.
               The procedural aspect as to who should lead evidence
               first, thus may have to be determined on the basis of
               the issues arising in the matter. When we say so, we do
               not mean that the procedure involved being a summary
               one, the issues are required to be specifically framed but
               that which is the principal issue(s) between the parties
               must be known to the Estate Officer.
               Thus      under   the Public     Premises    (Eviction    of
               Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 the occasion would
               arise for multi-level inquiry: primary inquiry will be to
               arrive at a conclusion on “unauthorised occupant”, and
               intermediate inquiry would be as to the eviction of
               “unauthorised occupant”.
                The question has been succinctly dealt with by a
               Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in Minoo
               Framroze Balsara v. Union of India6 wherein Bharucha,
               J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was) opined: (AIR
               p.       389, para 36)
                    “36. … the government company or corporation
                    must so act not only when terminating the
                    authority of an occupant of public premises of its
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                               Page 18 of 20

                   ownership to occupy the same but also when,
                   thereafter, it seeks his eviction therefrom.”
                The statute, although, does not require a lengthy
               hearing or a lengthy cross-examination but the noticee
               should be given an opportunity to file an effective show-
               cause. An effective show-cause can be filed when
               eviction is sought for a specified ground and the
               occupants must know the particulars in relation thereto.
               For the said purpose, Sections 4 and 5 of the Act must
               be read together. Even the Rules which are validly
               framed must be read along with the statutory
               provisions.”
14.      Another contention of the counsel for the respondent
was that the High Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction
would not interfere with the findings of facts arrived at by
Courts below. It is a settled legal position that in a
proceeding under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
India the High Court cannot sit in appeal over the findings
recorded by the competent authority or courts below.
Undoubtedly the jurisdiction of the High Court, therefore, is
supervisory and not appellate. But it is also a settled law that
if on a mere perusal of the order of an inferior court if the
High Court comes to a conclusion that such a court has
committed         manifest         error     by     misconstruing       certain
documents, or the High Court comes to the conclusion that
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                                             Page 19 of 20

on the materials it is not possible for a reasonable man to
come to a conclusion arrived at by the court or the court has
ignored to take into consideration certain relevant materials,
then the High Court will be fully justified in interfering with
the findings of the inferior court.
15.     Hence, in view of the aforesaid discussion, I find merit
in the contention raised by the counsel for the petitioners.
The judgments cited by the learned counsel for the
respondent are not applicable to the facts of the present
case. This Court accordingly allows all these petitions and
sets aside the orders passed by the learned Estate Officer
dated 25th April, 2005 and order dated 9th May, 2007 passed
by the learned ADJ.
                                     KAILASH GAMBHIR, J
August 05, 2010
mg/rkr
W.P.(C) No. 4152/2007                               Page 20 of 20


