        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                    FAO No. 112/2002
                                 Judgment delivered on: 24.03.2008
Smt. Leena Malhotra & Ors.                                ..... Appellants
                                 Through: Mr. Ashok Popli, Adv.
                          versus
Shri Vinod Kumar & Ors.                                   ..... Respondents
                                 Through: Mr. D.K. Sharma, Adv. for R-3.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KAILASH GAMBHIR,
1.    Whether the Reporters of local papers may
      be allowed to see the judgment?
2.    To be referred to Reporter or not?
3.    Whether the judgment should be reported
      in the Digest?
KAILASH GAMBHIR, J. Oral:
      Respondents No. 1 and 2 have been served through publication,
but despite service nobody is present. Respondents No. 1 and 2 are
proceeded ex parte. Mr. D.K. Sharma is present for respondent No. 3.
Service is complete.       With the consent of the parties, the matter is
taken up for final disposal.
FAO No. 112/2002                                                            Page 1 of 6

      By way of the present appeal the appellants seek to challenge
the impugned Award so as to claim enhancement in the compensation
amount over and above the amount of Rs. 1,72,692/- awarded by the
Tribunal. Brief summary of the facts of the present case are as
follows:-
      On 14.8.1992 at about 12.00 noon, the deceased Shri Ashok
Kumar Malhotra while driving his two wheeler scooter was coming
from Mall road side and was going towards Malka Ganj side, when the
deceased     reached  opposite main   gate  of Law    Faculty,  Delhi
University, a Tata Tempo bearing registration No. DL-1L-A-2183
driven by respondent No. 1 Sh. Vinod Kumar came at a fast speed and
in a rash and negligent manner. The Tata Tempo came on the wrong
side of the road and struck against the two wheeler scooter of the
deceased with its front right portion as a result of which deceased
with his scooter fell down on the road and sustained fatal injuries.
Deceased was removed to Hindu Rao Hospital where he succumbed to
injuries at about 2.30 p.m.
      Mr. Ashok Popli counsel appearing for the appellants contends
that the Tribunal has not taken into consideration the income tax
assessment order placed and proved on record in which the income of
FAO No. 112/2002                                             Page 2 of 6

the deceased was disclosed as Rs. 3,000/- per month. Another
grievance of the appellants is that the Tribunal has not correctly
applied the multiplier, which as per the appellants is 17 keeping in
view the Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act in place of 13 as
applied by the Tribunal. No amount of compensation has been
awarded by the Tribunal towards loss of consortium and for funeral
expenses. The deceased was survived by his widow, children and
parents. Counsel further submits that children and parents of the
deceased have also expired and only the deceased is survived by his
widow.
      Mr.    D.K. Sharma,   counsel  appearing  for  the   respondent
insurance company on the other hand submits that the Tribunal has
granted just, fair and reasonable compensation in favour of the
claimants keeping in view the facts placed and proved on record by
the claimants. Mr. D.K. Sharma submits that the claimants/appellants
have placed the assessment order for the assessment year 1991-92,
return of which was filed on 22.1.1993 much after the date of the
accident i.e. 30th August, 1992. Counsel for the respondent further
contends that the Tribunal has rightly not placed any reliance on the
said income tax assessment order, return of which was filed much
later. Counsel for the respondent further submits that except the said
FAO No. 112/2002                                              Page 3 of 6

document no other document prior to the said assessment order was
placed on record by the appellants. Counsel thus submits that the
Tribunal has correctly assessed the income of the deceased under the
Minimum Wages Act. As regards the grievance raised by the
appellants for grant of compensation towards loss of consortium and
funeral expenses Mr. D.K. Sharma, counsel for the respondent leaves
the same to the discretion of this Court.
      I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the record.
      Perusal of the record shows that the appellant had merely
placed on record the income tax assessment order for the assessment
year 1991-92 for which the return was filed on 22 nd January, 1993. It
was claimed in the petition that the deceased was earning a sum of
Rs. 3,000/- per month from his business being run under the name
and style of M/s G.R. Engineerings. To substantiate the claim of the
said earning of the deceased the appellant had examined one Mr.
Jagdish Kumar as PW-2, who in his deposition had shown the earning
of the deceased between Rs.4,000/- to Rs. 5,000/- per month.
Appellant No. 1 Smt. Leena Malhotra also appeared in the witness
box, she disclosed the earning of the deceased as Rs. 3,000/- per
FAO No. 112/2002                                              Page 4 of 6

month. The said witness also could not place on record anything to
show that the deceased was running a factory under the name and
style of M/s G.R. Engineerings. In her cross-examination the widow of
the deceased stated that the deceased was not an income tax payee.
In support of the income only assessment order for the assessment
year 1991-92 was placed on record and admittedly return of the said
assessment year was filed much later in time after the date of
accident i.e. 22nd January, 1993. The Tribunal has correctly not placed
the reliance on the said assessment order as that was the solitary
document placed on record to establish the income of the deceased
unsupported with any other evidence.         The return of the said
assessment year was filed on 22nd January, 1993 although the accident
in question took place on 14th August, 1992. I do not find any infirmity
in the finding of the Tribunal holding that the said assessment order
has no relevance to establish the actual income of the deceased at the
time of his death. The contention of the counsel for the appellants in
this regard is accordingly rejected.
      Perusal of the Award further shows that the Tribunal has applied
multiplier of 13. The accident in question pertains to the period prior
to introduction of the Second Schedule of the Motor Vehicles Act,
which was brought in the year 1994. As per the Second Schedule of
FAO No. 112/2002                                                Page 5 of 6

the Motor Vehicles Act the applicable multiplier is 17 and taking the
analogy of the same the multiplier of 17 is made applicable in place of
multiplier of 13. The deceased is survived by his widow and as per
counsel for the appellants other legal heirs left by the deceased have
already died. No amount of compensation towards loss of consortium
has been granted by the Tribunal. The widow of the deceased as on
the date of accident must be quite young as the deceased himself was
35 years of age. Grant of Rs. 50,000/- towards loss of consortium
would be appropriate amount, which should be granted in favour of
the appellant/widow of the deceased. An amount of Rs. 5,000/- is also
granted towards funeral expenses. The differential amount shall be
paid by respondent No. 3 insurance company with upto date interest
@ 6% from the date of filing of the petition till 31 st December, 1999
and @ 7.5% from 1st January, 2000 till filing of the petition.
      With these directions the matter is remanded back to the
tribunal for apportionment of the amount of compensation in favour of
the appellants/claimants.
March 24, 2008                                KAILASH GAMBHIR, J.
rkr
FAO No. 112/2002                                               Page 6 of 6


