                        HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                      FAO NO. 86 OF 2012
        From the order dated 16.01.2012 passed by the learned Civil Judge
        (Senior Division), Jaleswar in I.A.No.7 of 2012 arising out of C.S. No. 5 of
        2012.
                                               -------------
       Sri Rabindra Kumar Mohanty                                    ……                     Appellant
                                                         -Versus-
       Smt. Sujata Mohapatra and others                              ……                    Respondents
                    For Appellant               :   M/s. D.K. Dey, C.K. Dey
                                                            & A.K. Das
                     For Respondents :              M/s. D.K. Mohanty, D.K. Rath
                                                             & S.C. Tripathy
                                             ------------------------------
                                    Date of Judgment: 10.07.2015
                                            ------------------------------
        P R E S E N T:
                    THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE K.R. MOHAPATRA
             ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
K.R. Mohapatra, J.           This appeal has been filed assailing the order dated
        16.01.2012 passed by the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division), Jaleswar
        in I.A. No. 7 of 2012 arising out of C.S. No. 5 of 2012, wherein, the
        learned Civil Judge granted an ex parte ad interim injunction in exercise
        of power conferred under Order 39 Rule 3, C.P.C. restraining the
        appellant and others from alienating the suit property during pendency of
        the suit.

                                        2
2.            Civil Suit No.5 of 2012 has been filed by plaintiff/respondent
no.1 for partition of the suit schedule property, to declare the gift deed
executed by the defendant nos. 1 to 3 in favour of defendant nos. 4 and 5
and different sale deeds executed in favour of defendant nos. 5 and 6 as
null and void and for permanent injunction. Along with the plaint, the
plaintiff-respondent no. 1 filed an application under Order 39 Rule 1 and
2, C.P.C. (I.A. No.7 of 2012) praying, inter alia, to restrain the defendants
from alienating the suit property. The plaintiff also filed an application
under Order 39 Rule 3, C.P.C. along with the said interim application
with a prayer to pass an ex parte ad interim injunction. Entertaining the
aforesaid applications, the learned Civil Judge by his order dated
16.01.2012 passed an ex parte interim order restraining the opposite
parties therein, i.e., the appellant and respondent nos. 2 to 4 from
alienating any part of the suit property during pendency of the suit. The
defendant no. 5 (appellant) being aggrieved by the said order has
preferred this appeal.
3.            At the outset, Mr. D.K. Dey, learned counsel for the appellant
advanced his argument on the question of maintainability of the appeal
and submitted that the power of the Court to grant an ex parte ad interim
injunction does not flow from Order 39 Rule 3 C.P.C., but from the
provisions under Section 94 read with Order 39 Rule 1 and 2 C.P.C. The
impugned order of ad interim injunction being passed under Order 39
Rule 1 and 2, C.P.C., the appeal is very much maintainable under Order
43 Rule 1(r) of C.P.C.

                                         3
4.         The rules of natural justice demand that when an application
under order 39 Rules 1 and 2, C.P.C. is made before a court, the
person(s) against whom the relief is sought for must be given an
opportunity of being heard. But, situation/circumstance may demand
immediate interference of the court to pass an order, which if not passed
may occasion failure of justice and would defeat the very purpose of
making such application. In such a situation, the Court may proceed to
entertain the application for interim injunction filed under Order 39 Rules
1 and 2, C.P.C. before issuance of notice to person(s) against whom the
relief is sought for. This is the requirement of Rule 3. However, proviso to
Rule 3 is introduced in order to restrict the court to exercise such power
liberally, which requires the court to record its reason for postponement
of notice when it proposes to pass an ex-parte ad-interim order of
injunction. Thus, it is quite clear that exercise of power under Rule 3 of
Order 39, C.P.C. is available only for issuance and/or postponement of
notice and it has nothing to do with passing of an order of interim
injunction. Accordingly, an ex-parte ad interim order of injunction can
only be passed in exercise of power conferred under Order 39 Rules 1 and
2, C.P.C. In the case of A. Venkatasubbiah Naidu –v- S. Chellappan
and others, reported in AIR 2000 SC 3032, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
while dealing with similar situation held as under:
         “11.    It cannot be contended that the power to pass
         interim ex parte orders of injunction does not emanate
         from the said Rule. In fact, the said rule is the repository
         of the power to grant orders of temporary injunction with
         or without notice, interim or temporary, or till further

                                       4
       orders or till the disposal of the suit. Hence, any order
       passed in exercise of the aforesaid powers in Rule 1
       would be appealable as indicated in Order 43, Rule 1 of
       the Code. The choice is for the party affected by the order
       either to move the appellate Court or to approach the
       same Court which passed the ex parte order for any
       relief.”
         Situation,   however,  is  different  when   the  Court   refuses
postponement of the notice before passing an order of ex parte interim
injunction. When the Court directs for issuance of notice under Rule 3 of
Order 39, the Court neither refuses nor passes an order of injunction. In
that case, the Court decides to take up the application in a later date
after notice to the opposite party. Thus, neither any right of the party is
affected nor any order of refusing or granting interim order of injunction
is passed. In the case of Naliniprava Patnaik and another –v- Smt.
Jyotirmayee Das and others, reported in 1989 (II) OLR 455 and
subsequently in the case of Bidulata Das –v- Braja Bihari Palit and
others, reported in AIR 1993 (Orissa) 78, this Court held as follows:
         “9.    xxx                xxx               xxx
                When the Court is not satisfied that it should
         consider the application for temporary injunction
         under O. 39, Rule 1 and 2, CPC before notice to
         opposite party, it does not pass an order under O. 39,
         Rule 1 or 2 CPC. It postpones the consideration of
         such application to a later date after notice to the
         opposite party as envisaged under Order 39, Rule 3
         proviso CPC. Such order not being an order under
         Order 39, Rule 1 or 2 C.P.C., right of appeal Order 43,
         Rule 1(r) cannot be exercised in respect of such an
         order.
         10.     An order under O. 39, Rule 1 or 2 CPC, may be
         either by grant of temporary injunction or refusal to
         grant such injunction. Where that order is passed ad
         interim for further consideration it has the same effect
         as an order of temporary injunction till it remains in

                                        5
          force. Thus, right of the party restraining is effected. In
          that view of the matter, an appeal lies against such an
          order. Where, however, the Court adjourns such an
          application to the future date after notice to opposite
          party, no right of any party is affected. Application of
          the party making the application remains pending for
          future consideration. Such an order cannot be treated
          as an order refusing to grant injunction.
                xxx              xxx                 xxx”
5.           Further, Mr. Dey, learned counsel for the appellant drawing
attention of this Court to Rule 3-A of Order 39, C.P.C. submitted that
when an order in exercise of power under Rule 3 is passed by
postponement of notice to the party against whom the relief is sought for,
the Court should make an endeavour to finally dispose of the application
under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 C.P.C. within thirty days from the date on
which the injunction was granted and where it is unable so to do, it shall
record its reason for such inability, but, in the instant case, though an ex
parte ad interim injunction was passed on 16.01.2012, the learned Civil
Judge has not made any endeavour to dispose of the application as yet.
He further submitted that while passing the ex parte order of injunction
before issuance of notice to the opposite parties, the learned Civil Judge
passed an order directing the opposite parties not to alienate the suit
property during pendency of the suit, which means he has passed an
absolute order of injunction before issuance of notice to the opposite
parties in the I.A. Such an order is per se illegal. He further submitted
that failure on the part of the Court to do so gives right to the aggrieved
party to prefer an appeal against the order of ad interim injunction,
notwithstanding the remedy available under Rule 4 of Order 39 C.P.C. In

                                         6
the case at hand, the ad-interim order of injunction has been passed on
16.01.2012 and is in force till date. He also relied upon the decision in
the case of A. Venkatasubbiah Naidu (supra), wherein, the Hon’ble Apex
Court observed as follows:
          “19. It is the acknowledged position of law that no party
          can be forced to suffer for the inaction of the Court or its
          omissions to act according to the procedure established by
          law. Under the normal circumstances the aggrieved party
          can prefer an appeal only against an order passed under
          Rules 1, 2, 2A, 4 or 10 of Order 39 of the Code in terms of
          Order 43, Rule 1 of the Code. He cannot approach the
          appellate or revisional Court during the pendency of the
          application for grant or vacation of temporary injunction. In
          such circumstances the party who does not get justice due
          to the inaction of the Court in following the mandate of law
          must have a remedy. So we are of the view that in a case
          where the mandate of Order 39, Rule 3-A of the Code is
          flouted, the aggrieved party, shall be entitled to the right of
          appeal notwithstanding the pendency of the application for
          grant or vacation of a temporary injunction against the
          order remaining in force. In such appeal, if preferred, the
          appellate Court shall be obliged to entertain the appeal and
          further to take note of the omission of the subordinate
          Court in complying with the provisions of Rule 3-A. In
          appropriate cases the appellate Court, apart from granting
          or vacating or modifying the order of such injunction, may
          suggest suitable action against the erring judicial officer
          including recommendation to take steps for making adverse
          entry in his ACRs. Failure to decide the application or
          vacate the ex parte temporary injunction shall, for the
          purposes of the appeal, be deemed to be the final order
          passed on the application for temporary injunction, on the
          date of expiry of thirty days mentioned in the Rule.”
6.            In view of the discussion made above and the law laid down
(supra), I have no hesitation to hold that an appeal is maintainable as
against an ex parte ad interim order of injunction as provided under
Order XLIII Rule (1) (r) C.P.C., but not against the order refusing to
exercise power under Order 39 Rule 3 C.P.C. Taking into consideration

                                          7
the facts and circumstances of this case, I hold that this appeal is
maintainable.
7.             Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that the
plaintiff-respondent no. 1 is not entitled to an order of interim injunction
as the ingredients of interim injunction are not satisfied in the case at
hand. It is contended that in a pending suit, alienation if made would be
hit by doctrine of lis pendens and as such, no irreparable loss can be
caused to the plaintiff even if there is alienation as the purchaser would
be bound by the decision in the civil suit, whether or not they are
impleaded as parties to the suit. In support of his contention, he relied
upon the decision in the case of M/s. Graftek Pvt. Ltd. and others –v-
Sri Lord Lingaraj Mahaprabhu Bije, Bhubaneswar, reported in 1998
(II) OLR 404, wherein this Court in paragraph-8 of the said           judgment
observed as follows:
           “8. So far as the question of irreparable loss is concerned,
           the trial Court does not appear to have adverted to this
           aspect. The injunction sought for is against alienation
           and against making any construction on the disputed
           land. So far as alienation is concerned, since a suit is
           already pending, the doctrine of lis pendens would be
           squarely applicable and as such no irreparable loss can
           be caused to the plaintiff even if there is alienation as the
           alienese would be bound by the decision in the civil suit,
           whether they are impleaded or not impleaded as parties
           to the suit. To allay any further apprehension in the mind
           of the plaintiff, a condition can also be imposed to the
           effect that in case the property is alienated, it must be
           indicated by the vendor in the sale deed that the property
           is subject-matter of the suit and the purchaser should be
           bound by the decision of the Civil Court.”

                                         8
              On the other hand, it is objected to on the ground that,
alienation, if any, made during pendency of the suit, may lead to
multiplicity of litigation and the plaintiff would be deprived from enjoying
the fruits of the decree in the event of his success.
8.            In view of the decision in the case of M/s. Graftek Pvt. Ltd.
(supra), law is no more res integra that no irreparable loss can be caused
to the plaintiff if there is alienation during pendency of the suit as the
alienee would be bound by the decision in the civil suit, whether or not
the purchasers are impleaded as parties to the suit because the
purchasers will be squarely governed under the doctrine of lis pendens.
Thus, apprehension of the plaintiff is baseless and he would not suffer
any irreparable loss even if the order of injunction is refused.
9.            On perusal of the impugned order, it appears that the trial
Court has passed an order restraining the opposite parties from alienating
the suit property during pendency of the suit, which necessarily
implicates that the order of injunction shall remain in force during
pendency of the suit unless the same is set aside or modified. Rule 3
empowers the Court to pass an ex parte interim order till a particular date
because of exigency in the matter and the Court while passing the ex
parte interim injunction records the finding that the object of granting
injunction would be defeated by the delay. Hence, the Court should not
have restrained the opposite parties from alienating the suit property till
disposal of the suit. Such an order, in my view, is not sustainable in the
eye of law. Further, the Court before passing an ex parte ad-interim order

                                       9
of injunction should always keep in mind that all the three ingredients for
grant of the order of injunction are satisfied in the case. When one of the
ingredients as discussed above is not satisfied, the plaintiff is not entitled
to the relief of injunction.
10.           In that view of the matter, the impugned order is set aside.
The FAO is accordingly allowed, but in the circumstances, there will be no
order as to cost.
                                         ………………………….
                                         K.R. Mohapatra, J.
 Orissa High Court, Cuttack
 Dated the 10th July, 2015/bks/ss


