                        HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                    OJC NO. 8556 OF 1995
        In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of
        Constitution of India.
                                                -----------
        Sri Purna Chandra Nayak                             ……                     Petitioner
                                          -Versus-
        State of Orissa and others                          ……                   Opp. Parties
                        For Petitioner        : Mr.N.K.Sahu
                       For Opp. Parties : Addl. Government Advocate
                                        ---------------------------------
                                   Date of Judgment : 18.05.2016
                                       ----------------------------------
        PRESENT:
                        THE HONOURABLE KUMARI JUSTICE S. PANDA
                                                    AND
                     THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE K.R. MOHAPATRA
         -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
K.R. Mohapatra, J.      Legality and propriety of the order dated 10.11.1995 passed
         by the Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack in O.E.A. Revision
         Case No. 9 of 1994 under Section 38-B of the Orissa Estate Abolition Act,
         1951 (for short ‘the Act’) is under challenge in this writ petition.
         2.           The dispute relates to C.S. Plot No. 583 to an extent of Ac.2.00
         under Khata No.168 of village Nuagaon, Nimapara Tahasil, Kissam “Kanta
         Jangal-Anabadi” in the district of Puri (for short ‘the case land’). The case
         land was a part of intermediary estate recorded in the name of Mahanta
         Gadadhar Ramanuj Das Goswami of Emar Math.

                                        2
            The case of the petitioner in nut shell is that on 02.09.1938,
the ex-intermediary granted permanent lease in favour of the father of the
petitioner, namely, late Nalu Nayak, for the purpose of agriculture and
inducted him as a tenant on payment of rent. In the year 1953-54, the
estate vested to the State free from all encumbrances. On the date of
vesting, the father of the petitioner was in cultivating possession over the
disputed land by virtue of the said permanent lease. In the year 1973,
said Nalu Nayak initiated OEA Case No. 595 of 1973 to recognize him as a
tenant under the State and to accept the rent from him. Thus, the
Tahasildar, Nimapara on 14.08.1973 directed the R.I. to make an enquiry
in respect of the claim of said Nalu Nayak and submit a report to that
effect. The R.I. conducted an enquiry and submitted his report on
16.11.1973 stating that the father of the petitioner was inducted as a
tenant by the ex-Landlord and was continuing in possession over the
same till the date of submission of the report. Taking into consideration
the report of the R.I., the Tahasildar, Nimapara vide his order dated
25.1.1974 directed for realization of rent from the petitioner accepting him
as a tenant under the State over the case land. Accordingly, rent was
accepted from the petitioner on 26.5.1974 with effect from 1953-54 and
he was recognized as a tenant under the State on payment of rent for a
period of twenty years. However, some of the villagers filed an application
before   the   Tahasildar,  Nimapara      on  01.07.1975    challenging   the
correctness of the said proceeding under which the petitioner was
recognized as a tenant by the State.       Considering the grievance of the
villagers, the Tahasildar, Nimapara on 06.08.1975 reopened the matter

                                         3
and directed for fresh hearing of the matter. On 28.4.1976, the
Tahasildar, Nimapara reviewed his own order and cancelled the Patta
issued in favour of the father of the petitioner. Assailing the same, the
father of the petitioner, namely, Nalu Nayak, preferred OEA Appeal No. 2
of 1976. The Sub-Collector, Nimapara by his order dated 23.05.1979, set
aside the order of cancellation dated 28.04.1976 and restored the original
order dated 25.01.1974. Subsequently, on recommendation of the
Tahasildar, Nimapara, the Collector, Puri referred the matter to the
Member, Board of Revenue, Cuttack for initiation of the proceeding under
Section 38-B of the Act to revise the order of settlement made in favour of
the petitioner. On the basis of the said reference, OEA Revision Case No.9
of 1994 was initiated by the Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack-
opposite party No.2. The opposite party No.2 taking into consideration
several aspects of the matter allowed the revision holding that the order
dated 25.01.1974 of the Tahasildar, Nimapara is not sustainable in the
eye of law and set aside the same. The petitioner being aggrieved by the
said order has filed this writ petition.
3.          The petitioner assailed the order of the Member, Board of
Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack mainly on the ground of maintainability of the
revision contending that the instant revision cannot be entertained after
lapse of twenty one years of passing of the order by the Tahasildar,
Nimapara. Further, he challenged the findings recorded in the impugned
order on merit.
4.           The opposite parties filed their counter affidavit refuting the
allegations made in the writ petition. Admitting the chronology of events

                                        4
set out in the writ petition, the opposite parties stated that since the
Tahasildar, Nimapara has settled the land in favour of father of the
petitioner in exercise of power under Section 8(1) of the Act in OEA Case
No.595 of 1973, the same is amenable to the revisional jurisdiction of the
Member, Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack. It is further contended in the
counter affidavit that the case land was never leased out in favour of the
father of the petitioner and unregistered lease deed (Annexure-1) is not
admissible under law. The case land is incapable of being leased out as it
is a Kanta Jungle kissam of land, the rent receipts alleged to have been
issued by the Ex-intermediary are forged and fabricated for the purpose of
this case. After vesting of the estate in the year, 1953 under Section 3 of
the Act read with G.O. No. 3026/E.A. dated 27.11.1953, the Ex-
intermediary did not furnish any Zamabandi in favour of Nalu Nayak, the
father of the petitioner. Further, relying upon a decision in the case of
State of Orissa Vs. Brundaban Sharma, reported in (1995) Supp.3 SCC
249, the opposite parties submitted that conferment of tenancy right by
the Tahasildar, Nimapara without confirmation of the Member, Board of
Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack, is without jurisdiction. Though proclamation
issued by the Tahasildar, Nimapara in his order dated 28.11.1973 inviting
public objection was stated to have been served in the locality and
Bhaskar Lenka, Khetra Mohan Biswal, Achambit Lenka, Nishakar Lenka
and Maheswar Lenka were stated to have signed on the body of the said
proclamation, but subsequently they filed affidavits stating that they had
not signed on the proclamation and their signatures were forged. They
also stated in the affidavits that the villagers came to know about the

                                      5
settlement of the land in favour of the present petitioner, when he
removed the embankment of the tank which was used for public and
charitable purpose. This necessitated the Tahasildar, Nimapara to review
his own order and cancelled the Patta issued in favour of Nalu Nayak vide
his order dated 28.4.1976.        However, the order of the Tahasildar,
Nimapara dated 28.4.1976 was set aside by the Sub-Divisional Officer,
Puri in OEA Appeal No.2 of 1976 and the order dated 25.1.1974 passed
by the Tahasildar, Nimapara was restored. The said fact was brought to
the knowledge of the Tahasildar, Nimapara by the villagers in the year,
1992. The Tahasildar, Nimapara after verifying the case record in OEA
Lease Case No.595 of 1973 submitted a proposal to the Collector, Puri for
filing of a revision under Section 38-B of the Act. The petitioner assailing
initiation of OEA Revision Case No. 9 of 1994 moved this Court in OJC
No. 2540 of 1995. The said writ petition was disposed of on 8.5.1995 with
an observation that the writ application was premature.        Further, this
Court held that all the points with regard to the maintainability of the
OEA Revision so also merit of the case can be agitated before the Member,
Board of Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack. Accordingly, the Member, Board of
Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack proceeded with the Revision Case No. 9 of 1994
and passed the impugned order.         All the four issues raised by the
petitioner have been discussed in thread bare by the Member, Board of
Revenue, Orissa, Cuttack while adjudicating the matter.          It is also
contended that the Member, Board of Revenue, has dealt with the matter
in its proper perspective and passed the reasoned order referring to the

                                       6
facts and law involved in the case.       As such, the same warrants no
interference by this Court.
5.             Mr. N.K. Sahu, learned counsel for the petitioner assailing
the impugned order raised the following points for consideration.
         (i)    The order dated 25.01.1974 passed by the
                Tahasildar, Nimapara in OEA No.595 of 1973
                cannot at all said to be an order of settlement
                made under the provisions of the Act. It is merely
                the order of recognition of tenancy of the
                petitioner under Section 8 (1) of the Act;
         (ii)   Thus, the Revision under Section 38-B of the Act
                is not maintainable and the Member, Board of
                Revenue has no jurisdiction to exercise power
                under Section 38-B of the Act;
         (iii)  The Revision is not entertainable after lapse of
                21    years  of  passing   of   the   order  dated
                25.01.1974 by the Tahasildar, Nimapara.
         (iv)    The findings recorded by the Member, Board of
                Revenue are devoid of any merit and thus, the
                impugned order is not sustainable in the eye of
                law.
6.             Mr. Sahu in support of his contentions submitted that the
Tahasildar, Nimapara has no jurisdiction to settle the land in purported
exercise of power under Section 8(1) of the Act accepting premium for such
settlement conferring tenancy right on a person. In such event, the
Member, Board of Revenue has jurisdiction to entertain suo motu revision
in exercise of power under Section 38-B of the Act. In the instant case,
father of the petitioner made an application to recognize him as tenant by
accepting rent though no application is contemplated under Section 8(1) of

                                         7
the Act. However, the Tahasildar dealt with such application on the
administrative side and made enquiry in order to be satisfied that the
petitioner was, in fact, in possession of the holding (case land) as a tenant
under the ex-intermediary on the date of vesting.      Thus, the order passed
under Section 8(1) of the Act is not amenable to the revisional jurisdiction
of the Member, Board of Revenue. The father of the petitioner, namely,
Nalu Nayak, was inducted as a tenant under the ex-intermediary by virtue
of an unregistered lease deed executed on 02.09.1938 (Annexure-1). Said
Nalu Nayak continued to be in cultivating possession of the case land on
payment of rent to the ex-intermediary till the date of vesting. Some of the
receipts granted by the ex-intermediary are annexed to the writ petition as
Annexure-2 series. After the date of vesting, the father of the petitioner
continued to be in cultivating possession over the case land. In order to be
recognized as a tenant under the State, said Nalu Nayak made an
application under Section 8(1) of the Act and was accordingly recognized
as a tenant on acceptance of rent (Annexure-4 series).        The Tahasildar,
Nimapara having no jurisdiction reviewed the said order vide order dated
28.04.1976. However, the Sub-Divisional Officer, Puri set aside the order
dated 28.4.1976 in OEA Appeal No.2 of 1976 and the original order dated
25.01.1974 was restored. Accordingly, ROR was issued in favour of the
petitioner under Sthitiban status (Annexure-7). Neither the order dated
23.05.1979 passed in OEA Appeal No.2 of 1976 nor the ROR was ever
challenged in the higher forum within the statutory period. Thus, the same
attained finality. After the lapse of 21 years, on the recommendation of the
Tahasildar, Nimpara, the Collector, Puri referred the matter to the

                                        8
Member, Board of Revenue and the learned Member, Board of Revenue
exercised its power under Section 38-B of the Act, which is without
jurisdiction.
7.              In order to test the veracity of the contentions raised by
Mr.Sahu, this Court examined the case record produced by Mr.Kishore
Kumar Mishra, learned Additional Government Advocate. On perusal of
the application dated 14.08.1973, it appears that the petitioner on behalf
of his father, Nalu Nayak made a prayer, inter alia to declare him as a
tenant under the State and to accept rent from him with effect from the
date of vesting. On consideration of his application, the Tahasildar,
Nimapara vide his order dated 25.01.1974 settled the case land in favour
of the petitioner subject to payment of Salamai of Rs.11 and 22 paise. The
nature of prayer made in the application and the aforesaid order passed by
the Tahasildar do not come within the purview of Section 8(1) of the Act.
Law is no more res integra on this issue. A Full Bench of this Court in the
case of Smt. Basanti Kumari Sahu vs State Of Orissa And Ors,
reported in 73(1992) CLT 868 had held as follows:-
             “10. Where, however, in exercise of powers under
             Section 8 (1), the officer settles the land with the
             applicant in course of a proceeding and confers
             tenancy right, the proceeding, the adjudication and
             the settlement are without jurisdiction. A proceeding
             in purported exercise of jurisdiction not vested, i. e.,
             by usurpation of jurisdiction, is also a proceeding
             under the Act and Section 38-B would be attracted
             and the Board of Revenue in exercise of powers
             conferred by Section 38-B would be entitled to annul
             the same.”
8.              In the case of Chandra Sekhar Rath Vs. Collector,
Dhenkanal, reported in 1988 (II) OLR 572, this Court relying upon a Full

                                        9
Bench decision in the case of Radhamani Dibya and others Vs. Braja
Mohan Biswal and others, reported in 57 (1984) CLT 1 categorically came
to the conclusion that a person seeking declaration/recognization as a
tenant under the ex-intermediary can only move the common law forum,
i.e., Civil Courts having competent jurisdiction for redressal of his
grievance. Similar view is also taken in the case of State of Orissa –v-
Baidyanath Jena (since dead), reported in 2013 (II) OLR 780.
                In view of the law laid down in the decision referred to
supra, there is no room for doubt that the Tahasildar, Nimapara exceeded
his jurisdiction by settling the land in faovour of the petitioner in exercise
of power under Section 8(1) of the Act and the same is amenable to the
revisional power conferred on the Member, Board of Revenue under
Section 38-B of the Act.
9.              Mr. Sahu, further contended that the power under Section
38-B of the Act should not have been exercised after a lapse of 21 years
from the date of the order, i.e. 25.01.1974, passed       by the Tahasildar,
Nimapara recognizing the petitioner as a tenant.
10.             No period of limitation has been prescribed for exercise
of power under Section 38-B of the Act.         Borrowing the words from
the case of Brundaban Sharma (supra), it can be said that the
revisional power conferred on the Board of Revenue under Section 38-
B of the Act should be exercised in a reasonable manner which
inheres the concept of exercise of power within a reasonable time.
Absence of limitation is an assurance to exercise power with caution
or circumspection to effectuate the purpose of the Act, or to prevent

                                         10
 miscarriage of justice or violation of the provisions of the Act or misuse or
abuse of the power by the lower authorities or fraud or suppression.
Length of time depends upon the factual scenario in a given case. The
Member, Board of Revenue has dealt with the issue of limitation at
paragraph-14 of the impugned order.        On assessment of the materials, he
observed that the villagers as early as on 01.07.1975 raised objection with
regard to settlement of the land in favour of the petitioner. On hearing the
parties, the Tahasildar, Nimapara by order dated 28.04.1976 cancelled
such settlement. The said order was not given effect to and the Patta
issued in favour of the petitioner was not cancelled.          The petitioner,
however, assailed the said order in OEA Appeal No. 2 of 1976 without
impleading the villagers at whose instance the settlement was cancelled as
parties. When they came to know that the order dated 28.04.1976 was set
aside by the appellate authority vide order dated 23.05.1979 in OEA
Appeal no.2 of 1976, they made grievance before the Tahasildar,
Nimapara.     Upon receiving complaint from the villagers, the Tahasildar,
Nimapara verified the case record and upon being satisfied that there are
illegalities and irregularities in settlement of land in favour of the
petitioner, moved the Collector, Puri. The Collector, Puri in turn, on
assessment of the materials on record referred the matter to the Member,
Board of Revenue. The Tahasildar, Nimapara has no power or authority of
conferment of a tenancy right while exercising power under Section 8 (1) of
the Act as has been done in this case.             An order passed without
jurisdiction is non est in the eye of law and can be challenged at any time.
Limitation would not stand on the way of challenging such order. Thus,

                                       11
taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the case, it
cannot at all be held that the power under Section 38-B of the Act was not
exercised within a reasonable period.
11.            The next question that arises for consideration is whether
the impugned order is sustainable on merit. Mr.Sahu, learned counsel for
the petitioner strenuously urged that the father of the petitioner, namely,
Nalu Nayak was inducted as a tenant and permanent lease was granted in
his favour on 02.09.1938 by executing an unregistered deed of lease
(Annexure-1). By virtue of the said lease, he continued to be in possession
and paid rent to the ex-intermediary. In support of his case, the petitioner
also filed copies of certain rent receipts (Annexure-2 series). The estate
vested to the State in the year 1953. On the date of vesting, the father of
the petitioner was in cultivating possession over the case land. Further,
the Tahasildar, Nimapara initiated OEA case No.595 of 1973 and
recognized the petitioner as a tenant and accepted rent from him. Thus, he
continued to be a tenant under the State on payment of the rent. He
further contended that the statute does not provide the mode of enquiry to
be conducted by the Tahasildar while exercising power under Section 8(1)
of the Act. The Tahasildar can make such enquiry as would deem
necessary for acceptance of rent from the person who has been in
possession of the holding of the ex-intermediary on the date of vesting.
Thus, the Patta granted by the ex-intermediary coupled with the rent
receipts convey that the petitioner was a tenant under the ex-intermediary.
Further, the report of the R.I. pursuant to the direction of the Tahasildar,
Nimapara clearly disclosed that the father of the petitioner was a tenant

                                        12
under the ex-intermediary. Mr.Sahu also relied upon a letter dated
08.01.1974 purported to have been issued by the law agent of the ex-
intermediary recognizing the petitioner as a tenant. Thus, he claimed that
the petitioner was rightly recognized as a tenant by the Tahasildar,
Nimapara. Learned Member, Board of Revenue at paragraph-16 of the
impugned order discussed regarding rent receipts stated to have been
granted by the ex-intermediary. He has scrutinized the rent receipts
meticulously. The first rent receipt stated to have been granted by the ex-
intermediary bears Sl. No.21152 and a sum of Rs.4/- and 2 anna has
been tendered as rent for 1344-45 sala and the person who alleged to have
accepted the rent have signed the receipt on 05.09.1938. On scrutiny of
the said rent receipt, the Member, Board of Revenue came to a conclusion
that though the Chirastai Patta stated to have been executed on
02.09.1938, the rent was accepted for the period when the lease deed was
not in existence, which is not permissible under law. Further, he also found
some irregularities in subsequent rent receipts, such as, over-writing in the
rent receipt dated 04.09.1944. Further, the Chirastai Patta (Annexure-1)
stated to have been issued by the ex-intermediary is an unregistered one.
Law is well-settled that an agricultural tenancy can be created orally and no
deed is required to be executed for the same, but when such deed is
reduced to writing, which is subject to payment of rent, it requires
registration under Section 17 of the Indian Registration Act, 1908 and if the
same is not registered, the deed renders inadmissible in evidence as per
Section 49 of the Indian Registration Act. This view gets support from a
decision in the case of Sita Maharani And Ors. vs Chhedi Mahto

                                         13
And Ors., reported in AIR 1955 SC 328. Further, in the case of Ram Nath
Mandal And Ors. vs Jojan Mandal And Ors, reported in AIR 1964
Pattna 1 (FB), their Lordships held as follows:-
        “…................under Section 117 of the Transfer of
        Property Act a lease for agricultural purposes is not
        necessary to be made by a written instrument. It may be
        effected by an oral agreement, and when so effected no
        registration is required, but if the transaction is reduced
        to writing, then, in the case of a lease from year to year or
        for any term exceeding a year or reserving a yearly rent,
        registration would be required under Section 17 of the
        Registration Act, and, if unregistered, the lease will be
        inadmissible in evidence under Section 49 of the
        Registration Act, and other evidence of its terms will be
        precluded under Section 91 of the Evidence Act….......”
The petitioner claims that his father, namely, Nalu Nayak, was in
cultivating possession over the case land on the date of vesting. On the
other hand, the villagers claimed that said Nalu Nayak was never in
possession over the case land. They came to know about such erroneous
recording of the case land in the name of the petitioner, when he created
disturbance and tried to cut the ridge.     To invoke a right under Section 8
(1) of the Act, two basic requirements are to be satisfied i.e. (i) a person
claiming to be tenant under the ex-intermediary has to satisfy the
authority that he was, in fact, inducted as a tenant under the ex-
intermediary and (ii) he was in cultivating possession over the land in
question on the date of vesting. Thus, question of possession plays a vital
role in invoking right under Section 8 (1) of the Act. The nature of enquiry
conducted by the Tahasildar, Nimapara under Section 8 (1) of the Act is
administrative in nature. Thus, the Tahasildar, Nimapara while exercising
the power under Section 8 (1) of the Act has no scope to adjudicate the
disputed question of possession, which is under the exclusive domain of

                                                 14
      Civil Court having jurisdiction.       In view of the above, none of the basic
      requirements of Section 8 (1) of the Act is satisfied in this case and thus,
      no reliance can either be placed under Annexure-1 or Annexure-2 series,
      i.e., Chirastai Patta and the rent receipts stated to have been granted by
      the ex-intermediary and the petitioner cannot derive any benefit out of the
      same.
      12.                 In that view of the matter, the impugned order needs no
      interference. Accordingly, the writ petition fails and stands dismissed.
                                                  .................................
                                                    K.R. Mohapatra, J.
S. Panda, J.             I agree.
                                                       ........................
                                                         S. Panda, J.
     Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
     Dated the 18th May, 2016/bks


