                HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                 W.P.(C) Nos.1331, 1332 and 1334 of 2012
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                                   -----------
W.P.(C) No.1331 of 2012
Biswajit Mohapatra                             ….                   Petitioner
                                 Versus
State of Orissa and others                     ….             Opposite parties
                    For Petitioner      -- M/s.A.K.Mishra, Jaydev Sengupta,
                                                 D.K.Nanda,G.Sinha,
                                                 A.Mishra &     P.P.B.Behera.
                   For Opp. Parties --           Mr.Bishnu Prasad Pradhan
                                                 Addl. Government Advocate
W.P.(C) No.1332 of 2012
Adikanta Bhatta                        ….                       Petitioner
                                Versus
State of Orissa and others                     ….          Opposite parties
                   For Petitioner      -- M/s.A.K.Mishra, Jaydev Sengupta,
                                               D.K.Nanda, G.Sinha, A.Mishra
                                               & P.P.B.Behera.
                   For Opp. Parties --         Mr.Bishnu Prasad Pradhan
                                               Addl. Government Advocate
W.P.(C ) No.1334 of 2012
Deepak Kumar Das                ……                              Petitioner
                                    Versus
State of Orissa and others      ……                         Opposite parties
                   For Petitioner      -- M/s.A.K.Mishra, Jaydev Sengupta,
                                                 D.K.Nanda, G. Sinha,
                                                 A.Mishra & P.P.B.Behera.
                   For Opp. Parties --           Mr.Bishnu Prasad Pradhan
                                                 Addl. Government Advocate

                                            2
   PRESENT:
               THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                          AND
                 THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE C.R.DASH
   Date of hearing 11.09.2012         :        Date of judgment:    20.09.2012
L. Mohapatra, J. The prayer and issues involve in all the three writ
   applications being same, we heard the matters together and dispose of in
   this common judgment.
                An advertisement was issued by the Additional Secretary to
   Government, Department of Water Resources, Government of Orissa
   published in daily Samaj dated 2.11.2011 inviting applications for
   appointment to the post of Director, WALMI (Water and Land Management
   Institute). The petitioners in all the three writ applications had submitted
   their respective applications for appointment to the said post. They also
   went through the selection process and having not qualified, filed these
   writ applications seeking for quashing the advertisement and also for a
   direction to issue a fresh advertisement for appointment to the post of
   Director, WALMI by specifying the requisite qualification, experience and
   remuneration at par with Institutes of National/State importance or for
   consideration of their cases for appointment to the post of Director/Joint
   Director/Professor/    Associate     Professor/Deputy   Director  taking  into
   account their qualifications, teaching and relevant research experiences
   etc.
   2.           Shri A.K.Mishra, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
   petitioners in all the three writ applications challenged the advertisement,

                                      3
selection procedure and also selection of a candidate for appointment to
the post of Director, WALMI on the ground that WALMI is a Society
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. The Memorandum of
Association provides that there shall be a Governing Council, which will
consist of official members as set out therein. Under Clause-36 of the
Memorandum of Association, the business and affairs of the society shall
be carried on and managed by the Governing Council and one of the
powers and duties of the Governing Council is to sanction          posts and
appoint officers    and employees in its office or officers and fields and
regulate the terms and conditions of their service. Referring to Clause-40 of
the Memorandum of Association, it was further contended by the learned
Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners that it is the Governing
Council,    who   shall  appoint  a   person   possessing    the   prescribed
qualifications to be the Director of the Society. Referring to the above
provision contained in the Memorandum of Association, Shri Mishra,
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners challenged the
advertisement on the ground that the same has been issued by the
Additional Secretary to Government, Department of Water Resources,
Government of Orissa, and the Selection Committee has been constituted
by the said Water Resources Department and the selection has also been
made by the Water Resources Department. According to Shri Mishra,
learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioners, the advertisement,
constitution of the Selection Committee and selection of a candidate for the
post of Director done by the Water Resources Department are in
contravention of the Memorandum of Association and right to appoint the

                                      4
Director, WALMI only vests with the Governing Council and the
Department of Water Resources had no authority to do so.
             Learned counsel for the State submitted that the petitioners
having submitted their applications in response to the advertisement,
appeared in the selection test and being unsuccessful, now have come up
challenging the advertisement, constitution of the Selection Committee and
selection of candidate made by the said Selection Committee. Learned
counsel for the State referred to some decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in this regard, which we will deal with later on. It was further
contended by the learned counsel for the State that the Governing Council
by Resolution dated 17.3.2007 had authorised the Department of Water
Resources to conduct the test and select a candidate for the post of
Director, WALMI and, therefore, the Governing Council of WALMI had
divested its power to appoint the Director of WALMI in favour of the Water
Resources Department.
3.            Undisputedly, the Resolution dated 17.3.2007 passed by the
Governing Council, WALMI, the power for selection and appointment of
Director for WALMI was given to the Water Resources Department.
Resolution of the Governing Council dated 17.3.2007 is not disputed.
Therefore, the authority of the Department in issuing the advertisement in
Annexure-1 to all the writ applications inviting applications for selection of
a candidate for appointment to the post of Director, WALMI cannot be
questioned.

                                       5
             From the record, we find that the Selection Committee had
been constituted by the Department of Water Resources to conduct the
selection test and the Selection Committee consisted of Agriculture
Production Commissioner, Odisha, Principal Secretary to Government,
Department of Water Resources, Principal Scientist and in-charge Director,
Water Technology Centre for Eastern Region, Bhubaneswar and Prof. Bipin
Bihari Das, representative of Director of Xavier Institute of Management
Bhubaneswar. The Committee met on 27.6.2012 and thirteen candidates
were interviewed separately and three were selected in order of merit for
appointment to the said post. The petitioners undisputedly participated in
the said selection test and were not selected by the Selection Committee for
appointment to the said post. Now the question arises as to whether the
petitioners can maintain the writ applications challenging constitution of
the said Selection Committee and the process of selection, having taken a
chance by appearing before the Selection Committee or not. In the case of
Dr.G.Sarana Vrs. University of Lucknow and others reported in (1976)
3 Supreme Court Cases 585 , the applicant voluntary appeared before the
Selection   Committee    and   took   a  chance   of  having   a  favourable
recommendation from it and accordingly having done so, it was no more
open for him to turn round and question the constitution of the Selection
Committee. Failure to take the identical plea at the earlier stage of
proceedings created an effective bar of waiver against him. It was
contended by Shri Mishra, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
petitioners that constitution of the Selection Committee whether proper or
not can only be questioned when a candidate appears before the Selection

                                       6
Committee and looks at its constitution. There is no scope to challenge
constitution of a Selection Committee before appearing in an interview
conducted by such Selection Committee. Answer to this question is also
available in the above reported judgment. In the said reported decision, the
Court also held that even at the time of interview the applicant therein did
not raise his little finger against constitution of the Selection Committee.
Therefore, if any one of the petitioners had any doubt or objection in
relation to constitution of the Selection Committee, he could have
questioned the same at the time of interview also. Similar views have been
expressed by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Union of India and
others Vrs. S.Vinodh Kumar and others reported in (2007) 8 Supreme
Court   Cases    100,   Vijendra    Kumar     Verma     Vrs.  Public Service
Commission, Uttarakhand and others reported in (2011) 1 Supreme
Court Cases 150 as well as Om Prakash Shukla Vrs. Akhilesh Kumar
and others reported in 1986 (Supp.) Supreme Court Cases 285.
4.           As stated earlier, on verification of the record produced by the
learned counsel for the State, we did not find any irregularity in
constitution of the Selection Committee and, on the other hand, the
Selection Committee constituted consists of very senior officers and
professors. The petitioners having not objected to constitution of the
Selection Committee either before the interview or even at the time of
interview and having taken a chance, it is no more open for them to turn
round and challenge constitution of the Selection Committee.

                                          7
    5.            For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in any one of
    the writ applications and, accordingly, dismiss the same.
                                                           ………………………..
                                                            L. Mohapatra, J.
C. R. Dash, J.          I agree.
                                                           …….…………………
                                                              C.R.Dash, J.
    Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
    The 20th September, 2012/C.R.Biswal.


