                    HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                 W.P.(C) No.22004 of 2011 & W.P.(C) No.7743 of 2012
     In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
     Constitution of India.
                                       -----------
     W.P.(C) No.22004 of 2011
     Srikara Majhi                                 ….                   Petitioner
                                     Versus
     Divisional Manager,
     United Bank of India Sambalpur Division,
     Sambalpur and others                          ….              Opposite parties
                        For Petitioner      -- M/s.Bigyan Kumar Sharma and
                                                     A.U.Senapati
                        For Opp. Parties --     M/s.Ranjit Sahoo, D. Das and
                                                     M.N.Jena
                                                     (For O.Ps.1 & 2)
     W.P.(C) No.7743 of 2012
     Bansidhar Tripathy                    ….                           Petitioner
                                     Versus
     Chief Manager & Authorised Officer,
     United Bank of India and others        ….                     Opposite parties
                        For Petitioner     -- M/s.Raj Kishore Swain, Y.Nayak,
                                                    B.Mohanty, B.Nayak &
                                                    P.K.Mohanty
                        For Opp. Parties --    M/s.Ranjit Sahoo, D.Das,
                                                    M.N.Jena & M.K.Acharya
                                                     (Caveator)
     PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE L. MOHAPATRA
                                          AND
                   THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE C.R.DASH
     Date of hearing 12.09.2012          :    Date of judgment:       20 .09.2012
L. MOHAPATRA, J.      Both the writ applications relate to the same issue and,
     accordingly, learned counsel appearing for both parties in both the writ

                                         2
applications were heard and the writ applications are disposed of in this
common judgment.
              The petitioner in W.P.(C) No.22004 of 2011 is the District
Manager of Orissa State Civil Supplies Corporation Ltd., and opposite
party no.3 therein is the Proprietor of M/s. Maa Rice Mill located in the
district of Subarnapur.
              The petitioner, Banisdhar Tripathy, in W.P.(C ) No.7743 of
2012 is father of the borrower and a prayer has been made for release of
the property belonging to him.
2.            The facts leading to filing of the writ applications are that M/s.
Maa Rice Mill was appointed as a custom miller by the Orissa State Civil
Supplies Corporation and, accordingly, an agreement was executed
between the said M/s. Maa Rice Mill and the Corporation on 3.6.2010 for
kharif marketing season 2009-10. Under the agreement, the Rice Mill was
to receive paddy stocks procured from the farmers by the Corporation and
supply the resultant FAQ standard rice to the Corporation within a
stipulated time for distribution to the beneficiaries under the Public
Distribution System. The said Rice Mill received 29289 quintals of paddy
with due acknowledgement and as per the terms of the agreement, it was
to supply 19916.85 quintals of resultant rice to the Corporation. As against
the said contract, the Rice Mill had supplied only 15875.33.200 quintals
and misappropriated 3748.83.400 quintals of rice. The Corporation
therefore issued a demand notice through the Collector, Subarnpur on
17.2.2011 requesting the Mill owner to deposit the cost of balance rice. The

                                      3
owner of the Rice Mill, who is opposite party no.3 in W.P.(C) No.22004 of
2011, having not paid the price of the misappropriated rice, a requisition
under Section 4 of the Orissa Public Demand Recovery Act 1962 was filed
in   the  Court   of  Certificate Officer for  realization of    a sum    of
Rs.62,91,444.34 from the said opposite party no.3. Along with the said
requisition, property statement of the owner was also furnished for the
purpose of attachment and recovery of the dues of the Corporation.
3.           Opposite party no.3, who is owner of the Rice Mill, had availed
financial assistance from opposite party no.1-Bank, namely, United Bank
of India by mortgaging the properties, which were sought to be attached
under the recovery proceeding initiated under the Orissa Public Demand
Recovery Act, 1962. The dues of the Bank having not been paid, the Bank
took recourse to the provisions of SARFAESI Act, 2002 and a notice was
issued under Section 13(4) of the said Act on 15.7.2011 for sale of the
mortgaged properties. When the Corporation came to know about the said
notice, intimation was given to the Bank indicating therein that the
Corporation was to get an amount of Rs.62,91,444.34 from the said Rice
Mill owner. However, intimation was ignored by the Bank.
4.           Case of the Corporation is that any action taken by the Bank
under the SARFAESI Act, 2002 does not create first charge in favour of the
Bank and, therefore, dues of the State shall have precedence over the dues
of the Bank and other financial institution. Shri Sharma, learned counsel
appearing for the Corporation submitted that the provisions contained in
OPDR Act, 1962 for realization of State dues is not inconsistent with the

                                      4
SARFAESI Act, 2002 and in absence of any provision in the SARFAESI Act
creating first charge in favour of the Bank, in lieu of its dues, the said
legislation cannot be given overriding effect qua the provisions contained in
the State law or the right of the State to recover its dues. In support of his
submission, Shri Sharma, learned Counsel appearing for the Corporation
referred to Section 35 of the SARFAESI Act, 2002.
5.           Learned counsel appearing for the Bank submitted that the
properties, which are sought to be attached in the proceeding initiated
under OPDR Act, are the properties which had been mortgaged by the
owner of the Mill (opposite party no.3) with the Bank for the purpose of
obtaining the loan. The properties had never been mortgaged with the
Corporation for recovery of any dues and, accordingly, the Corporation has
no right over the properties mortgaged with the Bank and the Corporation
has to find out some other method for recovery of its dues.
6.           The question that arises for consideration is as to whether the
Corporation can seek for attachment of the properties mentioned in the
certificate when such property has been mortgaged with the Bank for the
purpose of obtaining a loan. Therefore, Shri Sharma, learned counsel
appearing for the Corporation referring to Section 35 of the SARFAESI Act,
2002 submitted that the provisions of the said Act shall have effect, not
withstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law
for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any
such law. Since the SARFAESI Act does not create any first charge, there is
no inconsistency between the State Legislation and the OPDR Act under

                                      5
which the Corporation seeks to recover its dues. Moreover, Section 37 of
the SARFAESI Act provides that the provisions of the said Act and the
Rules made thereunder shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any
other law for the time being in force. Therefore, action under both the Acts
can be taken simultaneously and dues of the State being dues of the
Crown it shall have precedence over the dues of the Bank.
7.           Learned counsel for the Bank in reply submitted that
principle of Crown debt or principle of priority does not apply to the
present case and, there is no provision under which the Corporation can
claim that it shall have precedence over the dues of the Bank. On the other
hand, in absence of any such provision, the Bank being a secured creditor,
its claim shall prevail over the Crown debt. It was further contended by the
learned counsel appearing for the Bank that the Civil Supply Corporation
Ltd. has been registered under the Companies Act and, therefore, cannot
be treated as a Department of Government and, accordingly, cannot claim
that its dues is a Crown debt. Learned counsel for the Bank, therefore
prayed for dismissal of the writ application as the Corporation has no right
to seek for attachment of the properties mortgaged with the Bank for the
purpose of obtaining the loan.
8.             Undisputedly, the Corporation is registered under the
Companies Act and is a separate legal entity. The principle of priority of
Government debts/propriety of State debts is founded on the rule of
necessity and of public policy. The State is entitled to raise money by
taxation because unless adequate revenue is received by the State, it

                                      6
would not be able to function as a sovereign Government at all and it is
essential that as a sovereign, the State should be able to discharge its
primary function and in order to be able to discharge such functions
efficiently, it must be in possession of necessary funds and this
consideration emphasizes the necessity and the wisdom of conceding to
the State, the right to claim priority in respect of its tax dues. In this
connection, reference may be to a decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the
case of Dena Bank Vrs. Bhikhabhai Prabhudas Parekh and Co. and
others reported in (2000) 5 Supreme Court Cases 694. Dues of the
Corporation is not a tax due and, therefore the principle of Crown debt or
principle of priority shall have no application in the facts of the present
case. On the other hand, admittedly, the properties, which are sought to be
attached in the proceeding initiated under the OPDR Act, have been
mortgaged by the proprietor of the Rice Mill with the Bank for obtaining a
loan. The Madras High Court in the case of UTI Bank Ltd. Vrs. The
Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise, Chennai and another
reported in AIR 2007 Madras 118 went to the extent of holding that the
claim of secured creditor will prevail over the Crown’s debts. There is no
provision under the OPDR Act creating first charge over the properties
sought to be attached in the proceeding. Even if we accept the contention
of the learned counsel appearing for the Corporation that SARFAESI Act
does not create any charge, the difference is that the properties sought to
be attached by the Corporation, are mortgaged with the Bank for obtaining
the loan. The said properties having been mortgaged with the Bank, the
Bank has right to sell the properties and recover its dues. The Corporation

                                       7
has no right over the said properties and, accordingly, its dues have to be
recovered by way of attachment of the properties which are not mortgaged
or otherwise.
9.           For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in the prayer of
the Corporation and, accordingly, dismiss W.P.(C) No.22004 of 2011.
10.          So far as W.P.(C) No.7743 of 2012 is concerned, the petitioner
therein is the father of the borrower and he was the guarantor. In addition
to the collateral security offered by the borrower, the ancestral residential
building of the petitioner was also offered as collateral security for sanction
of loan amount. When steps were taken by the Bank for realization of its
dues taking recourse to SARFAESI Act, 2002, the petitioner approached
this Court in W.P.(C) No.21131 of 2011 and the said writ application was
disposed of on 25.8.2011. In the said writ application, it was contended by
the petitioner that he arranged a buyer for purchasing Plot Nos.99, 100,
153 and 184 under Khata No.58 extending to an area of Ac.2.220 decimals
in Mouza-Kumunde in the district of Sonepur advertised for sale by the
Bank for consideration of Rs.1.01 crores. The prospective buyer appeared
in the Court through counsel and learned counsel for the prospective
buyer undertook to deposit the entire dues of the Bank to the tune of
Rs.1,16,82,378.50 (as on 25.7.2011) by end of October, 2011. The Court
therefore directed that in the event the prospective buyer deposits the
entire money, the property mentioned above shall be sold in favour of the
prospective buyer. The other properties mentioned in the advertisement
shall be released in favour of the present petitioner. From the claim made

                                                  8
           in the present writ application, it appears that the prospective buyer did
           not deposit the amount as undertaken, as a result of which, the Bank
           issued advertisement for sale of all the properties. Though we find no
           justification to interfere with the action taken by the Bank for recovery of
           its dues, being conscious of the fact that the residential house of the
           petitioner had been mortgaged, we direct the Bank to put all the mortgaged
           properties in public auction, if not already done, and if the outstanding
           dues can be recovered by sale of the properties taken as collateral security
           offered by the borrower, the residential house of the petitioner shall be
           spared. In the event, it is not possible to recover the entire outstanding
           dues by sale of the properties mortgaged by the borrower, the Bank may
           also proceed with sale of the properties of the guarantor (petitioner) for
           recovery of its dues.
           11.           With the above observation, this writ application is also
           disposed of.
                                                                    ………………………..
                                                                    L. Mohapatra, J.
C. R. Dash, J.       I agree.
                                                                    …….…………………
                                                                      C. R. Dash, J.
           Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
           The 20th September, 2012/C.R.Biswal.

9

