                                                                               1
                IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                       MAC APP NO.81 OF 2011
       UNITED INDIA INSURANCE CO. LTD.,
       HAVING ITS REGISTERED OFFICE AT 24,
       WHITES ROAD, MADRAS AND
       REGIONAL OFFICE AT G.S. ROAD,
       DISPUR, GUWAHTI – 781005
       REPRESENTED BY ITS
       CHIEF REGIONAL MANAGER
                                                        ……..Appellant/ claim ant
       -Versus-
   1. SMTI RENU PAWE
       WIFE OF SRI MON PAWE @ CHINMON PAWE
       VILL : KHALIHAMARI
       P.S., NORTH LAKHIMPUR,
       DISTRICT – LAKHIMPUR,
       ASSAM,
       PIN - 787001
   2.  MD. SAFAR ALI,
       S/O LATE MUYAB ALI,
       VILLAGE – BANTOW GAON, P.O. - BANTOW
       P.S. NLPS, DISTRICT – LAKHIMPUR
       ASSAM,
       PIN – 787001
   3. NATIONAL INSURANCE CO. LTD.,
       NORTH LAKHIMPUR BRANCH,
       P.O. – NORTH LAKHIMPUR,
       ASSAM, PIN - 787001
                                                       …..P roform a respondents
                                B E F O R E
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
For the appellant                        : Mr. S Dutta
MAC App No.81/2011

                                                                                       2
                                              : Ms. M Choudhury
                                              : Mr. D Chakraborty
For respondents                               : Mr. RK Bhatra
                                              : Mr. BK Purkayastha
Date of Judgment & Order                     : 19-07-2017
                             JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
                  Heard Mr. S Dutta, learned senior counsel for the appellant.      Also
       heard Mr. BK Purkayastha and RK Bhatra, learned counsel appearing for
       respondent No.3. None appeared for respondent Nos.1 and 2.
       [2]        This appeal under Section 173 of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988, has
       been filed challenging the judgment and award dated 21.01.2011 passed by
       learned Member, Motor Accident Claims Tribunal in MAC Case No.70/2009.
       [3]        The undisputed facts which may be relevant for disposal of this appeal
       are that one Kamal Pawe died in a vehicular accident involving a truck and a
       motor cycle bearing registration Nos.AS-07-4817 and AS-07-5593 respectively.
       The offending vehicles were insured with the appellant and respondent No.3,
       respectively. The Legal representative of the deceased approached the MACT,
       Lakhimpur and the learned Tribunal after holding an enquiry and on appreciation
       of evidence, passed an award of Rs.3,13,500/-. The learned tribunal held, that
       the deceased also contributed to the accident and liability on the part of the
       deceased and other offending vehicle has been apportioned at 75%:25%.
       [4]        Learned senior counsel Mr. Dutta submits that by drawing an inference
       from the mere fact that accident took place due to head on collision, learned
       Tribunal fixed responsibility on the deceased holding that he also contributed to
       the accident to the extent of 25%. Even if it is assumed, that the deceased has
       contributed to the accident, the appellant is under no liability as the deceased
       himself was the owner of the vehicle, submits Mr. Dutta.
MAC App No.81/2011

                                                                                         3
       [5]          Learned counsel Mr. BK Purkayastha relying on a decision of the Apex
       Court in Bijoy K um ar Dugar Vs. Bidya Dhar Dutta and Ors reported in
       (2006) 3 SCC 242 submits, that the Tribunal has rightly apportioned the extent
       of liabilities between the driver of the truck and the deceased, as the accident
       occurred due to head on collision of the two vehicles.
       [6]           I have gone through the evidence on record.
       [7]          The claimant examined two witnesses being the claimant himself and
       one Biman Morang, who claims to be eye witness of the occurrence. CW-1, Smti
       Renu Pawe (claimant) was not an eye witness of the occurrence and therefore, it
       is only the evidence of the CW-2, who was the eye witness, is material. CW-2
       stated in his evidence that the deceased was proceeding by driving his motor
       cycle from Lakhimpur. At that point of time, a truck bearing registration No.AS-
       07-5593 was coming from the opposite direction.            The truck was driven
       recklessly in an excessive speed. Noticing the speed of the truck, which was
       driven recklessly, the deceased moved towards the side of the road and was
       proceeding slowly. Despite taking such precaution by the victim, the truck which
       was driven in a careless manner, dashed against the motor cycle, thus, leading
       to the accident. That the accident occurred due to head on collusion of both the
       vehicles, is not in dispute and the specific evidence of the claimants side is that
       in spite of taking precaution by the deceased, the truck which was driven in a
       careless manner hit the motor cycle.         Though during cross examination a
       suggestion was put to CW-2 that the deceased was talking over mobile phone
       and the accident took place due to the negligence of the deceased, such
       suggestion was denied by the CW-2.         Thus the evidence of CW-2 remained
       unshaken.       No rebuttal evidence was adduced by the owner/driver/insurer to
       show that the victim contributed to the accident in any manner.
       [8]           Inspite of the above evidence, the learned Tribunal drew the
       inference that the deceased also contributed to the accident merely on the facts
       that the accident took place due to head on collision of two vehicles. The law is
       by now well settled, that only because of the accident having taken place due to
MAC App No.81/2011

                                                                                       4
       head on collision, there cannot be an automatic inference, that both the vehicles
       involved in the accident were responsible. When there is clear evidence adduced
       by the claimant, that it was due to rash and negligent driving on the part of the
       driver of the truck, the accident took place, and no evidence has been brought
       on record to controvert such evidence, there cannot be any automatic inference.
       The Apex Court in Oriental Insurance Co. Vs. Sahaban Begum reported in
       (2013) 1 GLR 133 held that for attributing contributory negligence to the
       victim, definite proof to establish contributory negligence is required. On the
       factual matrix of this case, the decision of the Apex Court in Bijoy K um ar
       Dugar Vs. Bidya Dhar Dutta (supra) would be of no help to the respondent
       No.3.
       [9]        As observed by the Apex Court in K henyei Vs. New India
       Assurance Co. Ltd reported in (2015) 9 SCC 273 , there cannot be any
       automatic inference of contributory negligence by the deceased, only because
       the accident took place because of head on collision, in absence of any evidence
       to that effect.
       [10]        What is abundantly clear from the evidence brought on record is that,
       there was absolutely no material to show, that the victim had anyway
       contributed to the accident. When no evidence was brought on record to show
       that the deceased also contributed to the accident and there was clear evidence
       from the side of the claimant, that the accident occurred solely due to rashness
       and negligence of the driver of the truck, insured with respondent No.3, there
       cannot be any automatic presumption, that victim also contributed to the
       accident.    Therefore, in my considered view, the vehicle insured with the
       respondent No.3 was solely responsible for the accident and in the facts and
       circumstances of the case no liability can be attributed to the victim.
       [11]        The award is accordingly modified to the effect that the entire award
       made by the Tribunal shall be satisfied by respondent No.3 being the insurer of
       the vehicle No.AS-07-5593.
MAC App No.81/2011

                                                                                       5
       [12]        With the above modification, the appeal is allowed. The amount if
       any, deposited by the appellant shall be refunded including the statutory deposit.
       The respondent No.3 shall satisfy the award fully within 6 (six) weeks.
       [13]        Send back the LCR.
                                                                               JUDGE
       Smita
MAC App No.81/2011


