                                                                         1
                IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                      MAC APP NO.72 OF 2013
       THE ORIENTAL INSURANCE CO. LTD.,
       A COMPANY UNDER THE COMPANIES
       ACT, REPRESENTED BY ITS REGIONAL MANAGER,
       ULUBARI, GUWAHATI – 7.
       DISTRICT KAMRUP, ASSAM
                                                 ……..Appellant/ petitioner
       -Versus-
   1. SMTI DIPALI SARMA,
       WIFE OF LATE BHABA KANTA SARMA
       VILL – GARAMUR, PURANIGUDAM
       DISTRICT – NAGAON, ASSAM
   2. SMTI JONALEE RAJAK
       WIFE OF SRI BHOLA RAJAK,
       R/O VILL – NEW GUWAHATI RLY COLONY
       P.O BAMUNIMAIDAN,
       P.S CHANDMARI
       DIST – KAMRUP, ASSAM
   3. SRI KRISHNA SAHAI
       SON OF SRI MONTAKI SAHAI,
       VILL – NOONMARI,
       P.S – NOONMATI,
       DISTRICT – KAMRUP, ASSAM
                                                            …..respondents
   4. SRI NITIN SARMA,
       SON OF LATE BHABA KANTA SARMA.
   5.  SMTI PAHARI SARMA,
       D/O OF LATE BHABA KANTA SARMA
   6. SMTI KASTURI SARMA,
       D/O LATE BHABA KANTA SARMA
                                                 …..P roform a respondents
MAC App No.72/2013

                                                                                        2
                                 B E F O R E
              HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
For the appellant                            : Mr. SK Goswami
                                             : Mr. PK Sharma,
                                             : Mr. A Acharya
                                             : Ms. P Medhi
For respondents                              : Mr. M Choudhury
                                             : Mr. MK Misra
                                             : Mr. M Mahanta
                                             : Mr. P Hazarika
Date of Judgment & Order                    : 20-07-2017
                              JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)
                  This statutory appeal under Section 173 of the MV Act has been filed
       by the appellant Oriental Insurance Company Ltd challenging the judgment and
       award dated 07-03-2012 passed by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Nagaon
       in MACT Case No.488/2009.
       [2]        The undisputed facts which may be relevant for disposal of this appeal
       are that late Bhaba Kanta Sarma died in a motor vehicle accident involving truck
       bearing registration No.AS-01D-7227, owned by respondent No.2 and insured
       with the appellant. At the time of accident, the deceased was aged about 65
       years. The claimant i.e. the wife of the victim filed a petition for compensation.
       The learned Tribunal made an award of Rs.4,74,456/- which included loss of
       dependency of Rs.4,56,456, Funeral expense Rs.5,000/-, loss of consortium
       Rs.10,000/- and conveyance Rs.3,000/-.
       [3]        Mr. SK Goswami, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. M
       Choudhury, learned senior counsel for the respondent were heard.
       [4]        Learned counsel Mr. SK Goswami arguing for reduction of the award,
       submitted that the tribunal awarded a higher amount by applying a wrong
MAC App No.72/2013

                                                                                       3
       multiplier and also awarded an amount of Rs.3,000/- on account of conveyance,
       not permissible under the law.
       [5]         Mr. M Choudhury, learned Sr. counsel for the respondent relying on
       the judgment of the Apex Court in Helen C R ebello (M rs) and Ors Vs.
       M aharashtra State R oad Transport Corporation and Anr reported in (1999) 1
       SCC 90 as well as Arati Chakraborty and Ors Vs. Nephurai Jam atia and Anr
       reported in 2006 (2) GLT 20 submitted that family pension received by the
       claimant, having no correlation to the accidental death of the victim, cannot be
       deducted while determining compensation payable under the MV Act. Learned
       Tribunal assessed the compensation after deducting the family pension, which is
       not permissible under the law and therefore, the award is required to be
       enhanced in the interest of determining just compensation, without deducting
       the family pension, submits Mr. Choudhury. Learned counsel has also placed
       reliance on the decision of the Apex Court in Ranjana P rakash and Ors Vs.
       Divisional M anager and Anr reported in (2011) 14 SCC 639 in support of his
       submission for enhancement of the award. Countering the submission of Mr.
       Choudhury, Mr. Goswami, placing reliance on the same decision i.e. Ranjana
       P rakash (supra) submitted, that in absence of counter appeal or cross objection
       by the respondent, the award cannot be enhanced in the present appeal, filed by
       the Insurance Company for reduction of compensation.
       [6]         The admitted position is that the deceased was drawing pension of
       Rs.10,375/- per month, and while calculating the loss of dependency, the learned
       Tribunal deducted the family pension from the compensation. In view of the
       ratio laid down by the Apex Court in the case of Helen C. Rebello and Ors (supra)
       later on affirmed in United I ndia I nsurance Co. Ltd. v. P atricia Jean M ahajan
       (2002) 6 SCC 281, as well as the decision of this High Court in Arati
       Chakraborty case (supra), the law in respect of family pension is no longer res-
       integra.     Therefore, the questions required to be decided are whether
       enhancement of compensation is permissible in absence of cross-appeal or cross-
       objection by the respondent and whether the compensation awarded by the
       Tribunal deserves to be reduced on the plea raised by the appellant.
MAC App No.72/2013

                                                                                                4
       [7]        The appellant Insurance Company has challenged the award on
       quantum and sought for reduction of compensation, as according to Mr.
       Goswami, higher multiplier was applied by the Tribunal and also some amount
       had been given on account of conveyance, which the claimant was not entitled
       to.   Apparently, no cross appeal or cross objection has been filed by the
       appellant.   The Apex Court in para 8 of the judgment in Ranjana Prakash
       (supra) dealing with the ambit of power of the appellate Court to enhance the
       award in an appeal preferred by the Insurance Co for reduction of compensation,
       observed as under:
                              8. Where an appeal is filed challenging the quantum of
                      compensation, irrespective of who files the appeal, the appropriate
                      course for the High Court is to examine the facts and by applying the
                      relevant principles, determine the just compensation.              If the
                      compensation determined by it is higher than the compensation awarded
                      by the Tribunal, the High Court will allow the appeal, if it is by the
                      claimants and dismiss the appeal, if it is by the owner/insurer. Similarly,
                      if the compensation determined by the High Court is lesser than the
                      compensation awarded by the Tribunal, the High Court will dismiss any
                      insurer for reduction. The High Court cannot obviously increase the
                      compensation in an appeal by the owner/insurer for reducing the
                      compensation, nor can it reduce the compensation in an appeal by the
                      claimants seeking enhancement of compensation.
       [8]        In the case of Ranjana P rakash (supra) , while awarding the
       compensation, the Tribunal did not deduct the income tax from the gross income
       of the deceased. On appeal by the Insurance Company before the High Court,
       the appellant relying upon the decision of the Apex Court in Sarala Verm a Vs.
       DTC (2009) 6 SCC 121 and Shyam w ati Sarm a Vs. K aram Singh (2010) 12 SCC
       378 argued, that the income of the deceased being taxable, the Tribunal ought
       to have deducted the income tax and only the net income ought to have been
       considered for determining the compensation.              The claimant’s counsel also
       argued, that considering the age of the deceased, 30% of the actual income
       ought to have been added as future prospect, but the Tribunal did not add the
       future prospect. The High Court did not consider the submission of the claimant’s
MAC App No.72/2013

                                                                                            5
       side for addition of the future prospect, however, deducted 30% from the
       income of the deceased and reduced the award accordingly.
       [9]        On the above facts, the Apex Court observed that when the High Court
       considered the submission of the appellant, pointing out error in calculating the
       income of the deceased and deducted 30% towards income tax from the gross
       income of the deceased, the submission of the claimant to defend the award,
       pointing out error of not adding 30% of the income as future prospect also
       should have been considered, so that, the compensation awarded was not
       reduced. When the argument of both the sides was centering round the quantum
       of income of the deceased and the High Court accepted the submission of the
       appellant, with regard to the error in the award, pointed out by the appellant but
       ignored the contention of the claimant/respondent, the Apex Court observed in
       para 6 as follows:
                      “6. We are of the view that the High Court committed an error in
                      ignoring the contention of the claimants. It is true that the claimants
                      had not challenged the award of the Tribunal on the ground that the
                      tribunal had failed to take note of the future prospects and add 30%
                      to the annual income of the deceased. But the claimants were not
                      aggrieved by Rs.23,134 being taken as the monthly income. There
                      was therefore no need for them to challenge the award of the
                      Tribunal. But where in an appeal filed by the owner/insurer, if the
                      High Court proposes to reduce the compensation awarded by the
                      Tribunal, the claimants can certainly defend the quantum of
                      compensation awarded by the Tribunal, by pointing out other errors
                      or omission in the award, which if taken note of, would show that
                      there was no need to reduce the amount awarded as compensation.
                      Therefore, in an appeal by the owner/insurer, the appellant can
                      certainly put forth a contention that it 30% is to be deducted from
                      the income for whatsoever reason, 30% should also be added
                      towards future prospects, so that the compensation awarded is not
                      reduced. The fact that the claimants did not independently challenge
                      the award will not therefore come in the way of their defending the
                      compensation awarded, on other grounds. It would only mean that
                      in an appeal by the owner/insurer, the claimants will not be entitled
                      to seek enhancement of the compensation by urging any new
                      ground, in the absence of any cross-appeal or cross-objection.”
MAC App No.72/2013

                                                                                                6
       [10]       The Apex Court also taking note of the provisions of Order 41 Rule 33
       of the Code of Civil Procedure, observed that the power entrusted to the
       appellate Court by Order 41 Rule 33 can be pressed into service to make the
       award more effective or maintaining the award on other grounds or to make
       other parties to the litigation to share the benefits or the liability, but cannot be
       invoked to get a larger or higher relief.
        [11]      What therefore, follows from the ratio laid down by the Apex Court in
       Rajana P rakash (supra), is that the High Court in an appropriate case can
       examine the facts and by applying relevant principles determine just
       compensation irrespective of the fact, as to who has filed the appeal, when the
       appeal is challenged on the point of quantum. However, the High Court can not
       obviously increase the compensation in an appeal by the owner/insurer for
       reducing the compensation, nor can reduce the compensation in an appeal by
       the claimant seeking enhancement of compensation on any new ground, in
       absence of cross-appeal or cross objection.
       [13]         This Court in the case of National I nsurance Co. Ltd Vs. Suw alla
       Dutta and Ors reported in 2017 (2) GLT 39 having confronted with question of
       enhancement of award in an appeal preferred by the Insurance Company, in
       absence of any cross appeal having been preferred by the respondents/claimants
       held as under:
                                 Interpreting Section 168 of the MV Act 1988, the Supreme Court
                       has observed in paragraph 12 in the case of Jitendra Khimshankar
                       Trivedi (supra) that in the cases where the Tribunal had omitted to grant
                       relief to the claimants to which they were otherwise entitled under the
                       law, it would not only be proper but also obligatory for the Court/tribunal
                       to award a just and reasonable compensation. But in cases where the
                       tribunal had awarded some compensation on a particular head, in the
                       absence of a cross appeal preferred by the claimant, the Court cannot
                       enhance the amount of compensation on the said head by invoking
                       jurisdiction under Order XLI Rule 33 CPC on the ground that the amount
                       is inadequate. That is because inadequacy of any amount awarded by
                       the Tribunal would point at an erroneous decision of the tribunal which
                       can be corrected only in exercise of appellate jurisdiction of a superior
                       court/tribunal.
MAC App No.72/2013

                                                                                          7
       [14]        What therefore, abundantly clear is that the power or duty of the
       appellate Court to examine and determine the just compensation or to enhance
       the compensation in an appeal preferred by the insurance co, in absence of cross
       objection/ or cross appeal by the claimant is circumscribed and not unfettered.
       In the instant case, the appeal has been filed by the Insurance Company for
       reduction of the compensation on the ground of error in applying multiplier and
       also for awarding a small amount on account of conveyance, which according to
       the appellant was not permissible, whereas, the respondent claimant in course of
       argument prayed for enhancement of the compensation on a new ground, which
       will be a larger or higher relief. The claimant having not filed any cross objection
       seeking higher relief or for enhancement of compensation on the ground as
       discussed herein before, shall not be entitled to such enhancement or higher
       relief in the present appeal filed by the Insurance Co for reduction of the
       compensation, in view of ration laid down by the Apex Court in Ranjana Prakash
       (supra).
       [15]       Be that as it may, having considered the totality of the matter, more
       particularly the quantum of award made by the Tribunal, I am not inclined to
       interfere with the award made by the Tribunal and in that view of the matter, the
       appeal is dismissed.
       [16]        Send back the LCR.
                                                                                 JUDGE
       Smita
MAC App No.72/2013


