                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, ARUNACHAL PRADESH AND MIZORAM)
                       MAC Appeal No.128 of 2016
Appellant:
Eunus Ali
S/o Late Sheikh Naim
R/o Dhirenpara, House No.4
D.K.Road, By-Lane Milan Path
P.S.Fatasil Ambari, Guwahati
District Kamrup, Assam,
PIN-781 025
Respondents
1.      The Branch Manager (Legal)
        Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Co. Ltd.
        G.S.Road, Ulubari, Opposite Bora Service Station
        Guwahati- 781 007
        (Insurer of vehicle)
2.      Md. Jamat Ullah Sheikh,
        S/o Md. Akhtar Ali of Sahib Ali Path,
        Sijubari, PO Hatigaon W/No.60,
        House No.14, Guwahati-6
        (Owner of the vehicle)
3.      Md. Salam Ali, S/o Karim Ali
        of village Jor Simla, P.S.Chhaygaon,
        P.O. Tapar Pathar,
        District Kamrup Assam
        PIN-781 137
        (Driver of the vehicle).
                                    BEFORE
               HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the Appellant      …            Mr. MA Sheikh and Mr.SZB Aklas,
                                    learned counsel
For the Respondents           …     Mr. R Goswami, learned counsel for R-1
                                    Mr. Rajib Sarma, learned counsel
                                    for Respondents No.2 & 3
Date of hearing & Judgment …        11.07.2017
                                                                     Page 1 of 7

                           JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Having noticed divergence of views expressed by the Supreme Court
of India in the cases of U.P. State Road Transport corporation Vs.Trilok
Chandra, (1996) 4 SCC 362, New India Assurance Company Limited Vs.
Charlie, (2005) 10 SCC 720, New India Assurance Company Vs. Smt. Shanti
Pathak, (2007) 10 SCC 1, Ramesh Singh Vs. Satbir Singh, (2008) ACJ 814,
Sarala Verma (Smt.) Vs. Delhi Transport Corporation (2009) 6 SCC 121,
National Insurance Company Limited Vs. Shyam Singh, (2011) 7 SCC 65,
Amrit Bhanu Shali Vs. National Insurance Company Limited, 2012 ACJ 2002,
Reshma Kumari Vs. Madan Mohan, (2013) 9 SCC 65, Munna Lal Jain Vs.
Vipin Kumar Sharma, (2015) 6 SCC 347 and Single Bench decisions of this
High Court in Sh. Laldaihzauva Vs. Lalnunsangi, (2016) 4 GLR 708, New
India Assurance Company Vs. Bhuban Chandra Bora, 2016 (5) GLJ 21,
Oriental Insurance Company Vs. Shitamai Saikia, 2016 (2) GLT 653 and
National Insurance Company Limited Vs. Keteki Barua, 2014 (4) GLT 531,
the learned Single Judge has referred the following question for our
consideration:-
              Whether age of the parents is relevant in choosing multiplier when
              claim petition is filed by the parents for death of the unmarried
              son/daughter ? Or in other words, whether in all cases the age of
              the deceased is the sole criterion for choosing multiplier?
2.     The facts leading to this reference in nutshell are that one Raja Ali
was a bachelor, son of the claimant. On 27.12.2008, Raja Ali was travelling
in an Auto Van from Guwahati to Goalpara. Unfortunately, on way, another
vehicle coming from the opposite direction collided with his vehicle. On
account of the aforesaid accident, two persons including Raja Ali died on
the spot. While hearing the appeal, learned Single Judge noticed divergence
of views taken by the Supreme Court in its various decisions as well as
                                                                          Page 2 of 7

decisions of this High Court referred to in the preceding paragraph and has
referred the above quoted question for our consideration.
3.     We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and have
perused the record. A three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the case
of U.P. State Road Transport Corporation Vs. Trilok Chandra (supra) while
dealing with claim of parents for death of their unmarried son has held that
selection of multiplier cannot in all cases be solely dependent on the age of
deceased and the age of the parents would also be relevant in selecting a
multiplier.  Also, in the case of New India Assurance Company Vs. Smt.
Shanti Pathak (supra), another three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court
dealt with a claim by parents on account of death of their bachelor son and
took a similar view that multiplier should be selected taking into account the
age of the dependents, namely, the parents. It is however pertinent to
note that in this case, the case of Trilok Chandra (supra) was not noticed by
the Supreme Court. Even later, in the case of Ramesh Singh Vs. Satbir
Singh (supra), a Division Bench of the Supreme Court took note of the
decision rendered in the case of New India Assurance Company Limited Vs.
Charlie and held that the High Court did not commit any illegality in
applying the multiplier by taking into account the age of the parents of
deceased.
4.     But, subsequently, a two-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in
Sarala Verma’s (supra) case where the dependents were deceased’s widow,
three minor children and parents held that multiplier should be selected
with reference to the age of deceased.
5.     However, a two-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of
National Insurance Company Limited Vs. Sham Singh (supra) approved the
action of the Tribunal in selecting the multiplier of 8 by taking average age
of the parents of deceased. And yet, in another case of Amri Bhanu Shali
vs. National Insurance Company Limited (supra), a Division Bench of the
Supreme Court while dealing with a case for compensation by the parents
                                                                     Page 3 of 7

and sister for the death of a bachelor followed the ratio laid down in the
case of Sarala Verma and held that selection of multiplier should be based
on the age of deceased and not on the age of dependent.
6.     Thereafter, a two-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court referred the
following two questions for consideration by a larger Bench:
                (i) Whether the multiplier specified in the Second Schedule
                appended to the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 should be scrupulously
                applied in all cases?
                (ii) Whether for determination of multiplicand, the 1988 Act
                provides for any criterion particularly as regards determination of
                future prospects?
 7.    A three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Reshma
Kumari Vs. Madan Mohan (supra) thereupon answered the reference in the
following terms:-
                      1. In the applications for compensation made under Section
                          166 of the 1988 Act, in death cases where the age of
                          deceased is 15 years and above, the Claims Tribunal
                          shall select the multiplier as indicated in Column 4 of the
                          Table prepared in Sarla Verma’s case read with Para 42
                          of that judgment.
                      2. In cases where the age of deceased is up to 15 years
                          irrespective of Section 166 or 163 A under which the
                          claim for compensation has been made, the multiplier of
                          15 and the assessment as indicated in the Second
                          Schedule subject to correction as pointed out in Column
                          6 of the Table in Sarla Verma’s case should be followed.
                      3. As a result of above, while considering the claim
                          applications made under Section 166 in death cases,
                          where the age of the deceased is above 15 years, there
                          is no necessity for Claims Tribunal to seek guidelines or
                          for placing reliance in Second Schedule in the 1988 Act.
                      4. The Claims Tribunal shall follow the steps and guidelines
                          stated in Para 19 of Sarla Verma’s case for determination
                          of compensation in cases of deaths.
                      5. While making addition to the income for future
                                                                           Page 4 of 7

                            prospects, the Tribunal shall follow Para 24 of the
                            Judgment in Sarla Verma.
                       6. In so far the deduction for personal and living expenses
                            is concerned, it is directed that the Tribunal shall
                            ordinarily follow the standards described in Paras 30, 31
                            and 32 of the judgment in Sarla Verma’s case subject to
                            observations made by us in Para 41 above.
8.      Thereafter, a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of
Munna Lal Jain Vs. Vipin Kumar Sharma (supra), followed its earlier decision
of a three-Judge Bench rendered in Reshma Kumari (supra) and held that
multiplier has to be selected with reference to the age of the deceased.
9.      But, recently vide judgment dated 15.2.2017, a Division Bench of the
Supreme Court in Meena Vs. Rani Ammal, relying upon the decision of Trilok
Chandra (supra), while deciding Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No.
34648/2015, at the motion hearing stage, summarily disposed of the appeal
in the following terms:
               “UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following ORDER:
               Delay condoned. We have heard learned counsel for the parties. We
               are not satisfied that the age of the deceased should have been
               taken for the purpose of determining the multiplier. It is now well-
               settled particularly after the decision of a Bench of 3-Judges in U.P.
               State Road Transport Corporation and Others Vs. Trilok Chandra and
               Others [(1996) 4 SCC 612] that ordinarily in the case of the death of
               a bachelor the age of the dependent parents should be taken for
               determining the multiplier. Consequently, we do not accept the
               contrary submission of learned counsel for the petitioners in this
               regard. It is then submitted that future prospects have not been
               taken into account by the High Court and that should also have been
               considered. In our opinion, keeping this in mind, it would be in the
               interest of justice, particularly since the deceased is a bachelor that a
               total amount of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five lakhs only) be awarded
               as compensation along with interest at the rate of 7.5 per cent from
               the date of filing of the claim petition. The amount be paid within a
               period of two months from today. Needless to say, the amount of
               Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five lakhs only) will include the amount
               awarded by the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal. The special leave
               petition is disposed of. ”
                                                                             Page 5 of 7

10.    Thus, from narration of the decisions referred by us in the preceding
paragraphs, it is evident that there are two conflicting views taken by three-
Judges Bench of the Supreme Court, namely, in the case of Trilok Chandra
(supra) where it is held that age of the parents would be relevant in the
choice of multiplier whereas in the case of Reshma Kumari (supra) a
contrary view has been taken holding that multiplier is to be used with
reference to the age of deceased. The aforesaid decision has been followed
by another three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Munna
Lal Jain (supra). It is also relevant to mention that decision in the case of
Trilok Chandra was noticed by the Supreme Court in the case of Reshma
Kumari and thereafter the legal position with reference to selection of
multiplier was further explained and clarified by the Supreme Court in the
case of Munna Lal Jain (supra). It is well settled in law that an order passed
by the Supreme Court at the motion hearing stage cannot be treated as
precedent. (See State of Punjab Vs. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar, (2011) 14
SCC 770. Therefore, the Division Bench decision of the Supreme court in the
case of Mina vs. Rani Ammal (supra) does not alter the legal position which
emerges after two decisions of the three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court
in the cases of Reshma Kumari and Munna Lal Jain.
11.        Besides that, it is important to note that decision rendered by a
three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Trilok Chandra has
been considered, explained and reiterated by three-Judge Bench in two
decisions of the Supreme Court. In Munna Lal Jain, a three-Judge Bench of
the Supreme Court has explained the ratio in Reshma Kumari as follows:-
               “Whether the multiplier should depend on the age of the
               dependents or that of the deceased, has been hanging fire for
               some time, but that has been given a quietus by another three-
               Judge Bench decision in Reshma Kumari. It was held that the
               multiplier is to be used with reference to the age of the deceased.
               One reason appears to be that there is certainty with regard to the
               age of the deceased but as far as that of dependents is concerned,
               there will always be room for dispute as to whether the age of the
               eldest or youngest or even the average, etc., is to be taken.”
                                                                          Page 6 of 7

12.   The Supreme Court in the case of M.S. Sandhu Vs. State of Punjab,
(2014) 6 SCC 514 has held that in case of conflict of co-ordinate Benches of
equal strength, the latter decision has to be followed specially when earlier
decision rendered by co-ordinate Bench has been explained. Similar view
has been taken by a five-Judge Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in
Jabalpur Bus Operators Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 2003 (MP) 81
wherein it is held that in case of conflict of two Division Benches of equal
strength, the decision of earlier Division Bench shall be followed except
when it is explained by the latter Division Bench. In view of aforesaid
enunciation of law and taking into account the principle of stare decisis, the
decision rendered in the cases of Reshma Kumari and Munna Lal Jain is
binding on this Court.
13.    For the aforementioned reasons, we hold that age of the parents is
not relevant for selecting the multiplier and the multiplier has to be selected
with reference to age of the deceased. Accordingly, the reference is
answered.
       Let the matter be placed before the learned Single Judge for decision
on merits.
               JUDGE                                      CHIEF JUSTICE
Skd/-
                                                                      Page 7 of 7


