.*    IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                 Judgment pronounced on: March 05, 2014
+                   RC.REV. 359/2013 & CM No.15110/2013
      ANILA JAIN                                                  ..... Petitioner
                           Through      Mr.Shubhankar Sharma, Adv.
                           versus
      NIKUNJ SINGHANIA                                         ..... Respondent
                           Through      Mr.Puneet Bhatnagar, Adv. with
                                        Ms.Richa S. Bhatnagar, Adv.
      CORAM:
      HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN SINGH
MANMOHAN SINGH, J.
1.    By way of the present petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India read with Section 25B(8) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
(hereinafter referred to as “the Act”), the petitioner has assailed the eviction
order dated 8th April, 2013 of the learned Rent Controller whereby the leave
to defend application filed by the petitioner was dismissed for the reason
mainly that the same was not filed within the stipulated period prescribed
under the Act.
2.    The respondent had filed an eviction petition being No.E-17/12
against the petitioner under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act in respect of a room
bearing No. 3B, with Balcony alongwith common toilet and bathroom in the
property bearing municipal No. A-14/3, Jamna Bhawan, 2nd Floor, Asaf Ali
Road, New Delhi(hereinafter referred to as the “tenanted premises”).
RCR No.359/2013                                                   Page 1 of 16

3.     It is admitted by the petitioner that incomplete summons were served
on the petitioner on 23rd August, 2012, the same however did not contain
pleading and documents. Therefore not considered as valid summons. It is
stated that on 25th October, 2012 the counsel for the petitioner appeared
before the learned Trial Court and requested for supply of the complete set
of pleadings, paper books and documents. It is stated that it was in those
circumstances that the learned Trial Court vide order dated 25 th October,
2012 granted time and liberty to the petitioner to inspect court file and
thereafter to file the application for leave to defend, and for this purpose, the
matter was put up for 21st January, 2013.
4.     It was the case of the petitioner that the delay in filing the leave to
defend application is due to the fact that incomplete summons were served
on the petitioner without the paper books containing pleading and
documents and the same could not be called as complete service. The leave
to defend application was filed within 15 days of receipt of the complete set
of paper books were received by the petitioner.
5.     The said plea raised by the petitioner has been discussed in the
following decisions:
     (i)    In M/s. Delhi Book Store vs. K.S. Subramaniam, AIR 2006 Delhi
            206.
               “10. Another submission vehemently made on behalf of
               the defendant is with regard to the service of the
               summons upon the defendant in accordance with the
               provisions of Order 37 of the CPC. It is contended that
               the documents were not given to the defendant along with
               the plaint and the service of the summons was not proper.
               The copy of the summonses which were served upon the
               defendant indicates that they were duly received by the
RCR No.359/2013                                                   Page 2 of 16

             defendant and nothing was recorded on the said
             summonses that the documents annexed to the plaint have
             not been served upon the defendant. Even after the
             summonses were received and prior to filing the
             application for leave to defend, there is nothing on record
             which could indicate that the defendant had written to the
             plaintiff or placed any document on the Court file at the
             time of putting in appearance that the requisite documents
             were not supplied to the defendant. This again appears to
             be an afterthought on the part of the defendant.”
    (ii) Rena Verma vs. Veena Gupta, CM(M) 178/2012, dated 6th
          August, 2012, (Date of decision : 6th August, 2012).
             “The contention of the petitioner before this court is that
             the copy of the eviction petition was illegible and hence
             rendered her unable to file the application for leave to
             defend. The same contention was urged by the petitioner
             before the ld. ARC, but the perusal of record shows that
             after service of summons, the petitioner took no step to
             obtain the copy of petition or to bring the matter before
             the trial Court immediately, but instead waited till last
             day, i.e., 01.02.2011 to file an application for direction to
             the petitioner to supply legible copy of petition. The only
             reason put forward by the petitioner was that no steps
             could be taken by him due to his marriage. Even the
             application filed under Order 37 Rule 4 of CPC on
             30.09.2011 for review of order dated 27.04.2011, was
             time barred and was not accompanied with the
             application for condonation of delay. The whole chain of
             events displays chronic apathy on the part of the
             petitioner, and I am unable to find the presence of any
             special circumstances existed which could merit the
             condonation of delay in filing the application for leave to
             defend.”
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 3 of 16

6.     The learned Trial Court by the impugned eviction order observed that
the petitioner had been served on 23rd August, 2012 and after service on 23rd
August, 2012, the petitioner was required to file application for leave to
defend with 15 days thereafter, however the petitioner did not do so, and the
counsel for the petitioner had appeared on 25th October, 2012. Even
thereafter, the leave to defend application was not filed with 15 days from
his appearance and it was finally filed on 21st January, 2013, which is clearly
beyond the period of limitation. Accordingly, the impugned eviction order
was passed by the learned Trial Court, and aggrieved thereof the petitioner
filed the present petition.
7.     It has been stated in the present petition that petitioner is a senior
citizen and widow of the original tenant in the tenanted premises for more
than 51 years. It is stated that she and her son are earning their livelihood by
running an office at the tenanted premises.
8.     It is however not denied by the counsel for the petitioner that the
application for leave to defend was not filed within 15 days from the date of
service of summons i.e. 23rd August 2012, rather it was filed on 21st January
2013. So there is delay in filing the application for leave to defend.
9.     The issue for consideration before this Court is whether Rent
Controller was correct in rejecting the application for leave to defend after
expiry of the prescribed period on the ground that he had no power to
condone the delay under the Act. In        various cases decided from time to
time it has been held that the Rent Controller has no other option but to pass
an order of eviction.
10.    It is true that before this Court many revision petitions against the
orders passed by the Rent Controller(s) are being filed on similar issue, it
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 4 of 16

has been urged on behalf of the tenants that the law of limitation was not
intended to extinguish the right of the parties which cannot be defeated for
procedural laws. Thus passing of mechanical orders by the Rent
Controller(s) to the effect that they have no jurisdiction to condone the delay
in filing the application for leave to defend after the expiry of fifteen days
would not only defeat the ends of justice but violate the basic purpose of
Limitation Act, 1963.
11.     The legal issue involved in the present case is the same as in RCR No.
298/2013, RCR No. 341/2013, RCR 363/2013, RCR 418/2012 and RCR
15/2013. Almost same arguments were addressed in all three matters.
12.     It is submitted that in the matter of jurisdiction of the controller to
extend the time for compliance of the provisions of Section 14(1)(a) for
payment of rent and 14(1)(e) for obtaining leave to contest as required under
the third Schedule to Chapter IIIA is the same and the Act does not
contemplate different treatment between the said two provisions. A number
of decisions rendered by this Court have been referred in this regard under
which powers of the Controller to condone the delay in complying with the
orders under Section 15(1) of the Act has been upheld. In the case of
Rakesh Kumar vs. Gandharv Singh, 155 (2008) DLT 750, a Single Judge
of this Court after referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case
of Ram Murthy vs. Bhola Nath, AIR 1984 SC 1392, held as under:
      “…… A perusal of aforesaid observations in the judgment would
      clearly show that the learned Additional Rent Controller or for
      that matter Tribunal is not powerless to condone the delay in a
      given case which may occur on account of the reasons which are
      beyond the control of the tenant to physically make the deposit
      within a period of one month as stipulated in law. The said
      paragraph gives various illustrations under which the tenant may
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 5 of 16

      be unable to deposit the rent. In all such contingencies the ARC
      would not be powerless to condone the delay. Therefore, in the
      light of the aforesaid facts, it could not be said that the learned
      Tribunal or the ARC did not have the power to condone the
      delay. However, so far as the question of actually delay being
      condoned in the present case is concerned, that aspect has to be
      seen as to whether the delay could have been condoned or not. In
      the instant case, there was no application filed by the petitioner
      for condonation of delay nor was such an application filed before
      the learned Additional Rent Control Tribunal therefore the delay
      could not be ipso facto condoned automatically by the learned
      Additional Rent Controller or by the Tribunal without there being
      an application. To that extent, I feel that the order of the learned
      Additional Rent Controller as well as that of the Tribunal cannot
      be found fault with.”
13.     In the case of Smt. Anit Maharani vs. Sh. Shashi Bhushan, decided
by Valmiki J. Mehta, J., on 19th April, 2011, while referring to the judgment
of the Supreme Court in the case Ram Murthy vs. Bhola Nath (supra), this
Court has held that the Controller has got the powers to condone the delay in
case the tenant is able to show that the delay was on account of reasons
which were beyond his control.
14.     In view of abovesaid decisions referred, it is argued that the
provisions of Limitation Act, 1963 cannot selectively be applied to
proceedings under the same Act as observed in the cases decided wherein
the Courts have held that the Controllers have power to condone the delay in
complying with the orders under Section 15(1) of the Act and in another
provision of the same Section, it is being held that the Controller(s) have no
power to condone the delay. It cannot be selectively applicable. Therefore,
the Controller does possess the power to condone the delay if an application
for leave to defend is filed after the prescribed period of 15 days in case the
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 6 of 16

tenant is prevented from filing the same due to reasons which were beyond
his control.
15.    Let me now consider the submissions made on behalf of three
petitioners/tenants i.e. present revision petition and RCR No. 298/2013,
RCR No. 341/2013, RCR 363/2013, RCR 418/2012 and RCR 15/2013.
Before dealing with their arguments, it is necessary to refer the relevant
provisions of Section 25-B(4) in order to decide the issue in hand. The same
reads herein as under:-
        “25. B Special procedure for the disposal of applications for
        eviction on the ground of bona fide requirement. - (4) The
        tenant on whom the summons is duly served (whether in the
        ordinary way or by registered post) in the form specified in the
        Third Schedule shall not contest the prayer for eviction from
        the premises unless he files and affidavit stating the grounds on
        which he seeks to contest the application for eviction and
        obtains leave from the Controller as hereinafter provided; and
        in default of his appearance in pursuance of the summons or
        his obtaining such leave, the statement made by the landlord in
        the application for eviction shall be deemed to be admitted by
        the tenant and the applicant shall be entitled to an order for
        eviction on the ground aforesaid.”
16.    The provisions of Chapter III-A of the Act stood challenged in an
earlier proceeding and the Supreme Court in Kewal Singh vs. Smt.
Lajwanit, (1980) 1 SCC 290. In the said case, the classification on the class
of landlords under Section 14 (1)(e) and the procedure applicable and as
contained in Section 25-B of the Act had been questioned; submission
was that the classification is not in consonance with the object sought to be
achieved by the Act. The Supreme Court had answered this question in the
following words:-
        “We would, therefore confine ourselves to the validity of
        Section 14(1)(e) and the procedure prescribed to give relief
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 7 of 16

         mentioned in the aforesaid Section in Section 25B. Before
         discussing the relevant provisions of the Act it may be
         necessary to observe that the Rent Control Act is a piece of
         social legislation and is meant mainly to protect the tenants
         from frivolous evictions. At the same time, in order to do
         justice to the landlords and to avoid placing such restrictions
         on their right to evict the tenant as to destroy their legal right to
         property certain salutary provisions have been made by the
         legislature which give relief to the landlord. In the absence of
         such a legislation a landlord has a common law right to evict
         the tenant either on the determination of the tenancy by efflux
         of time or for default in payment of rent or other grounds after
         giving notice under the Transfer of Property Act. This broad
         right has been curtailed by the Rent Control Legislation with a
         view to give protection to the tenants having regard to their
         genuine and dire needs. While the rent control legislation has
         given a number of facilities to the tenants it should not be
         construed so as to destroy the limited relief W.P.(C)
         No.1801/2013 Page 10 of 13 which it seeks to give to the
         landlord also. For instance one of the grounds for eviction
         which is contained in almost all the Rent Control Acts in the
         country is the question of landlord's bonafide personal
         necessity. The concept of bonafide necessity should be
         meaningfully construed so as to make the relief granted to the
         landlord real and practical.”
17.     The scope of Chapter IIIA of the Rent Act has been elaborately
discussed in the case of Ravi Dutt Sharma vs. Ratan Lal Bhargava, (1984)
2 SCC 75 in which this Court duly discussed the object of the Rent Act and
also the insertion of Chapter IIIA of the same in the following manner:
      “7…..The dominant object of the act is to provide a speedy,
      expeditious and effective remedy for a class of landlords
      contemplated by Sections 14(1)(e) and 14-A and for avoiding
      unusual dilatory process provided otherwise by the Rent Act. It is
      common experience that suits for eviction under the Act take a
      long time commencing with the Rent Controller and ending up
      with the Supreme Court. In many cases experience has indicated
      that by the time the eviction decree became final several years
RCR No.359/2013                                                     Page 8 of 16

     elapsed and either the landlord died or the necessity which
     provided the cause of action disappeared and if there was further
     delay in securing eviction and the family of the landlord had by
     then expanded, in the absence of accommodation the members of
     the family were virtually thrown on the road. It was this mischief,
     which the Legislature intended to avoid by incorporating the new
     procedure in Chapter III-A. The Legislature in its wisdom
     thought that in cases where the landlords required their own
     premises for bona fide and personal necessity they should be
     treated as a separate class along with the landlords covered by
     Section 14-A and should be allowed to reap the fruits of decrees
     for eviction within the quickest possible time. It cannot, therefore,
     be said that the classification of such landlords would be an
     unreasonable one because such a classification has got a clear
     nexus with the objects of the Amending Act and the purposes,
     which it seeks to subserve. Tenants cannot complain of any
     discrimination because the Rent Act merely gave certain
     protection to them in public interest and if the protection or part
     of it afforded by the Rent Act was withdrawn and the common law
     right of the tenant under the Transfer of property Act was still
     preserved, no genuine grievance could be made.”
18.    In the case of Prithipal Singh vs. Satpal Singh (D) through legal
heirs, 2010 (2) SCC 15, the Supreme Court, while dealing with the specific
plea set up by the tenant as to whether the Addl. Rent Controller had the
power to condone the delay of 15 days in seeking leave to defend, held as
under:
        “23. As noted hereinearlier, Section 25-B(1) clearly says
        that any application filed by a landlord for recovery of
        possession of any premises, inter alia, on the ground of
        Section 14(1)(e) of the Rent Act, shall be dealt with in
        accordance with the procedure specified in Section 25-B of
        the Rent Act. Therefore, Sub-section (1) of Section 25-B
        makes it clear that if any application for eviction of a tenant
        is filed by the landlord, the special procedure indicated in
        Section 25-B has to be followed and Section 25-B(1) clearly
        stipulates that the application for eviction shall be strictly
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 9 of 16

       dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified in this
       Section. Apart from that, as we have noted herein earlier,
       Section 25-B itself is a special code and therefore, Rent
       Controller, while dealing with an application for eviction of
       a tenant on the ground of bona fide requirement, has to
       follow strictly in compliance with Section 25-B of the Act.
       Therefore, after insertion of Section 25-B of the Act, any
       application for granting eviction for a special kind of
       landlord, shall be dealt with strictly in compliance with
       Section 25-B and question of relying on Rule 23 of the
       Code, which also does not give full right to apply the
       provisions of the Code, could be applied.
       24. That apart, Rule 23 does not specifically confer any
       power on the Controller to follow the provisions of the Code
       in special classes of landlords. It is a general rule, by which
       the Controller in deciding any question relating to procedure
       not specifically provided by the Act and these rules shall, as
       far as possible, be guided by the provisions contained in the
       Code.
       25. In view of our discussions made hereinabove that
       Section 25B has been inserted by the Legislature for
       eviction of a tenant of a certain classes of landlords, in
       which the entire procedure has been given, it is difficult for
       us to hold that Rule 23 of the Rules can be applied in the
       present case in view of the specific provisions provided in
       Section 25B of the Rent Act. Accordingly, we are of the
       view that Rule 23 has no manner of application.
       26. That being the position, if Rule 23 cannot be applied in
       the present case because of applicability of Section 25B,
       which is a special code and specific procedure for eviction
       of a tenant by a landlord on the ground of bona fide
       requirement, we cannot agree with the courts below that in
       view of Rule 23 of the Rules, the provisions of the Code can
       be applied in the present case and, therefore, we are of the
       view that the High Court had acted illegally and with
       material irregularity in the exercise of its jurisdiction in
       setting aside the order of eviction and in allowing the
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 10 of 16

        affidavit filed by the tenant for the purpose of defending the
        proceedings for eviction.
        27. That apart, from a perusal of the order of the High Court
        and also of the Rent Controller, it would be evident that the
        High Court had relied on a decision of the Delhi High Court
        in the case of Mohd. Quresh vs. Smt. Roopa Fotedar &amp;
        Ors. [1990 (1) ILR 16] and held in favour of the
        tenant/respondent. In Mohd. Quresh (supra), another
        decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of Gurditta Mal
        Vs. Bal Sarup [AIR 1980 Delhi 216] was relied on to come
        to a conclusion that in view of Rule 23 of the Rules, the
        Rent Controller was conferred with the power to entertain an
        application under Order 37 Rule 4 read with Section 151 of
        the Code.”
19.   The Division Bench of this Court in the case of Olive Marques vs.
Union of India, 2013 (199) DLT 727, has discussed the implications and
consequences of non-filing of application for leave to defend in the
prescribed time in para 8 of the judgment which reads as under:
        “8. The elaborate submission of the learned counsel for the
        petitioners on this score being that the last four lines in the
        said sub- clause are the offending lines. This envisages a
        situation where if the tenant does not file his defence within
        the stipulated period, the statement made by the landlord in
        his eviction petition shall be deemed to be admitted by the
        tenant and the landlord would straightway be entitled to a
        decree of eviction; this impinges upon the power of judicial
        review which the Courts have; there could be cases where
        the landlord has filed an eviction petition which is based
        purely on a fraud and merely because of an inadvertent
        mistake or error on the part of the tenant in not being able to
        file his application for leave to defend within the time frame
        as contained in Section 25-B (4), such a landlord would also
        be entitled to a decree straightway which could not have
        been the intention of the legislature. This principle is in fact
        opposed to the principles of natural justice; it denies a right
        to be heard to the tenant. Submission being that this so
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 11 of 16

        called summary procedure is in fact a flagrant abuse of right
        of equality before the law and equal protection which is
        guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution; such a
        legislation can in no manner be sustained. The vehement
        submission of learned counsel for the petitioners being that
        Section 4 of the Evidence Act contains a rebuttable
        presumption giving a right to the opposing party to rebut
        such a presumption but the language of Section 25-B (4) has
        gone beyond that point; it has embodied within itself a
        conclusive proof which is draconian in character and is
        liable to be struck down. Learned counsel for the petitioners
        has taken us through Article 31-C of the Constitution of
        India; submission being that last three lines of the said
        Article "and no law containing a declaration that it is for
        giving effect to such policy shall be called in question in any
        court on the ground that it does not give effect to such
        policy" had been declared as invalid by the Supreme Court
        in Keshavananda Bharati Vs. The State of Kerala (1973)
        Supp SCR 1. Learned counsel for the petitioners by relying
        upon this Article seeks to draw a parallel with his
        submission that the last four lines contained in Section 25-B
        (4) also need to be invalidated.”
20.    Similar view was also taken by the Supreme Court of India as well as
by this Court that the Court has no power to condone the delay in filing the
application for leave to defend in the following cases.
       (i)    In the case of Rakesh Gupta & Another vs. Ashok Dilwali,
              reported in 2012 (1) RCR (Rent) 342, it was held that the tenant
              seeking permission to contest the eviction petition filed under
              Section 14(1)(e) of the Rent Act, is supposed to file an affidavit
              within 15 days from the date of receipt of summons pleading
              such facts as would disentitle the landlord from obtaining an
              eviction order. Failure to file the affidavit has to result in the
RCR No.359/2013                                                  Page 12 of 16

             passing of an eviction order against the tenant. It was further
             held that period of 15 days is not extendable even for a day.
      (ii)   In the case of Om Prakash vs. Ashwani Kumar Bassi, 2010 (2)
             RLR 289, it was held that wherein the application for leave to
             contest, there was a delay of one day in filing the application,
             the Rent Controller has no jurisdiction to condone the delay.
             The eviction order has been rightly passed as the Rent
             Controller being a creature of statute can only act in terms of
             the powers vested in him by statute and cannot therefore
             entertain an application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act
             for condonation of delay since the statute does not vest him
             with such power.
      (iii)  Shiv Gopal & Anr. vs. Shipra Singh & Ors., reported in 186
             (2012) Delhi Law Times 194, wherein it was held that the Rent
             Controller has not been conferred with power to condone delay
             even for one day.
      (iv)   Ramesh Tuli vs. Sharda Kapoor, reported in 153 (2008) Delhi
             Law Times 302, wherein it was held that in view of Prithi Pal
             Singh’s case, 133 (2006) DLT 686, Court of Additional Rent
             Controller had no jurisdiction to entertain application under
             Section 25B which is filed beyond period of 15 days. It was
             further held that the provisions of Limitation Act are not
             applicable.
23.   In view of settled law on the issue in hand, there is no force in the
submissions of the petitioner to the effect that in view of the law laid down
by the Supreme Court wherein it is held that despite of time stipulated under
RCR No.359/2013                                                Page 13 of 16

Section 15(1) read with Section 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(2) of the Act, the
Tribunal is not powerless to condone the delay in a given case, therefore,
those decisions would also apply in the same manner, as there is a delay in
filing of the application for leave to defend in the petition filed under Section
14(1)(e) of the Act when there can be circumstances which may be beyond
the control of the tenant which may prevent the tenant from complying with
the order under Section 15(1) of the Act. However, this Court is of the
considered opinion that the said decisions have no application in the
situation when the eviction orders are passed under Section 14(1)(e) of the
Act on failure of filing the application for leave to defend beyond the time
prescribed. The main reasons are that the eviction sought by the landlord
under the provision of Section 14(1)(e) is to be treated as summary
proceedings and in view of the special procedure provided under sub-section
(4) of Section 25B which mandates that in default of tenant’s appearance
pursuant to the summons or in obtaining such leave, the statement made by
the landlord in the application for leave to eviction shall be deemed to be
admitted by the tenant and the landlord shall be entitled to an order of
eviction on the grounds stated in the eviction petition.           Such deeming
provision is not prescribed in the provision and procedure under Section
14(1)(a) if the arrears of rent are recoverable. Therefore, the arguments
addressed by the petitioner cannot be accepted in the absence of such
deeming provision available in the eviction petition under Section 14(1)(a)
for recovery of rent.
24.    For the aforesaid reasons as explained and in view of settled law on
the issue involved and in existence of special provision for bonafide
requirement under Section 25(B) sub-section (4), this Court under the
inherent and plenary powers is not empowered to take different view by
RCR No.359/2013                                                    Page 14 of 16

exercising discretionary jurisdiction and to mould the statutory and
mandatory provisions even in the cases where the tenant is able to make a
sufficient case for filing the application beyond the period of time. All the
decisions rendered by the Courts on the issue in hand are binding and my
view is also the same. However, I am of the considered opinion that in order
to provide justice in these nature of the cases where the eviction orders are
passed without having considered the defence of tenant, some reasonable
time should be granted to evict the tenant as one must understand that after
the decision of Satyawati Sharma (Dead) by LRs vs. Union of India (UOI)
& Anr., AIR 2008 SC 3148, the distinction between a premises let out for a
residential purpose and those let out for commercial purpose for the purpose
of an eviction petition filed under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act had been
abrogated.
20.    Considering the overall facts and circumstances of the case, I am of
the view that at least the petitioner is entitled for sufficient time to vacate the
tenanted premises without deciding the case of the petitioner on merit due to
the reasons that the application for leave to defend has not been filed by the
petitioner within the prescribed time.
21.    In the case of Mohd. Ayub vs. Mukesh Chand, (2012) 2 SCC 155, it
was observed that “the hardship Appellants would suffer by not occupying
their own premises would be far greater than the hardship the Respondent
would suffer by having to move out to another place. We are mindful of the
fact that whenever the tenant is asked to move out of the premises some
hardship is inherent. We have noted that the Respondent is in occupation of
the premises for a long time. But in our opinion, in the facts of this case that
circumstance cannot be the sole determinative factor. That hardship can be
RCR No.359/2013                                                     Page 15 of 16

mitigated by granting him longer period to move out of the premises in his
occupation so that in the meantime he can make alternative arrangement.”
22.    In view of the hardship shown by the petitioner, coupled with the fact
that it is a commercial property which was let out to the husband of the
petitioner since more than last 51 years, and she and her son are earning their
livelihood by running an office at the tenanted premises and in the interest of
justice, equity and fair play, the petitioner are granted two years’ time from
today to vacate the tenanted premises. During this period, the petitioner
shall not sublet or create any third party interest in the tenanted premises and
after the expiry of said period, the petitioner shall hand over the peaceful and
vacant possession of the tenanted premises to the respondent.
23.    The present petition is accordingly disposed of with these directions.
24.    No costs.
                                                       (MANMOHAN SINGH)
                                                                JUDGE
MARCH 05, 2014
RCR No.359/2013                                                   Page 16 of 16


