                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT,
       (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                              Mat. Appeal No.29 of 2015
       APPELLANT:
       Sri Arun Kumar Paul,
       Son of Late Akshay Kumar Paul,
       Resident of Nibedita Lane, Rangikhari,
       Silchar, PO & P.S. Silchar, District Cachar,
       Assam, Silchar-5
       R ESPONDENT:
       Smti. Sikha Paul @ Sikha Paul Choudhury,
       C/o Judhirstir Paul Choudhury
       Residing at:-
       Lala Town, Ward No.VIII, PO & P.S. Lala
       District Hailakandi, Assam
       PIN No.788163
                                              BEFORE
                          HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the appellant:            Mr.SD Purkayastha, learned counsel.
For the respondent:           Dr.B Ahmed and Mr.AK Azad, learned counsel.
Date of hearing & judgment: 20.6.2017
                                    JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       This appeal under Section 28 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 act read
with Section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure has been filed by the husband-
Arun Kumar Paul-challenging the legality and validity of the impugned judgement
and order dated 3/8/2015 passed by the District Judge, Hailakandi, in Title Suit
(Divorce) No. 5/2013, awarding permanent alimony of Rs.3,00,000/- to the
respondent wife-Sikha Paul- by dissolving the marriage between the parties.
                                                                          Page 1 of 3

2.     The brief facts are these. According to Appellant, he married the
respondent on 5/6/2002 as per Hindu rites and customs and they resided
together as husband and wife till 1/1/2009 on which date, respondent deserted
him and started living in her parental home. Appellant also pleaded that he had
no source of income and was dependent on his younger brother who used to
make the necessary expenses for his living. Prior to that, in the year 2003,
respondent asked appellant to pay a sum of Rs.1,50,000/-as permanent alimony
and consequently, the said amount was paid by him. An affidavit/declaration –
Exhibit-1   to  that   extent  was    executed   by   respondent    on   10/7/2003
acknowledging the receipt of the said sum. Appellant subsequently filed the Title
Suit (Divorce) No. 5/2013 for dissolution of the marriage on 26/2/2013 pleading
to the effect that respondent received the aforesaid sum as permanent alimony
which was admitted by her in the Court in maintenance case- M.R. Case
No.203/2010 under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and hence
prayed for a decree of divorce due to desertion.
3.     Respondent, however, in her written statement, while admitting her
signature in Exhibit -1, pleaded that appellant deceitfully obtained her signatures
in some blank papers, which were subsequently converted into a declaration and
she stoutly denied receiving the aforesaid sum of Rs.1,50,000/- as permanent
alimony in the year 2003. Her contention was that appellant used to demand
dowry from her and on her failure to satisfy his demands, he used to torture her
both physically and mentally and ultimately on 1/1/2009, she was beaten
mercilessly and was driven out from her matrimonial home and as such, she was
forced to leave the company of the appellant.
4.     The District Judge by the impugned judgement and order disbelieved the
execution of the declaration-Exhibit -1 and receipt of the aforesaid permanent
alimony and passed the decree of divorce by awarding a sum of Rs.3,00,000/- as
permanent alimony. Being aggrieved, appellant has preferred this instant appeal.
5.     After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties and perusing the
records, we are of the considered view that the appeal deserves to be allowed.
                                                                         Page 2 of 3

Respondent has admitted her signatures Exhibits-A(1), (2), (3) and (4) on the
declaration Exhibit-1 and has also proved the signature Exhibit-A(5) of her
brother-Radhu Paul Choudhury. Radhu Paul Choudhury stood as a witness to the
said declaration. He was not summoned as witness by the respondent to thwart
the claim of appellant. Burden was on her to prove that the signatures of both
respondent and her brother-Radhu Paul Choudhury were taken deceitfully on
blank papers and the same were subsequently converted into affidavit. She could
have easily done so by calling her own brother as witness and on the contrary,
she opted to conceal this witness. DW3-Kalyan Kar-an advocate by profession,
who identified respondent and her signatures, also deposed that respondent
received the aforesaid sum as permanent alimony. Ashit Paul (PW-2)-another
witness- also proved the said transaction. All the witnesses stood firm in the
witness box and did not shake during their cross-examination as such drawing
confidence of the court. Hence, we do not find any reason to disbelieve the
appellant and the contents of Exhibit-1. Besides, the respondent had admitted
her signatures in Exhibit-1 in the maintenance case too, thereby acknowledging
the receipt of Rs.1,50,000/-earlier. As such, the respondent is not entitled for
further sum of Rs.3,00,000/- as directed by the District Judge and now the
balance amount of Rs.1,50,000/- only is to be paid to her by the appellant.
Appellant shall pay the said sum of Rs.1,50,000/-to her within 60 (sixty) days
from today.
6.      Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the judgment and order of the
District Judge is modified to the above extent. Appeal is partly allowed.
                JUDGE                                          CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                                          Page 3 of 3


