                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, ARUNACHAL PRADESH AND MIZORAM)
                            Mat. Appeal No.27 of 2015
Appellant:
Sri Jayanta Paul,
S/o Sri Shambhu Nath Paul
R/o Tengapara, Ward No.5,
P.O. and P.S.Kokrajhar
District Kokrajhar, Assam
PIN-783 370
Respondent:
Smti. Rumi Dey,
W/o Jayanta Paul,
D/o Late Nitish Chandra Dey
R/o Kokrajhar Bazar, Ward No.6
P.O. and PS Kokrajhar
District Kokrajhar, Assam
PIN-783 370
                                    BEFORE
               HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the Appellant           …     Mr. AK Hussain, learned counsel
For the Respondent         …      Mr. MU Mahmud, learned counsel
Date of hearing & Judgment …      11.07.2017
                           JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
        This appeal under Section 39 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 has been
filed by the husband –Jayanta Paul-challenging the legality and validity of the
impugned judgement and decree dated 15/10/2015 passed by the District
Judge, Kokrajhar in Title Suit (D) 32/2015 dismissing the petition filed by him
for divorce under Section 27 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954.
2.      The brief facts are these. The appellant married the respondent Rumi
Dey on 20/7/2006 under section 13 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, which
was followed by a marriage as per Hindu rites and customers. Thereafter wife
                                                                       Page 1 of 3

started living together with the husband in his house till 21/12/2007 on which
date she deserted him and started living with her parents. The husband visited
the house of her parents in the month of July,2008 and persuaded her to live
with him. Later, as desired by wife to live separately from the parents of
husband, they started living in a rented house. After 2 months, i.e. on
8/1/2009, the wife again left the company of husband without his consent and
since then she has been living with her parents till date. The husband visited
the house of her parents on 15/1/2009 and tried to persuade her to return but
in vain. All the efforts made by him became futile and as such finding no
alternative he filed the suit for divorce.
3.     When the notice of the case was sent to wife she refused to accept the
same on 18/8/2015 and as such the suit proceeded ex-parte. Husband adduced
his evidence as PW1and the evidence of his father-Sambhu Nath Paul-as PW2.
The process server-Rajiv Narzary-was also examined and he deposed that wife
refused to accept the notice. However, the District Judge dismissed the suit by
way of the impugned judgement and decree as aforesaid, holding inter-alia that
the desertion by wife has not been proved and the husband made no bonafide
attempt to bring her back home. Being aggrieved, the husband has filed this
appeal.
4.     After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the
records, we find sufficient merit in the appeal and as such it deserves to be
allowed. Husband has categorically deposed that wife had deserted him on
21/12/2007 and thereafter he went to the house of her parents in July, 2008
and persuaded her to live with him. Later, when she desired and demanded to
live separately in a rented house, he also accepted that proposal and even took
a house on rent. They stayed there upto 8/1/2009 on which date wife again
deserted him and started living with her parents. It is his categorical statement
that appellant visited the house of her parents on 15/1/2009 and requested her
to come back home but in vain and since then, she has been staying there. His
evidence is also supported by the evidence of his father –Sambhu Nath Paul
and as such it is clear that the he made repeated attempts to bring the wife but
                                                                         Page 2 of 3

she did not return. The evidence of the process server would also go to show
that respondent refused to accept the notice when he went to serve the same.
Therefore, it is apparent that respondent deserted the appellant without any
justifiable cause and also evaded service of notice of the Court. It is also
proved that the appellant made several attempts to bring her back but she did
not return. The contention of the husband that the wife deserted him without
any justifiable reason and she did not return home in spite of repeated
attempts made by him also remained un-rebutted by the wife and therefore it
can safely be inferred that she deserted him and did not return in spite of
several attempts made by him.
5.      Only because of the fact that but for the husband’s father no elderly
person went to bring her back cannot be a ground for refusing a decree of
divorce on the ground of desertion when there is ample material on record to
show that wife deserted the husband without any justifiable cause and she
refused to come back home in spite of repeated attempts made by him.
6.      Although, it has been prayed on behalf of the wife that matter may be
remanded to the trial Court for adjudicating afresh, we do not find any reason
to do so, since she refused to accept the notice and thus, avoided the
proceedings intentionally and remanding the matter to the trial Court would
further delay the process and linger the litigation.
7.      Accordingly, the impugned judgement and decree is set aside. The suit
is allowed and the decree of divorce is passed dissolving the marriage between
the parties. We also direct the husband to pay permanent alimony of Rs.5 lacs
to the wife which he has readily agreed to deposit with the Registry of this
court within 2(two) months from today.
8.      The appeal is allowed and decree be prepared accordingly.
               JUDGE                                         CHIEF JUSTICE
Skd/-
                                                                      Page 3 of 3


