                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT,
       (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                               Mat. Appeal No.30 of 2013
       APPELLANT:
       Sri Nabajyoti Saikia
       Son of Late Bholaram Saikia
       Resident of J.B.Road, Oil Pipe Line,
       Sarbaibandha, Jorhat.
       R ESPONDENT:
       Smti. Anu Kumari Gogoi Saikia
       D/o Late Bhadreswar Gogoi
       Bongal Gaon, P.O.Rangajan
       Titabar, Jorhat
       Present Address: Gopal Chandra Prathamik
       Vidyalaya, Digambar Chuk,
       Jorhat, District Jorhat
                                          BEFORE
                         HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the appellant:             Mr.TC Chutia and Mr.DK Roy, learned counsel.
For the respondent:            Mr.A Ganguly, learned counsel.
Date of hearing & judgment: 15.6.2017
                                  JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       This appeal under Section 28 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 has been
filed challenging the legality and validity of the impugned judgement and
decree dated 28/5/2013 and 3/6/2013, respectively passed by the District
Judge, Jorhat in Marriage Title Suit No. 43/2009, dismissing the suit of
appellant holding it to be not maintainable.
                                                                        Page 1 of 3

2.      The brief facts are these. According to the appellant he married the
respondent on 3/5/2001 whereafter they lived together upto 4/3/2006. On
4/3/2006, the respondent left his house and went to her parental home. He
tried to bring her back, but in vain. Therefore, he filed Title Suit (Matrimonial)
No. 29/2006 for dissolution of marriage in the Court of District Judge, Jorhat.
In the said suit, appellant pleaded that the respondent filed many criminal
cases frivolously and maliciously against him and his old mother and as such
she treated him with cruelty. But, on contest the said suit was dismissed vide
judgment and decree dated 15/11/2008.
3.      However, the appellant again filed another Marriage Title Suit No.
43/2009 against her on the same ground of cruelty seeking divorce.
4.      The respondent contested the suit contending inter-alia that since the
earlier suit on the same ground of cruelty was dismissed by the court,
subsequent suit is hit by the provisions of Order II Rule 2 read with Section
12 of the Court of Civil Procedure and as such the suit is hit by the doctrine of
constructive res-judicata.
5.      The District Judge agreed with the objection of Respondent and
dismissed the suit by the impugned judgement and decree holding it to be
not maintainable. Aggrieved, the appellant has filed the present appeal.
6.      After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties and perusing the
records we find that both the appellant and the respondent used to stay in
the same house till 4/3/2006 and thereafter, they have been living separately
till date. Appellant filed his earlier suit on 5/6/2006 , thereby alleging cruelty
by the respondent during the period of his stay with her and naturally there
cannot be any act of cruelty by her towards him or his mother during the
period of their separation. Therefore, since the earlier suit was decided
against the appellant holding that he was not treated with cruelty by the
respondent and since he has also omitted to expressly reserve his rights to
sue the respondent again on some grounds thereby relinquishing the same,
the subsequent suit filed by him is hit by the provisions of order II Rule-2
                                                                       Page 2 of 3

read with Section 12 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Therefore, we are of the
considered view that the District Judge has rightly dismissed the suit holding
it to be not maintainable and hence, we do not find any ground to disagree
with the said finding.
7.     Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
          JUDGE                                           CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                                   Page 3 of 3


