                          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, ARUNACHAL PRADESH AND MIZORAM)
                            Mat. Appeal No.20 of 2011
Appellant:
Swapan Kumar Saha,
S/o Dr.Ramendra Kumar Saha
R/o 166, B.B.Sengupta Road,
P.S.Behala, Kolkata, W.B.
Respondent:
Smti. Kalpana Saha
W/o Swapan Kumar Saha,
C/o Sri K.C.Roy
Rly Qtr No.112/B, Adabari Colony
Pandu, Guwahati, Assam
                                    BEFORE
                HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                   HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the Appellant           …     Mr. AK Purkayastha, Mr.VK Chopra,
                                  Mr.SK Singh and Mr. J Chopra, learned counsel
For the Respondent         …      Mr. T Deuri, learned counsel
Date of hearing & Judgment …      3.8.2017
                            JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
        This appeal under Section 39 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 has
been filed by the husband-Swapan Kumar Saha- challenging the legality
and validity of the impugned judgement and decree dated 08/03/2011
passed by the District Judge, Kamrup, Guwahati, in Matrimonial Suit No.
46/2005, dismissing the suit filed by him against his wife-Kalpana Saha-
under Section 24 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954, praying for a decree
of nullity of their marriage.
2.      The brief facts are these. Appellant married the respondent on
15/01/2005 by registering their marriage under Special Marriage Act, 1954,
at Kolkata and thereafter they started their married life in his house. But
                                                                      Page 1 of 4

from the next day, appellant noticed abnormality in behaviour of
respondent and saw her taking medicines prescribed by psychiatric. She
spent a sleepless night. When the matter was brought to notice of her
relatives, they avoided on flimsy grounds. But on 03/02/2005, she became
violent and expressed her willingness to leave the matrimonial home. She
became so violent that she had to be put under lock and key in a room.
One psychiatrist was called for treatment and he prescribed some
medicines for administration. She was also advised to be hospitalised by
another psychiatrist to be put under observation but her relatives took her
to Guwahati on 05/02/2005 admitting that she had been suffering from
mental disorder much before the marriage. It was the case of the
appellant that their marriage was not consummated and as such, he filed
the suit in the Court of Additional District and Sessions Judge, (FTC), 8th
Court, Alipore, for declaration that the marriage is a nullity.
3.      Respondent contested the suit by filing written statement stating
inter-alia that the marriage was consummated on the first night itself and
thereafter the appellant used to sleep with her keeping his     dog-Jimmy-
in the bed under the mosquito net and as such she, out of fear,
sometimes had to spend sleepless nights. Appellant demanded a sum of
Rs.3 lacs and on the failure on her part to satisfy that demand, appellant
sent her back home on false allegations.
4.      Both the parties adduced their respective evidence. The suit was
transferred to the Court of District Judge, Kamrup, consequent to an order
passed by the Supreme Court in Transfer Petition (C) No. 338/07 and the
District Judge passed the impugned judgement and decree as aforesaid
and hence this appeal.
5.      After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and upon perusing
the records, we are of the considered view that the appeal is liable to be
dismissed being devoid of merit. Although, appellant had contended that
                                                                  Page 2 of 4

respondent was suffering from psychological disorder, Dr Satyabrat Kar
(PW2) has not sufficiently corroborated that evidence. In his cross
examination, he has admitted that earlier history of respondent was not
mentioned in his prescription (Exhibit 3) and he has also not mentioned in
the prescription that respondent was suffering from acute psychosis
although he has stated on oath that his provisional diagnosis was acute
psychosis. He has also admitted that appellant told him that respondent
was examined by another psychiatrist, namely, Dr S.K.Mukherjee on
3/2/2005. However, the said doctor was not examined.
6.    This court on an application filed by the appellant directed vide
order dated 12/7/2017 for the examination of respondent by a Medical
Board duly constituted for that purpose only and the said Board upon
physical examination of the respondent on 14/07/2017 submitted its report
dated 15/07/2017. The relevant portion of which reads as follows:-
      “She has no complaints. Earlier she used to have cough and
      disturbed sleep which resolved on returning to her parents’ home
      and after starting homeopathic treatment. At husband’s place two
      psychiatrists visited her but the treatment advised was not taken.
      No prescriptions are available. Her sleep, appetite, micturition, and
      bowels are normal at present. There is weight gain and her
      menstrual cycles are regular. She is a graduate and currently
      unemployed. She keeps house of busy in household activities and
      she enjoys that. Her mental state examination does not reveal any
      psychopathology at present. The psychomotor activity is normal,
      speech is relevant and coherent, mood is euthymic and affect is
      appropriate, there is no thought and perceptual disorders,
      cognitive functions are intact.
      Based on the history and mental state examination mentioned
      above it is not possible to comment on her earlier suffering from
      mental disorder but currently there is no symptoms suggestive of
      mental disorder.”
7.    On careful reading of the report of the Medical Board, it is clear
that currently she has not been suffering from any psychological disorder.
                                                                  Page 3 of 4

There is no history to that effect either. Only appellant has stated that she
suffered from mental disorder for which she was examined by two
psychiatrists. But the same is also not supported by cogent evidence. We
do not find any ground to disbelieve the evidence of respondent that she
had to suffer sleepless night out of fear and un-comfort as appellant used
to take his dog to the bed while sleeping with her. On the contrary, there
is no material sufficient enough to establish the plea of the appellant that
respondent was suffering from mental disorder. Although respondent
pleaded that the marriage was consummated in the first night, but in her
cross examination she categorically denied having physical relation with
her husband during her stay in the matrimonial home. In view of the
aforesaid, we do not find any reason to defer from the District Judge and
to interfere with the impugned judgment and decree.
       Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
                     JUDGE                                 CHIEF JUSTICE
Skd/-
                                                                    Page 4 of 4


