*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
#21.
+      FAO 430/2008
                                             Date of Decision:07.03.2011.
       RAJINDER KUMAR GUPTA                               ..... Appellant
                          Through     Mr. Amarjeet Sahni, Adv.
                    versus
       STATE AND OTHERS                                 .... Respondents
                          Through     Mr. V.b. Andley, Sr. Adv. with
                                      Mr. Lalit Gupta, Adv. for R-2.
                                      Mr. Nikhil Singhla, Adv. for R-3&4
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
:      MOOL CHAND GARG, J.(Oral)
1.     The short point involved in this matter is as to whether the Trial
Court was right in having decided issue No.2 against the appellant by
holding that the Will dated 18.08.1984 was not validly executed in a
case where the respondents have filed a petition under Section 276 of
the Indian Succession Act seeking letters of administration on the
allegation that late Smt. Janki Devi their mother died intestate. As an
objection to the aforesaid petition the appellant set up the Will dated
18.08.1984 alleged to have been executed by late Smt. Janki Devi.
2.     The Trial Court framed the following issues:
       “1.   Whether the deceased Smt. Janki Devi died and the
             petitioner is entitled to succeed her estate as such?
             OPP
       2.    Whether the deceased Smt. Janki Devi had executed a
             valid Will dated 18.08.1984 in favour of her sons and
             whether the said document is the last Will and
             testament of the said deceased? OPO
       3.    Relief.”
3.     Since the onus to prove the second issue was on the appellant,
the appellant examined a deed writer who prepared a Will at the
instructions of Smt. Janki Devi and who appeared as O2W1 and one
attesting witness namely Shri Rameshwar Dass Gupta who appeared as
O2W2. The second attesting witness was not examined.
FAO 430/2008                                                     page 1 of 5

4.     It would be relevant to take note of examination-in-chief of O2W2
who stated as under:
       “I know the parties to this petition for more than 25/30
       years Vol. They are the sons of my “Bua” Smt. Janki Devi.
       She has since died.
              I have seen on record the original Will mark A. My
       Bua Smt. Janki Devi had come to me and had told me that
       she had executed her Will and I should sign the same. I had
       done so at her asking at point C and the writing at point
       Counter-affidavit be filed within four weeks with advance
       copy to counsel for the petitioner who may file rejoinder
       within four weeks thereafter. Is also in my hand on Will
       mark A. I do not identify the signatures of any other person
       on this Will mark A. She was living in 92 Banarsi Dass
       estate as she had personally come to my house at 93
       Banarsi Dass Estate.”
5.     The Ld. Addl. District Judge taking note of the aforesaid
statement made by the attesting witness came to the finding that the
Will in question has not been proved in accordance with law.               The
relevant observation made by the Addl. District Judge are as under:
       “Accordingly it is held that the will Ex. PW1/RB (Marked –A)
       allegedly executed by deceased Smt. Janki Devi on
       18.08.1984 is not proved as legal, decided against the
       respondent no.2.      As there is no legal and admissible
       evidence on record led on behalf of the petitioner so no relief
       as prayed for by him can be granted. Issue No.1 is decided
       against the petitioner also.”
6.     In this regard the Trial Court has also taken note of statement of
O2W2 as follows:
       “Even if for the sake of arguments, it is presumed that the
       Will was duly registered before Sub-Registrar O2W3, then
       also simple registration is not sufficient to treat the Will as
       valid one. If the procedure and manner prescribed under
       Section 63 of India Succession Act is not followed, then such
       Will cannot be enforced even if it is registered. Registration
       of the Will and due execution of the Will are two different
       things.    Registration in case of Will is only optional.
       Registered Will cannot take place or due execution.
       Accordingly statement of O2W3 is of no help to the
       respondent No.2 in proving the alleged due execution
       because according to the other witnesses, Will was already
       signed by the testatrix and witnesses before presenting
       before Sub-Registrar.        Accordingly simple proving of
       registration of the Will cannot be treated as due execution
       also.
FAO 430/2008                                                   page 1 of 5

       The certificate of due verification and attestation of the Will
       mentioned at the bottom from point A to A does not contain
       the correct declaration as admitted by O2W2 in his cross
       examination.     When attesting witness examined by the
       respondent No.2 to prove the execution of the Will himself is
       not supporting the case, then there exist no grounds to treat
       the Will in question as genuine and valid Will.“
7.     Section 63 (c) requires evidence to be led in the format as
prescribed by the Indian Succession Act.        The said Section reads as
under:
       “63. Execution of unprivileged Wills:- Every testator, not
       being a soldier employed in an expedition or engaged in
       actual warfare, [or an airman so employed or engaged,] or a
       mariner at sea, shall execute his will according to the
       following rules:--
       (a)    xxx
       (b)    xxx
       (c)    The Will shall be attested by two or more witnesses,
       each of whom has seen the testator sign or affix his mark to
       the Will or has seen some other person sign the Will, in the
       presence and by the direction of the testator, or has received
       from the testator a personal acknowledgement of his
       signature or mark, or of the signature of such other person;
       and each of the witnesses shall sign the Will in the presence
       of the testator, but it shall not be necessary that more than
       one witness be present at the same time, and no particular
       form of attestation shall be necessary.”
8.     Hon’ble Supreme Court has examined the aforesaid issue in a
judgment delivered in the case of Janki Narayan Bhoir Vs. Naraya
Namdeo Kadam, VII (2002) SLT 361 AIR 2003 SC 761, wherein it has
been observed:
       “On a combined reading of Section 63 of the Succession Act
       with Section 68 of the Evidence Act, it appears that a person
       propounding the will has got to prove that the will was duly
       and validly executed. That cannot be done by simply proving
       that the signature on the will was that of the testator but
       must also prove that attestations were also made properly as
       required by Clause (c) of Section 63 of the Succession Act. It
       is true that Section 68 of Evidence Act not say that both or
       all the attesting witnesses must be examined. But at least
       one attesting witness has to be called for proving due
       execution of the Will as envisaged in Section 63. although
FAO 430/2008                                                    page 1 of 5

       Section 63 of the Succession Act requires that a will has to
       be attested at least by two witnesses, Section 68 of the
       Evidence Act provides that a document, which is required by
       law to be attested, shall not be used as evidence until one
       attesting witness at least has been examined for the purpose
       of proving its due execution if such witness is alive and
       capable of giving evidence and subject to the process of the
       Court. In a way, Section 68 gives a concession to those who
       want to prove and establish a will in a Court of law by
       examining at least one attesting witness even though will
       has to be attested at least by two witnesses mandatorily
       under Section 63 of the Succession Act. But what is
       significant and to be noted is that that one attesting witness
       examined should be in a position to prove the execution of a
       will. to put in other words, if one attesting witness can prove
       execution of the will in terms of Clause (c) of Section 63, viz.,
       attestation by two attesting witnesses in the manner
       contemplated therein, the examination of other attesting
       witness can be dispensed with. The one attesting witness
       examined, in his evidence has to satisfy the attention of a
       will by him and the other attesting witness in order to prove
       there was due execution of the will. If the attesting witness
       examined besides his attestation does not, in his evidence,
       satisfy the requirements of attention of the will by other
       witness also it falls short of attestation of will at least by two
       witnesses for the simple reason that the execution of the will
       does not merely mean the signing of it by the testator but it
       means fulfilling and proof of all the formalities required
       under Section 63 of the Succession Act. Where one attesting
       witness examined to prove the will under Section 68 of the
       Evidence Act fails to prove the due execution of the will then
       the other available attesting witness has to be called to
       supplement his evidence to make it complete in all respects.
       Where one attesting witness is examined and he fails to
       prove the attestation of the will by the other witness there
       will be deficiency in meeting the mandatory requirements of
       Section 68 of the Evidence Act.”
9.     In this case the aforesaid requirement has not been proved by the
appellant inasmuch as only one attesting witness has been examined
who admittedly has not signed the Will in question in presence of the
second witness. Therefore, his testimony does not prove the execution
of the Will and attestation thereof by the two witnesses.
10.    This Court has also taken a similar view in the case of Surinder
Kumar Grover Vs. State & Ors. 177 (2011) DLT 188.
11.    In view of that there is no infirmity in the findings returned by the
Addl. District Judge. Thus, the appeal does not call for any interference
by this Court and the same is hereby dismissed with no orders as to
FAO 430/2008                                                       page 1 of 5

costs.
12.    Learned counsel for the appellant submits that he may like to file
a probate petition.    He is always at liberty to file such petition in
accordance with law subject to all just exceptions and defences
available to the respondents.
                                                MOOL CHAND GARG,J
MARCH 07, 2011
‘ga’
FAO 430/2008                                                page 1 of 5


