                           THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                              ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                   MFA 28 of 2009
       GENERAL MANAGER, N.F. RAILWAYS                         …..Petitioners
                                       -Versus-
       CHARU ENTERPRISES                                     …..Respondents
                                      BEFORE
                HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
       Advocates for the Petitioners      : Mr. D.K. Dey.
       Advocates for the Respondents      : Mr. H.P. Barman.
       Date of hearing and Order          : 20.07.2017.
                          JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
           Heard Mr. D.K. Dey, learned counsel for the appellant as well as Mr.
H.P. Barman, learned counsel appearing for the respondent.
2.         By filing this appeal under Section 23 of the Railway Claims Tribunal
Act, 1987, the appellant has challenged the judgement and order dated
05.08.2010 passed by the learned Claims Tribunal, Guwahati Bench, Guwahati in
Application No. 495/07(M-21/04).
3.         At the outset it would be relevant to record that this appeal was
admitted by order dated 27.05.2009 and since then the Registry of this Court has
issuing continuous reminders for requisition the records of the claim case from
the learned Railway Claims Tribunal, Guwahati Bench, Guwahati. As the record
had not been received, this Court by taking a stern note of the non-compliance
of the orders, by the order dated 20.01.2017, directed the Additional Registrar of
the Railway Claims Tribunal, Guwahati Bench, Guwahati to appear personally
before this Court and to show cause for non-compliance of the orders. The said
MFA 28/2009                                                                   Page 1 of 16

authority had appeared before this Court and by filing an affidavit submitted that
the records were destroyed either by termites/insects or it was destroyed by
flood water. On this ground, this Court had caused an inspection to be made by
appointing an Advocate as Commissioner for carrying out local inspection to
know about the condition of the Railway Claims Tribunal, Guwahati Bench,
Guwahati and the Commissioner’s report showed a very bad condition of the
court building. Accordingly, this Court issued a notice to the General Manager,
N.F. Railway on the matter and now an affidavit has been filed by the General
Manager, N.F. Railway, indicating that steps are being taken for maintenance of
the RCT building and as the building is more than 60 years old, they are
replacing the building with new RCC framed building which was being proposed
in PWP 2016-17, but the work was not approved. But the same work was again
proposed in PWP 2017-18 and the amount sanctioned for new RCT building is
Rs.81.00 lakh and the work is under progress with a target date of completion on
15.08.2018. This aspect is being separately dealt with. This narration has been
given only for the purpose of showing that the trial court’s records are not
available in this case and they are destroying.
4.          The fact in the present case is a short one. The respondent herein
booked a consignment of rice on the basis of a Railway Receipt (R/R) which was
issued on “said to contain” basis. On receipt of the goods at the delivery station,
as per the assessment delivery report, 9 bags of rice out of 777 bags were
delivered in cut, torn and loose condition and weight was found to be 203 Kgs.
instead of 675 Kgs. so the shortage was assessed at 997 Kgs. The respondent
made a claim in respect of said shortage @ Rs.9 per Kg. The learned Railway
Claims Tribunal assessed the value of the rice at Rs. 8 per Kg. and held that the
claimant was entitled to Rs.9796/- as the value of consignment, plus a sum of
Rs.347/- towards proportionate application fee and Rs.500/-         as lump sum
Advocate fees.
MFA 28/2009                                                                   Page 2 of 16

5.          As per the judgment dated 05.02.2008, the learned Tribunal recorded
the submission made by the learned counsel for the respondent herein that a
sum of Rs.3250/- was paid during the pendency of the claim application. The
learned Tribunal held it to be part payment and by applying the ratio of the
judgment of the case of Union of India and another vs. M/s. Gangaram
Bhagwandas, AIR 1977 MP 2015 allowed deduction of the said amount and
therefore, the balance compensation of Rs.5573/- was ordered to be paid. This
order is in challenge in the present appeal.
6.          The learned counsel for the appellant has produced a letter purported
to be a letter dated 31.08.2004, purportedly by which the payment of Rs.3250/-
was given to the respondent. It is submitted that the payment of the amount
being made before the claim application was filed on 11.10.2004, this payment
could not be considered to be a part payment. But it was a payment without any
protest and therefore the present claim was maintainable in view of the case of
Union of India and Ors. vs. Jain Enterprises and Ors., reported in 2009 (1) GLT
124, wherein this Court by taking note of the protest and considering the date of
cheque and encashment, held that the conduct of the respondent did not amount
to acceptance of condition offered and therefore, held that the learned Tribunal
had rightly passed the judgment.
7.          The learned counsel for the appellant by referring to the said citation
has argued that in the present case in hand, it was the duty of the respondent to
show that they have lodged a protest before encashing the cheque and the said
burden having not been proved, the present appeal is deserved to be allowed. It
is further submitted in the case of Union of India (supra), this Court had
dissented from the ratio of the case of Gangaram Bhagwandas (supra) and, as
such, the impugned order is liable to be interfered with.
8.          It is projected that it was the burden of the Railway to prove that the
intention of the respondent herein was to accept the cheque in full and final
MFA 28/2009                                                                    Page 3 of 16

settlement of its claim and in this regard, the Apex Court had relied on the case
of Gangaram Bhagwandas (supra).
9.          Per-contra, the learned counsel for the respondent has stated that it is
a matter of record in form of the submissions made before the learned Tribunal
that the respondent had informed the learned Tribunal about the receipt of the
claim during the pendency of the claim petition and, as such, the burden of
proving the contrary had shifted on the appellant. The learned counsel for the
respondent has referred to the paragraph 16 of the case of Bhagwati Prasad
Pawan Kumar vs. Union of India, (2006) 5 SCC 311 and by referring to Section 8
of the Contract Act, he has submitted that if the payments are made before the
institution of the case then the question of protest by the manner of acceptance
of proposal can be gone into, but in view of the finding recorded in paragraph
16 of the said case where the Hon’ble Apex Court has relied on the case of
Gangaram Bhagwandas (supra), the decision of this Court in Union of India &
Ors. (supra) has to be held per incurium. The relevant paragraph 16 is quoted
below:
                             “16. In Union of India and another vs. M/s. Gangaram
                      Bhagwandas, the respondent had filed a suit on January 6,
                      1970 claiming by way of damages a sum of Rs.504.58 ps. on
                      account of goods being damaged due to negligence and
                      misconduct on the part of the Railways and its employees.
                      While the suit was pending a cheque for Rs.283.05 was sent
                      under cover of a letter dated March 6, 1970 which stated
                      that the amount was being sent in full and final settlement
                      of the claim. The respondent encashed the chque. The High
                      Court on facts found that there was no denying the fact that
                      the plaintiff did not accept the cheque in full satisfaction. It
                      had not passed a receipt in full satisfaction, nor did it send a
MFA 28/2009                                                                       Page 4 of 16

                     receipt to the Railways acknowledging receipt of the amount.
                     On the contrary, even after receiving the cheque the
                     respondent prosecuted the suit for the balance of the
                     amount. The Railway had led no evidence to show that the
                     intention of the plaintiff was to accept the cheque in full and
                     final settlement of its claim. On this finding, relying upon the
                     principle laid down in Day vs. Mciea it was held that :
                             "The question was thus primarily one of fact and since
                     the defendant did not choose to lead any evidence on the
                     point nor are there such circumstances brought on the
                     record to lead to the conclusion that the cheque was
                     accepted in discharge of the whole debt, I am unable to
                     come to the conclusion that the acceptance of the cheque
                     amounted to satisfaction of the whole claim."
10.        It is submitted that as the payment was made during the pendency of
the case, it was not obligation on part of the respondent to submit a protest and
therefore, there is no infirmity in the order passed by the learned Tribunal.
11.        Having heard the argument advanced by both sides. I have perused
the material available on record. In the present case in hand, it is seen that the
learned Tribunal has recorded the submission made by the learned counsel for
the respondent admitting payment of Rs.3250/- during the pendency of the claim
application. The learned Tribunal has also recorded that the payment in the
present case had become a part payment and by applying the ratio of case of
Gangaram Bhagwandas (supra), the respondent had prayed for the balance
amount. The learned Tribunal further recorded the submission made by the
learned counsel for the appellant that the amount of Rs.3250/- was paid to the
respondent herein as full and final settlement through cheque which was
encashed. The finding of the learned Tribunal is as follows:
MFA 28/2009                                                                      Page 5 of 16

                             “From the perusal of the record, it is crystal clear that
                     the respondent did not submit any document which could
                     prove that the applicant accepted the cheque amount in full
                     satisfaction. Even after receiving the cheque amount, the
                     applicant prosecuted the claim application for the balance
                     amount. So this inference goes against the respondent. The
                     authority titled (supra) referred by Ld. Counsel for the
                     applicant is applicable from all corners in the present case.
                     Hence, application for balance amount is maintainable.”
12.        Therefore, it is evident that the burden of proving the acceptance of
cheque in full and final satisfaction was shifted on the appellant.
13.        This Court in the case of Union of India & Ors. (supra), had referred to
the case of Gangaram Bhagwandas (supra), as well as the judgment of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in Bhagwati Prasad Pawan Kumar (supra). As this Court finds
that in the previous decision of Union of India & Ors. (supra), the entire aspects
have already been gone into. It would be appropriate to quote relevant
paragraphs No. 12 to 18.
                              “12. For better appreciation, Section 8 of the Indian
                     Contract Act, 1872 is reproduced below :
                             "8. Acceptance by performing conditions, or receiving
                     consideration.-Performance of the conditions of a proposal,
                     or the acceptance of any consideration for a reciprocal
                     promise which may be offered with a proposal, is an
                     acceptance of the proposal. "
                             13. It is a settled position of law that an offer may be
                     accepted by conduct but such conduct would only amount to
MFA 28/2009                                                                      Page 6 of 16

            acceptance if it is clear that the offeree did the act with the
            intention, which may be actual or apparent, of accepting the
            offer. In the event any conditional offer is made by an
            offerer and the conduct of the offeree was such as
            amounted to unequivocal acceptance of the offer made and
            there was no reservation in signifying the acceptance by
            conduct, it must follow that the offer has been accepted by
            conduct. There may be acceptance of offer by silence, if
            there is no protest from the offeree about the conditions of
            the offerer and the conduct of the offeree signifies such
            acceptance of conditions, In the present batch of cases, the
            cheques with conditions were issued by the railway
            administration in favour of the respondents, either before
            filing of the proceedings before the learned Tribunal or
            during the pendency and such cheques were retained and
            encashed by the respondents, in some cases after issuing
            the protest letters, in some cases after informing the learned
            Tribunal about receipt of such cheques and in some cases
            even without informing the learned Tribunal though cheques
            were    issued   and    received   during  pendency    of   the
            proceedings before the learned Tribunal.
                    14. The interpretation of Section 8 of the Contract
            Act sought to be given by the learned counsel appearing on
            behalf of the appellants was found favour in a Division Bench
            decision of this Court in Bhagawati Prasad Pawan Kumar
            (supra) wherein it was held that as the railway in the letter
            containing the offer had informed the offeree that if the offer
            made by the cheque was not acceptable to him, the cheque
            should be returned forthwith, failing which it would be
            deemed that the offeree had accepted the offer as full and
MFA 28/2009                                                            Page 7 of 16

            final settlement of the claim, such offer being complete in
            itself, it was either to be accepted or not to be accepted. It
            has been observed that in case of acceptance, the cheque
            would be retained and encashed and in case the non-
            acceptance cheque is to be returned to the railway office and
            in either case the course of conduct was indicated in the
            offer. Therefore, non-acceptance of the offer could only be
            expressed by returning the cheque and encashment of the
            cheque would be a conduct on the part of the claimant in
            performing the conditions as offered leading to the inference
            that encashment of the cheque was in full and final
            settlement of claim and it satisfies the ingredients of Section
            8 of the Contract Act. The Division Bench has further held
            that there is no third course open, protest or no protest.
                     15. The said Division Bench judgment was taken to
            the Apex Court in Bhagawati Prasad Pawan Kumar (supra)
            where the Apex Court has held as under:
                     "18. Section 8 of the Contract Act provides for
            acceptance by performing conditions of a proposal. In the
            instant case, the Railways made an offer to the appellant
            laying down the condition that if the offer was not
            acceptable the cheque should be returned forthwith, failing
            which it would be deemed that the appellant accepted the
            offer in full and final satisfaction of its claim. This was further
            clarified by providing that the retention of the cheque and/or
            encashment thereof will automatically amount to satisfaction
            in full and final settlement of the claim. Thus, if the appellant
            accepted the cheques and encashed them without anything
            more, it would amount to an acceptance of the offer made in
            the letters of the Railways dated 7. 4. 1993. The offer
MFA 28/2009                                                                Page 8 of 16

            prescribed the mode of acceptance, and by conduct the
            appellant must be held to have accepted the offer and,
            therefore, could not make a claim later. However, if the
            appellant had not encashed the cheques and protested to
            the Railways calling upon them to pay the balance amount,
            and expressed its inability to accept the cheques remitted to
            it, the controversy would have acquired a different
            complexion. In that event, in view of the express non-
            acceptance of the offer, the appellant could not be presumed
            to have accepted the offer. What, however, is significant is
            that the protest and non-acceptance must be conveyed
            before the cheques are encashed. If the cheques are
            encashed without protest, then it must be held that the offer
            stood unequivocally accepted. An "offeree" cannot be
            permitted to change his mind after the unequivocal
            acceptance of the offer.
                    19. It is well settled that an offer may be accepted by
            conduct. But conduct would only amount to acceptance if it
            is clear that the offeree did the act with the intention (actual
            or apparent) of accepting the offer. The decisions which we
            have noticed above also proceed on this principle. Each case
            must rest on its own facts. The Courts must examine the
            evidence to find out whether in the facts and circumstances
            of the case the conduct of the "offeree" was such as
            amounted to an unequivocal acceptance of the offer made.
            If the facts of the case disclose that there was no reservation
            in signifying acceptance by conduct, it must follow that the
            offer has been accepted by conduct. On the other hand, if
            the evidence discloses that the "offeree" had reservation in
            accepting the offer, his conduct may not amount to
MFA 28/2009                                                            Page 9 of 16

            acceptance of the offer in terms of Section 8 of the Contract
            Act. "
                   The Apex Court however, refused to give any relief to
            the appellants therein as there was neither any pleading nor
            evidence on record as to the date when the cheques were
            received and the date on which the same were sent for
            encashment. Therefore, it was not possible to record any
            finding as to whether the letters of protest were written
            before or after encashment of the cheque.
                   16. In the instant cases, the railway administration
            issued the cheques with the following conditions :
                   "please note that the cheque/pay order should be
            encashed for the amount mentioned therein if acceptable to
            you towards full and final settlement of the claim. If the
            amount is not acceptable to you in full and final settlement
            this Advice of Payment along with the cheque/pay order
            should be returned to this office under Regd. A/d post along
            with your objection, if any. If the cheque/pay order is
            encashed by you, it will be deemed that you have accepted
            the same in full and final settlement of the claim and no
            further claim whatsoever shall be entertained. "
                   17.   In view of the aforesaid position of law as
            enunciated by the Apex Court, it is evident that even if the
            railway administration issued any cheque with the aforesaid
            condition attached to it, if the offeree before encashment of
            the cheque and immediately on receipt of the same,
            protested such condition, it would not amount to acceptance
            of the conditions attached to the cheque, by conduct, for
            retaining and encashing the cheque. However, if the cheque
MFA 28/2009                                                         Page 10 of 16

            is retained and encashed by the offeree without any protest
            then it would amount to acceptance of the offer made by the
            railway administration by the offeree by conduct. It is the
            duty of the offeree to prove that by conduct he has not
            accepted the conditions attached to the cheque. It is not the
            railway authority who is to prove otherwise, as held by the
            Madhya Pradesh High Court in Gangaram Bhagwandas
            (supra).
                    18. Therefore, the offeree must protest, by positive
            action,   the   condition  attached    to  the    offer before
            encashment, even where the cheque is received by the
            offeree during pendency of the proceeding before the
            learned Tribunal. The conduct of the offeree in continuing
            with the proceeding before the learned Tribunal would not
            be sufficient to hold that the conduct of the offeree is such
            as it does not amount to acceptance of the conditions. The
            offeree must before encashment of the cheque protest the
            conditions imposed and inform the railway administration
            about its non-acceptance of such conditions. With all respect
            I am unable to agree with the view expressed by the
            Madhya Pradesh High Court in Gangaram Bhagwandas case
            as in that case the burden of proof has been wrongly shifted
            to the railway administration to substantiate that the offeree
            by conduct accepted the 'conditions attached to the cheque,
            though it is the offeree who is to prove that his conduct does
            not amount to acceptance of the condition. However, in the
            event, the offeree, who during pendency of the proceeding
            for recovery of any amount receives any conditional offer
            and encash the cheque with liberty from the Tribunal/court,
            the same would not amount to acceptance of any condition
MFA 28/2009                                                           Page 11 of 16

                       attached to the offer, as the action on the part of the
                       offeree, in that case, would not amount to unequivocal
                       acceptance of the offer made, rather indicative of non-
                       acceptance of his offer. The contention of the respondents
                       that where in the notice issued under Section 106 of the
                       1989 Act the Railway administration has been informed that
                       any amount less than the amount claimed under the notice
                       shall be treated as part payment and therefore, even if the
                       cheques are encashed without protest, such conduct of the
                       respondents would not amount to acceptance of the
                       condition attached to the offer, cannot be accepted as the
                       offeree after receipt of conditional offer and before
                       encashment of cheques, must indicate its intention of not
                       accepting the conditions by protesting the same. Merely by
                       intimating the Railway authority about the offeree's intention
                       in the notice under Section 106 of the Act, would not be
                       enough as the conditional offer of payment by the Railway
                       was made subsequent to such notice.”
14.        In the present case in hand, notwithstanding that the trial court’s
records cannot be reconstructed, from the impugned order, it is apparent that
there is no record of any protest by the respondent before encashing the cheque.
This Court is inclined to take notice of the covering letter by which normally a
payment order is made. In a format of the letter by which payments order are
issued, the same is found to an intimation that the cheque/pay order should be
encashed if it is acceptable towards full and final settlement of the claim and if
such amount is not acceptable, the cheque/pay order should be returned along
with the objection, if any, and it contains such specific advise that if the
cheque/pay order is encashed, it would be deemed that the same was accepted
as full and final settlement of the claim and no further claim whatsoever shall be
MFA 28/2009                                                                     Page 12 of 16

entertained. A copy of such format was produced by the learned counsel for the
appellant.
15.        From the above, it is apparent that the Railways authority had
normally issued the aforesaid covering letter together with the cheque/pay order
to the claimant. Therefore, it must be assumed that letter in the usual format has
been issued in the present case to the respondent. The objection or protest by
the respondent has not been produced before the learned Tribunal nor has the
copy of the same been filed in the present appeal. This Court is bound by the
ratio of the case of Union of India and Ors. (supra), and therefore, the contrary
view cannot be take in the present case in hand. There is nothing on record to
show that the respondent had filed any protest. This Court is of the opinion that
an offeree before encashment of the cheque must lodged a protest by a positive
action even where the cheque is received by the offeree during the pendency of
the proceedings before the learned Tribunal. As this Court is bound by the
observation made by this Court in paragraph 18 of the case of Union of India &
Ors. (supra), this Court is of the view that the impugned judgment passed by the
learned Railway Claims Tribunal, directing payment of further compensation
cannot be sustained. This Court finds in the case of Bhagwati Prasad Pawan
Kumar (supra), the Hon’ble Apex Court has held in paragraph 19 to 21 is as
follows:
                             “19. It is well settled that an offer may be accepted
                     by conduct. But conduct would only amount to acceptance if
                     it is clear that the offeree did the act with the intention
                     (actual or apparent) of accepting the offer. The decisions
                     which we have noticed above also proceed on this principle.
                     Each case must rest on its own facts. The courts must
                     examine the evidence to find out whether in the facts and
                     circumstances of the case the conduct of the "offeree" was
                     such as amounted to an unequivocal acceptance of the offer
MFA 28/2009                                                                  Page 13 of 16

            made. If the facts of the case disclose that there was no
            reservation in signifying acceptance by conduct, it must
            follow that the offer has been accepted by conduct. On the
            other hand if the evidence disclose that the "offeree" had
            reservation in accepting the offer, his conduct may not
            amount to acceptance of the offer in terms of Section 8 of
            the Contract Act.
                    20. Coming to the facts of this case if the appellant,
            before encashing the cheques, had sent the communication
            dated August 20, 1993, it could perhaps be argued that by
            retaining but not encashing the cheques, it did not intend to
            accept the offer made in the letter of the Railways dated
            April 7, 1993. At the same time if the evidence disclosed that
            it encashed the cheques and later sent a protest, it must be
            held that it had accepted the offer unconditionally by
            conveying its acceptance by the mode prescribed, namely
            by retaining and encashing the cheques, without reservation.
            Its subsequent change of mind and consequent protest did
            not matter.
                    21. In the instant case there is neither pleadings nor
            evidence on record as to the date on which the cheques
            were received and the date on which the same were sent for
            encashment. It is, therefore, not possible to record a
            categoric finding as to whether the letters of protest were
            written after encashing the cheques or before encashing the
            cheques. It was for the appellant to plead and prove that it
            had not accepted the offer and had called upon the Railways
            to pay the balance amount. This it must have done before
            encashing the cheques. If the appellant encashed the
            cheques and then wrote letters of protest to the Railways, it
MFA 28/2009                                                          Page 14 of 16

                     cannot be held that it had not accepted the offer by conduct,
                     because at the time when it sent the cheques for
                     encashment, it had not conveyed its protest to the offerer.
                     In the absence of any pleading or evidence to establish that
                     the encashment of the cheques was subsequent to the
                     protest letters by the appellant, it is not possible to hold that
                     by encashing the cheques the appellant had not adopted the
                     mode of acceptance prescribed in the letters of the Railways
                     dated April 7, 1993. In the absence of such evidence it must
                     be held that by encashing the cheques received from the
                     Railways, the appellant accepted the offer by adopting the
                     mode of acceptance prescribed in the offer of the Railways.”
16.        Therefore, by applying the ratio of the said case of Bhagwati Prasad
Pawan Kumar (supra), this Court is inclined to hold that it was the duty of the
respondent to plead and prove that it had not accepted the offer and had called
upon the Railway to pay the balance amount. The Hon’ble Apex Court has
categorically held in paragraph 21 of the case of Bhagwati Prasad Pawan Kumar
(supra), that a protest of not accepted must be done before enchasing the
cheque. Therefore, this Court is of the view that the case of Bhagwati Prasad
Pawan Kumar (supra), which is cited by the learned counsel for the respondent,
does not help him.
17.        In view of the binding precedent of previous decision of the case of
Union of India & Ors. (supra), this Court is of the view that the impugned
judgment dated 05.02.2008 passed by the learned Railway Claims Tribunal,
Guwahati Bench, Guwahati is not sustainable. The respondent has not protested
before encashment of the cheque, as such, it has to be held that such payment
was received without any protest as full and final payment of the claim and the
burden disproving the same cannot be shifted on the appellant. Accordingly, this
appeal stands allowed and the impugned judgment dated 05.08.2010 passed by
MFA 28/2009                                                                      Page 15 of 16

the learned Claims Tribunal, Guwahati Bench, Guwahati in Application No.
495/07(M-21/04) is set aside.
18.       The parties are left to bear their own cost.
                                                                  JUDGE
Mkumar.
MFA 28/2009                                                         Page 16 of 16


