                      THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                         M.F.A. No. 216 OF 2010
                        Oriental Insurance Company Limited
                                                                … Appellant
                             -Versus-
                        Billal Khan & Another
                                                              ..Respondents
                                    BEFORE
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
For the appellant               :       Mr. S. Dutta, Sr.Adv.
                                        Ms. M. Choudhury,
                                        Mr. P. Choudhury, Advocates.
For the respondents             :       Mr. IA Talukdar, Adv.
Date of hearing & judgment :            25.07.2017
                     JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
                Heard Mr. S. Dutta, the learned counsel for the appellant as
well as Mr. IA Talukdar, the learned counsel for the respondent
No.1/claimant.
2.              This   appeal     under   Section     30   of  the   Workmen’s
Compensation Act, 1923 (now, Employee’s Compensation Act, 1923), is
directed against the judgment dated 14.05.2008 passed by the learned
Commissioner, Workmen’s Compensation, Nagaon in connection with W.C.
Case No.128/2000.
3.              The claimant’s case, in brief, is that the respondent
No.1/claimant, namely, Bilal Khan, had filed a claim petition before the
Commissioner, Workmen Compensation, Nagaon, on 20.10.2000. It was
MFA No.216/201                                                     Page 1 of 13

stated therein that the claimant was a handyman of vehicle (709 Mini Bus)
bearing Registration No.AS-02-A-2325. At the relevant time, said vehicle
was driven by the driver having a valid license. The vehicle was owned by
the respondent No.2, namely, Siddartha Kumar Chetia, holding a valid
insurance policy of the appellant. In course of his employment, the vehicle
met with a head on collusion with a Tourist Bus bearing Registration
No.AS-01-H-7141, as a result of which, he sustained grievous injuries on
his person. The Samaguri P.S. Case No.103/2000 under Sections
279/337/338/427 IPC was registered. It is stated that the notice under
Section 10 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act was not required to be
issued as the police has received the information of the accident and
removed the vehicle from the place of occurrence. The claimant claimed to
be earning a fixed amount Rs.2000/- inclusive of food allowance of Rs.20/-,
and accordingly, a claim for Rs.2,00,000/- was made.          The claimant
examined as many as 3 witnesses including himself and a registered
Medical Practitioner.    In course of evidence, the respondent/claimant
exhibited the accident information report as Exhbt.1, patient slip of
Samaguri CHC is exhibited as Exhbt.2, papers relating to treatment at
Nagaon were exhibited as Exhbts.3 & 4.         Exhbt.5 is the certificate of
disability.  The written statement filed by the owner of the vehicle is
exhibited as Exhbt.6 and the respondent No.1, as PW.1 signed and his
signatures are exhibited as Exhbt.6(1) and Exhbt.6(5) as the signature of
Siddartha Kumar Chetia. X-ray plate purportedly exhibited is marked as
Material Exhbt. 1.
4.             PW.3 i.e. the Doctor had admitted Exhbt.5 to be his
disablement certificate and his signature as Exhbt.5(1) and also admitted
his signatures as Exhbt.3(1),(2) and (3). The signature appears in Exhbt.4
i.e. X-ray report was exhibited as Exhbt.4(1) was the signature of Dr. J.
Debnath, the Radiologist of the Civil Hospital. The material Exhbt.1 tallied
with Exhbt.4. He assessed the disability as 15% and loss of earning
capacity was assessed as 40% which was done as per the examination
MFA No.216/201                                                Page 2 of 13

carried out on 05.08.02 and the disablement certificate was given on
clinical examination of the respondent No.1. PW.2, one Sri Raju Das, is a
co-handyman of the vehicle.
5.             The   learned     Commissioner,    Workmen’s     Compensation
accepted the evidence of PWs and the income of the respondent No.1
assessed as Rs.2000/- and thereby assessed the compensation as 60% of
Rs.2000/-    X    224.00      X   40%     =    Rs.1,07,520/-,   holding    the
respondent/claimant to be entitled to the interest at the rate of 12% per
annum from the date of adjudication till the date of realization. Aggrieved
by the said judgment, the present appeal was filed.
6.             This appeal was admitted by the order dated 21.06.10 on
the following substantial questions of law:
                       “(i) Whether the finding of the Director, that the
                       respondent No.1 partially disabled to the extent of
                       15% and consequently may incur 40% loss of
                       earning capacity is total guesswork and not based on
                       any sound medical evidence. The injuries sustained
                       are absolutely simple in nature and the claimant has
                       already recovered from such injuries. The learned
                       member of such premise ought to have awarded
                       taking recourse to Section 4(1)(d) instead of
                       4(1)(c)(ii);
                       (ii) Whether the learned Commission1er failed to
                       take into consideration that the assessment of the
                       Doctor shall have no value unless such assessment
                       of the Doctor is not in conformity to the percentage
                       of loss of earning capacity relating to different
                       injuries in schedule 1, even if the compensation is
                       awardable under Section 4(1)(c)(ii) of the Act;
                       (iii) Whether the injury sustained is simple injury and
                       it is a case of either permanent or temporary and/or
                       total or partial. The learned Commissioner has to
                       record a clear finding as to whether the disablement
                       is permanent or temporary and whether it is total or
                       partial. In the instant case learned Commissioner
                       miserably failed to record such finding as
MFA No.216/201                                                  Page 3 of 13

                        contemplated under the statue and such failure has
                        vitiated the entire decision.”
7.              Challenging     the   findings   recorded by   the   learned
Commissioner, the learned senior counsel for the appellant has referred to
the Doctor’s certificate (Exhbt.5). It is submitted that as per the evidence
of Doctor, PW.3, when he issued the said certificate on 05.08.2002, he
relied only on the previous X-ray report dated 31.07.2000 i.e. the material
Exhbt.4(1). It is submitted that the said X-ray report Exhbt.4(1) indicates
that a fracture on right 9th and 10th ribs. It is submitted that in order to
make Exhbt.5 as an admissible document, PW.3 was required to take a
fresh x-ray and was required to opine on the basis of the subsequent X-ray.
It is submitted that by a clinical examination, it would not be possible for
any doctor to opine with certainty that the fracture was not healed and it
would cause any disability whatsoever after a period of 2 years, which
arises out of a fracture which occurred on 30.07.2000. It is submitted that
the assessment of disability was done whimsically and accordingly, the loss
of income was wrongly assessed at 40%. It is further submitted that as
per the Employee’s Compensation Act, 1923, loss of income must be
calculated not only by taking into account the work which the employee
was doing at the time of accident but it is also required to take into
account whether he has suffered loss of income in respect of any other
work which he could have carried out for his livelihood. It is stated that as
there is no evidence as regards loss of income capacity in any occupation,
which the respondent No.1 could have done, the finding in this regard by
the learned Commissioner, Workmen’s Compensation is not sustainable.
8.              The learned senior counsel for the appellant has relied on
the case of Haji Mohammad Ikramul Haq vs. State of West Bengal, AIR
1959 SC 488 to project that if the evidence was merely an opinion un-
supported by any reasons, the court ought not to place any reliance upon
it. The relevant paragraph-4 is quoted below:
MFA No.216/201                                                 Page 4 of 13

                       “The High Court found that premises No. 22
                       Chittaranjan Avenue was a little better than the
                       premises in dispute and they (premises in dispute)
                       were " somewhat better than the premises No. 5
                       Chittaranjan Avenue ". In these circumstances it
                       cannot be said that the High Court committed any
                       error of principle in taking an average of the two
                       premises No. 22 and 5 Chittaranjan Avenue. The
                       evidence of U. P. Malik was merely an opinion
                       unsupported by any reasons and in the
                       circumstances of this base the High Court has rightly
                       not placed any reliance upon it.”
9.             It   is  further  submitted    that   although    the   learned
Commissioner has referred to the Mat. Exhbt.3 i.e. X-ray plate, which finds
place in recording of the evidence of PW.1, but the said Mat. Exhbt. is not
available in the record. It is submitted that as per cross-examination of
PW.1, it was doubted that the said X-ray plate was not of respondent No.1.
Nonetheless, the said Material Exhbt.-1 has not been sent along with the
LCR to this Court. Hence, adverse inference may be drawn against the X-
ray (Exhbt.1) and the X-ray report (Exhbt.4). It is further submitted that
the loss of earning capacity as well the extent of disability was only by way
of guesswork and, as such, the learned Commissioner, at best, could have
awarded compensation under Section 4(1)(d) instead of Section 4(1)(c)(ii)
of the Act.    It is submitted that the Doctor was not an Orthopedic
specialist, as such he did not qualify to be an expert in respect of
orthopedic disability and therefore, the entries made in Exhbt.5 is liable to
be discarded. He has further referred to Exhbt.5 and submits that there is
nothing in Exhbt.5 to indicate whether the disablement suffered by the
respondent No.1 was permanent or temporary or whether it was partial.
Therefore, the learned Commissioner erred in law and also on facts in
accepting Exhbt.5 for the purpose of awarding compensation to the
respondent No.1 under Section 4(1)(c)(ii) of the Act.
10.            Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondent No.1 has
argued in defence of the impugned judgment and the compensation
MFA No.216/201                                                  Page 5 of 13

awarded in favour of respondent No.1. The main strength of his argument
is that the issue which has not been raised in this appeal are not covered
by the cross-examination of the Doctor (PW.3). Hence, the issues raised in
the present appeal are all afterthought to avoid paying compensation to
the claimant.    It is further submitted that the only requirement in the
Employee’s Compensation Act is that the assessment of disability and the
loss of earning must be done by a qualified Medical Practitioner and, as
such, there is no prohibition in law by which the PW.3, who is a qualified
Medical Practitioner could not have assessed the disability and the loss of
earning capacity. He further submits that in the absence of any guidelines
to that effect under the Employees Compensation Act, 1923, any Doctor
can make an assessment of the assessment of disability and the extent of
loss of earning capacity after examining the patient.
11.             The learned counsel for the respondent No.1 has referred to
the case of National Insurance Company Ltd. vs. Bapu Mohan (MD) and
another, 2015(2) GLT 848 to project that the provisions of Section
4(1)(C)(i) applies when there is a permanent disability and if the injury is
partial in nature then the provision of Section 4(1)(d) of the Act applies.
He has further referred to pargarph-10 of the impugned judgment to
project that Section 4(1)(c)(ii) required that in the case of non-schedule
injuries, assessment has to be made by the aid of qualified Medical
Practitioner. It is submitted that as the respondent No.1 has proved his
disability and loss of income by producing admissible evidence (i.e.,
Exhbt.5) which was proved by PW.3, a qualified Medical Practitioner and,
as such, there was no other evidence which was left out, as such, the
learned Commissioner had rightly awarded the compensation in this case
and therefore, there was no scope for any interference by this Court with
the impugned judgment passed by the learned Workmen’s Commissioner,
Nagaon.
MFA No.216/201                                                Page 6 of 13

12.             On perusal of the evidence of PW.1, he has not stated
anything about the loss of earning capacity. On perusal of the evidence of
PW.3, it appears that he has given a statement in examination–in-chief that
injuries of like nature may cause disability for a person for manual work
and he assessed permanent disability at 15%. It has not been sated that in
this particular case, the claimant /respondent No.1 had actually suffered
permanent disability. In this regard, neither the respondent No.1 nor the
Doctor i.e., PW.3 got any subsequent X-ray done to ascertain whether the
fracture was not completely healed or not. If the Doctor has clinically
examined the respondent No.1, then he should have recorded about which
were the disorders which he could feel on clinical examination. For
example, if there is a fracture and if it is not healed, there will be a sign of
inflammation existing in place of such injury, but such evidence is not
found in the present case in hand.           There is no doubt that as per
Exhbt.4(1), there was a fracture in 9th and 10 rib. Therefore, if a doctor
certifies disability on the basis of Exhbt.4(1), it would be a wrong or
inadmissible certificate.
13.             In this case, it would be appropriate to quote paragraphs-
27, 28 and 29 of the case of National Insurance Company Limited vs. Bimal
Nath, 2009(1) GLT 370:
                “(27) For the reasons recorded above, with all respect, I
                am unable to persuade myself to agree with the view
                expressed by the Andhra Pradesh High Court, Orissa High
                Court, Punjab and Haryana High Court and Himachal
                Pradesh High Court in the aforesaid decisions, as those, in
                my considered view, are not the authority for the proposition
                that the compensation under Section 4 (1) (c) (ii) of the Act
                in respect of non-schedule injury has to be determined only
                with reference to the work that was being done by the
                workman and not the loss in the earning capacity in every
                employment which the workman was capable of undertaking
                at the time of the accident. Those decisions, in my view,
                have been rendered keeping in view the facts involved in
                those cases and without laying down any law, as indicated
                above.
MFA No.216/201                                                   Page 7 of 13

             (28) In Company Law Board vs. Upper Doab Sugar Mills
             Ltd. Etc, 1977 AIR 831, the Allahabad High Court has opined
             that, to constitute 'permanent partial disablement', within
             the meaning of Section 2 (1) (g) of the Act, it must be such
             disablement which reduces the earning capacity of a
             workman in every employment which he was capable of
             undertaking at the time of the accident and, therefore, it has
             to be seen as to whether the earning capacity of a workman
             has been reduced in every employment which he was
             capable of undertaking at the time of accident and not
             merely in the particular employment in which he was
             engaged at the time of accident, resulting in the
             disablement. Similar view has also been taken by the
             Bombay High Court in Ahmed Abdul Vs. H.K. Sehgal , AIR
             1965 Bombay 32, and by the Punjab High Court in Bhagat
             Singh Ram Saran Vs. Punjab State trough Officer-in-Charge,
             Bhakra Nangal Dam , Hoshiarpur, AIR 1966 Punjab 397,
             while considering the definition of 'partial disablement' and
             'total disablement' as defined in Section 2 (1) (g) and in
             Section 2 (1) (l) of the Act, respectively. A Division Bench of
             the Calcutta High Court in Calcutta Licensed Measurers
             Bengal Chamber of Commerce vs. Md. Hossain, AIR 1969
             Calcutta 378, while considering the definition of 'partial
             disablement' in Section 2 (1) (g) of the Act, has observed
             that in case of disablement of a temporary nature, loss of
             earning capacity which is spoken is in any employment in
             which he was engaged at the time of accident resulting in
             the disablement, in other words, the employment in which
             the workman was engaged at the time of accident is
             immaterial and in case of disablement of permanent nature,
             the reduction of earning capacity is spoken with regard to
             every employment in which the workman was capable of
             undertaking at the time of accident resulting in disablement.
             The same view has been reiterated by Calcutta High Court in
             Ram Naresh Singh vs. Lodhna Colliery Col Ltd., 1973 LAB.
             I.C. 1956. A Division Bench of the Orissa High Court in C.
             David vs. Gobind Chandra Mishra and another, 1997 LAB.
             I.C. 1864, has also opined that to award compensation
             under Section 4 (1) (c) (ii) of the Act, the Commissioner has
             to see whether the earning capacity of the injured has been
             reduced in every employment and not merely in the
             particular employment in which he was engaged at the time
             of accident. A Single Bench of Karnataka High Court in The
             Mysore Sugar Company Ltd. vs. B.T. Krishnamurthy, 1997
             LAB I.C. 1838, has also taken the same view. I agree with
             the view expressed in those decisions, for the reasons
             recorded above.
MFA No.216/201                                                 Page 8 of 13

                 (29) A Full Bench of Karnataka High Court in Shivalinga
                 Shivanagowda Patil vs. Erappa Basuppa Bhavihala and etc.,
                 2004 LAB. I.C. 286, while considering the provisions of the
                 Act, including the definition of partial disablement' under
                 Section 2 (1) (g) and of 'total disablement' under Section 2
                 (1) (l) and the entitlement of the amount of compensation
                 under Section 4 of the Act, has opined that to determine as
                 to whether the workman has suffered from total
                 disablement, whether of a temporary or permanent nature,
                 what has to be seen, whether the injury incapacitates the
                 workman from performing all the work in which he was
                 capable of performing at the time of accident resulting in
                 such disablement and not in reference to the work which he
                 was performing before the accident. A Full Bench of the
                 Kerala High Court in Vanajakshan (died) Reveendra
                 Sadanam vs. M.D. Joseph Muringa Poratha House, 2004
                 LAB.I.C. 339, has also taken the same view.“
14.              It is further observed that Exhbt.5, the medical certificate
which is the plank of the present claim was prepared on 05.08.2002. The
verification appended to the said petition was surprisingly signed on
30.11.2000. Therefore, on the date of filing of the claim petition, there is
nothing on record to show that the respondent No.1/claimant had become
a permanently disabled person.        Therefore, this Court is not inclined to
accept Exhbt.5 as a valid document for entertaining the claim as the said
document was prepared during the pendency of the claim petition and
therefore, it is a tailor made document.
15.              It may be pertinent to mention that as this Court has
discarded the medical certificate i.e., the Exhbt.5, the case of Bimal Nath
(supra) is of no help to the respondent No.1/claimant under the facts and
circumstances of the case herein.
16.              The various orders passed in NWC Case No.128/2000 do not
disclose that the medical certificate dated 05.08.2002 was filed on record
by taking leave of the court. Moreover, the appellant herein had filed his
written statement on 28.08.2001 and on that date also this vital document
MFA No.216/201                                                  Page 9 of 13

was not before the learned Commissioner or in the record of NWC Case
No.128/2000.
17.             I have also perused the LCR very meticulously and I have
not find any petition by virtue of which leave was taken from the learned
Commissioner to introduce any exhibits along with evidence. As a matter
of fact, no document was filed along with the claim petition. Neither any
original document nor any true copies. Therefore, all the exhibits appear
to have been brought on record at a subsequent stage without any leave.
        The medical certificate i.e., Exhbt.5 is quoted herein below:
                “Examined one Billal Khan, Age- 20 years, resident of village
                –Dimungun in the district of Nagaon (Assam) and found the
                following disorders:
                (i)     Fracture Rt. 9th and 10 ribs.
                X-Ray ……(illegible) No. R-2 grievous in nature occurred by
                R.T.A.
                        From above findings his disability 15% and loss of
                income 40%.”
18.             The said certificate (Exhbt.5) does not state that whether
the disability was temporary or permanent or whether the loss of income
would cover the person/ employee for his existing or any other
employment which would have been undertaken. Moreover, the Mat.
Exhbt.1 is also not found on record, therefore, this appears to be a fit case
for issuing a direction to the State Government through the Chief Secretary
and the Secretary, Labour Department to issue a guideline for proper
maintenance of the records of trial cases before the court of learned
Commissioner, Employees Compensation all throughout the State so as to
prevent a procedural lapse, which may cause a genuine workman to suffer
as in the present case in hand, wherein the accident took place in the year
2000 and now even 17 years elapsed, the workman is languishing for want
of adequate compensation.
MFA No.216/201                                                  Page 10 of 13

19.             Hence, in view of the discussions above, the substantial
question of law No.1 is decided in the affirmative by holding that the
assessment of disability of the workman at 15% and loss of earning
capacity by 40% is a guesswork. It may be pertinent to refer that the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Golla Ranjana vs. The
Divisional Manager & another, (2017) 1 SCC 45: (2016) 0 Supreme (SC)
920 has observed that the Commissioner, Employees Compensation is the
last authority on facts.     Hence, in view of the said case, it would be
appropriate to remand the matter back before the said learned
Commissioner, Employees Compensation, Nagaon to see if the claimant
/respondent No.1 is entitled to any compensation.
20.             There is nothing in Exhbt.5 to show that there was any
record of clinical finding by the Doctor. Moreover, the assessment of loss
of income, prima facie, appears to be in excess if compared to other
injuries covered by Schedule I Part–II of Employees Compensation Act,
1923. Hence, substantial question No.2 is decided in the positive and
against the respondent No.1. On this count also, the matter needs to be
remanded for fresh decision.
21.             As the matter has been remanded for fresh decision, the
matter arising out of substantial question of law No.3 may be also decided
afresh by the learned Commissioner, Employees Compensation, Nagaon.
22.             In view of the discussion above, I am constrained to hold
that the respondent No.1/claimant has not been able to prove the extent of
his disability and loss of income in respect of the non-schedule injuries as
at the time of filing of the claim case. On the date of filing of the cliam,
there was no document to show the disability and the Exhbt.5 which was
procured on 05.08.2002 was a subsequently prepared document of which
MFA No.216/201                                                Page 11 of 13

there was no notice to the appellant herein and it could not even relied
upon.
23.            Considering the fact that the accident had occurred on
30.07.2000, this Court is not inclined to allow any recovery from the
respondent No.1, who had stated to have withdrawn a sum of Rs.53,760/-
pursuant to the interim order passed by this Court.
24.            Hence, as indicated above, this Court is inclined to issue
direction to the State Government through the Chief Secretary and the
Secretary, Labour Department to issue guidelines for proper maintenance
of the records of trial cases before the court of learned Commissioner,
Employees Compensation, as follow:
           1) That all the Commissioner of Employees Compensation may
               be directed to ensure that a list of documents is also filed
               along with the claim petition as on the date of filing of the
               claim petition together with self attested photocopy of such
               document; and
           2) All the exhibits should be recorded in form of a list together
               with Material Exhibits and such list should be maintained.
               And if any exhibit is returned, the same must be recorded in
               the order-sheet so that the exhibits can be available before
               the appellate court while hearing the appeal.
25.            In view of the discussion above, this appeal stands allowed.
The matter is remanded back for a fresh decision by the Commissioner,
Employee’s Compensation, Nagaon. For which, it is provided that if the
claimant/respondent No.1 desires a fresh trial, he may approach the
learned Commissioner, Employee’s Compensation, Nagaon within a outer
period of 2(two) months from today and by producing a certified copy of
this judgment, may pray for a re-trial and seek further instructions from the
said learned Tribunal.     However, without permitting the appellant for
MFA No.216/201                                                 Page 12 of 13

recovery from the claimant as it can be possible that the respondent
No.1/claimant, who was a handyman by profession at the relevant time,
might have spent the money and considering the fact that the accident
occurred 17 years ago.
26.           The parties shall bear their own costs.
27.           Let the LCR be returned urgently.
                                                             JUDGE
MKS
MFA No.216/201                                          Page 13 of 13


