*         IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                        CRL. M.C. No. 3649/2010
                                               Date of Decision: 18.05.2012
 RAJENDER VERMA                                        .… PETITIONER
                             Through:    Mr. Manorajan, Advocate
                             Versus
 ASHOK MALIK                                         …...RESPONDENT
                             Through:    Mr. S.O. Vashisht, Advocate
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE M.L. MEHTA
M.L. MEHTA, J.
1.       This petition is filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. assailing the order
dated 26th October, 2010 of Metropolitan Magistrate whereby application
of the Petitioner under Section 91 read with Section 349 Cr.P.C. was
dismissed.
2.      The Petitioner is facing prosecution in the complaint under Section
138 of Negotiable Instruments Act(in the short the NI Act) filed against
him by the Respondent Ashok Malik.              In the said complaint, the
Respondent had examined himself as CW-1 in support of his complaint.
The complainant evidence having been closed, the statement of the
petitioner had also been recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and the case
Crl. M.C. No. 3649/2010                                            Page 1 of 5

was at the stage of defence evidence of the petitioner. An application
under Section 91 read with Section 349 Cr.P.C. for summoning some
documents and for calling upon the respondent/Complainant to answer
some queries.
3.      I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and counsel for the
respondent and perused the records.
4.      The complaint that was filed against the petitioner was based on
the fact that both the cheques of Rs. Nine lacs given by the petitioner as
repayment of loan were dishonoured on presentation and that the
petitioner failed to pay the cheque amounts despite service of notice as
contemplated under Section 138 of the Act.
5.      The record that was sought to be summoned from the Complainant
under Section 91 Cr. P.C. consisted of copy of identity card issued by his
department, copies of income tax returns, copy of the sale deed/power of
attorney, agreement to sell the properties purchased by the Complainant
through the petitioner/accused, copy of bank transaction loan if any
relating to Rs. Nine lacs and copies of letters through which the
Complainant might have informed his department about the purchase of
the properties. There was no dispute with regard to the cheques in
Crl. M.C. No. 3649/2010                                         Page 2 of 5

question issued by the petitioner to the Complainant/Respondent. In fact
the petitioner had also filed a civil suit seeking declaration and
cancellation of those cheques and said case is pending in the Court of
Addl. District Judge.        In the said civil suit an application of
interrogatories under Order 11 Rule 2 CPC was filed by the petitioner,
wherein a plea was taken by him that the Respondent/Complainant along
with three persons threatened him and took two cheques of Rs.7 lacs and
2 lakhs respectively. He alleged that he issued the said two cheques to
save himself from threats to his life given by the respondent/complainant
and to save marriage of his son. He alleged that in the written statement,
in the civil suit a plea was taken by the Respondent/Complainant that he
had purchased some property through him and he (petitioner) had signed
a sale deed as a witness and that he had lured him to make investment
with him and so he gave him Rs. 9 lacs in cash and further that since the
deal could not be finalized, the petitioner returned the said amount of Rs.
9 lacs by way to aforesaid two cheques. In the said civil suit also the
petitioner through interrogatories sought information as regards all the
documents which are sought to be produced by way of instant application
under Section 91 Cr. P.C.
Crl. M.C. No. 3649/2010                                          Page 3 of 5

6.      The learned Addl. District Judge vide order dated 9th February,
2009 dismissed the said application of interrogatories reasoning that the
same does not appear to be having any close connection with the
controversy involved. He observed that the interrogatories were in the
nature of fishing enquiry and do not appear to be connected or having any
relevance with the matter in question. It was after dismissal of this
application that the petitioner filed the application under Section 91 Cr.
P.C. before the Court of learned Metropolitan Magistrate.
7.      All the documents which are sought to be produced do not seem to
be having any relevance with or bearing on the complaint under Section
138 of NI Act. By seeking to produce these documents, the petitioner
seem to be trying to wriggle out of the liability arising due to cheques
which were admittedly given by him to the Respondent and which on
presentation got dishonoured. It is of no relevance if the Complainant had
or not informed his department about the said payment to the petitioner or
had not shown the same in income tax returns or had not taken any loan
from the bank or had not purchased any property/things from the
petitioner. The queries which are sought to be made are nothing, but
questions which the petitioner has already put to respondent/complainant
Crl. M.C. No. 3649/2010                                          Page 4 of 5

in his cross examination. Section 311 is not meant for the purpose of
putting queries or questions to a witness.
8.      The first and foremost requirement of Section 91 Cr. P.C. is about
the document being necessary or desirable for the purpose of trial of the
case under Section 138 of the Act. No roving enquiry can be allowed to
be undertaken into the matter by weighing the pros and cons and directing
irrelevant material to be produced during the trial. It is not that on the
mere asking of a party that the documents can be directed to be produced.
As is noted above, Complainant has already been examined and cross-
examined and the case was at the fag end of the trial. The learned
Metropolitan Magistrate has rightly recorded that none of the documents
sought to be produced was relevant or has any bearing on the complaint
under Section 138 of the Act pending against the petitioner.
8.      I find no infirmity or illegality in the said order. The petition has
no merit and is thus dismissed.
                                                             M.L. MEHTA, J.
MAY 18 , 2012
dk
Crl. M.C. No. 3649/2010                                            Page 5 of 5


