                              ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK.
                                    W.P.(C) No.789 of 2005
              In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
              Constitution of India
                                             -----------
              Debaranjan Das and others                            ……           Petitioners
                                        -Versus-
              State of Orissa & Others                              ……         Opp. parties
                           For Petitioner     : M/s S.P. Singh,
                                                        U.C. Patnaik,
                                                        S.D. Mishra & S.Patnaik
                           For opp. parties:      Addl. Standing Counsel.
                                       ------------------------------------
                                    Date of Judgment: 09 .11.2010
                                       ------------------------------------
              PRESENT :
                             THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M.M. DAS
M. M. Das, J.              The petitioners are aggrieved by the orders passed by the
              Tahasildar, Bhubaneswar in Mutation Case No.5701 of 2001 and
              Collector, Bhubaneswar in Mutation Appeal Case No.52 of 2003 by
              which the Tahasildar refused to mutate the name of the petitioners in
              respect of Plot No.3 measuring Ac.20.190 decs., Kissam-Urnnata
              Yojana     Yogya,    pertaining       to     Khata        No.619 of    village-
              Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar. The said land has been recorded
              in the name of the General Administration Department in the Record
              of Rights published in the year 1988.
              2.           It appears from the facts as disclosed that the petitioners
              claimed to have inheritated a portion of the aforesaid property from

                                    2
their ancestor, late Lokanath Das on the basis that he was declared to
be the owner of the said land by the then Tahasildar, Cuttack on
04.03.1963.
3.             The case of the petitioners is that some of the villagers of
Patia and Chandrasekharpur filed a Title Suit, being T.S. No.49 of
1971 in representative capacity praying for a declaration that the suit
land is a communal land and the villagers have an indefeasible right
to graze their cattle and collect minor forest produces from the suit
land and to further declare that the defendant no.1 in the suit has no
right, title, interest or possession in respect of the suit property and
the tenancy certificate issued in favour of the defendant no.1 is a void
certificate. They also prayed for a decree for permanent injunction
against the defendants from interfering in exercising their communal
right over the suit property. The original defendant no.1 was the said
late Lokanath Das, who after his death was substituted by the
defendant nos.1(a) to 1(d). The said defendants pleaded that they are
in possession over the property after the death of late Lokanath Dash
on the basis of lease deed and the tenancy certificate granted in
favour of the said Lokanath Das. Defendant nos.2, 3 and 4 in the suit
are the State of Orissa, the Collector, Cuttack and the Collector, Puri.
The learned trial court decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiffs-
villagers against which the defendant nos.1(a) to 1(d) preferred Title
Appeal No.9 of 1997 before the appellate court. The appellate court
reversed the decree and dismissed the suit filed by the villagers

                                  3
holding that a tenancy certificate has been issued in favour of late
Lokanath Das and further holding that the plaintiffs have no right of
their own over the suit land. But such right has been created by
recording the land as Rakhit, which vested in the State. Thus, the
plaintiffs had not only no communal right over the suit land from
generation to generation, but any such right subsequently created by
the land holder as vested in the State. The appellate court has further
held that even if the defendants have no right over the suit land, the
plaintiffs having no communal right over the suit land have no locus
standi to challenge the right or title of the defendants. Of course, the
tenancy certificate has not been filed. But it appears from Ext-F that
the Tahasildar has endorsed in From No.2 which was an application
for removal of timber from one’s own recorded holding.
4.           On the above reasons, the decree passed by the learned
trial court was reversed and the suit was dismissed. The villagers,
who were plaintiffs, preferred Second Appeal No.261 of 1990 before
this Court. On 13.04.1995, three Misc. Cases were filed, being Misc.
Case No.156 of 1995 for recording a compromise, Misc. Case No.157
of 1995 for deletion of parties, namely, defendants 2 to 4 in the suit
and Misc. Case No.158 of 1995 for amending the land schedule in the
plaint to describe the suit land in accordance with the Hal Settlement
Record. All the Misc. Cases were disposed of on 08.08.1995 with the
following orders:
                         “M.C. No.158/95
             14. 8.8.1995. Heard.

                                      4
                                    For the reasons indicated in the
                    application, prayer for amendment is allowed.
                              The misc. case is disposed of.
                                                        Sd/-
                                                    A. Pasayat, J.
                                   “M.C. No.157/93
               15. 8.8.1995       Heard.
                                     Prayer for deletion of names of
                    respondents 2 to 7 and defendants 2 to 4 is
                    accepted.
                                 The Misc. Case is disposed of.
                                                        Sd/-
                                                    A. Pasayat, J.
                            “M.C. No.156/95
                16. 8.8.1995      Heard.
                                   Prayer for compromise is accepted.
                                   The Misc. Case is disposed of.
                                                        Sd/-
                                                    A. Pasayat, J.”
              On recording the above orders, an order was passed in the
Second Appeal No.261 of 1990 to the following effect:-
                            “S.A. No.261 of 1990
              17. 8.8.1995        Heard learned counsel for parties.
                                   The Second Appeal is disposed of
                            in    terms of compromise petition. The
                            compromise petition do form part of the
                            decree.
                                                        Sd/-
                                                    A. Pasayat, J.”
5.            Basing on the aforesaid order and the compromise
entered into, the Mutation Case was filed, which having been rejected
and the rejection order confirmed in appeal, the petitioners have
preferred the present writ application.
6.            Mr. Sambhunath Singh, learned senior counsel appearing
for the petitioners strenuously urged that it was incumbent upon the

                                   5
Tahasildar to mutate the land in favour of the petitioners in
accordance with the compromise decree which was passed as per the
order of this Court in the Second Appeal directing that the suit is
decreed in terms of the compromise and the compromise shall form a
part of the decree. He further submitted that the Tahasildar has acted
wholly without jurisdiction in not mutating the property, in question,
in favour of the petitioners on extraneous consideration and the
finding of the Tahasildar as well as the appellate authority that the
State is not bound by the compromise decree is unsustainable.
7.           Admittedly, the disputed properties belonged to the ex-
inter mediatory. After the Orissa Estate Abolition Act, 1951 came into
operation,   the    property   vested  in  the   State   free  from all
encumbrances. Further, it is also an admitted case that the land has
been recorded in the name of the General Administration Department
in the settlement of the year 1988 under the Kisam-Urnnat Yojana
Yogya. The General Administration Department was never made a
party in the suit, though, no doubt, the State of Orissa, Collector,
Cuttack and Collector, Puri were defendants in the suit.
8.           Mr. Goutam Mishra, learned counsel appearing on behalf
of the State opposed the claim of the petitioners on the ground that
the General Administration Department, Government of Orissa, which
is the recorded owner having not been impleaded as a party in the
suit, the suit, itself, was incompetent. Further, deleting the names of
the State of Orissa, Collector, Cuttack and Collector, Puri from the

                                 6
array   of respondents in the Second Appeal and, thereafter, getting
the compromise recorded amounts to playing fraud on the Court,
inasmuch as, once the said respondents were deleted from the Second
Appeal as respondents, any compromise entered into is not binding
on them. It is needless to mention that in an application for mutation,
the documents showing the source from which the applicant has
derived title is required to be produced before the Tahasildar. The
recorded owner as per the settlement Record of Rights is required to
be impleaded as a necessary party in the Mutation Case and given an
opportunity of hearing.
9.           In the present case, it is also an admitted position that
the Record of Rights published in 1988 by the Settlement Authority
under the Orissa Survey and Settlement Act, 1958 has not been
challenged by any of the parties. The compromise in the Second
Appeal having been recorded after deletion of the State and its
authorities from the array of respondents the said compromise decree
is not binding on the State.
10.          All these aspects have been taken into consideration by
the Tahasildar in the impugned order passed in Mutation Case
No.5701 of 2001, which has been confirmed in Mutation Appeal Case
No.52 of 2010. I, therefore, find absolutely no error apparent on the
face of the impugned order nor find the same to have been passed
without jurisdiction.

                                  7
11.          In view of the above, I am not inclined to exercise the
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution by
issuing a writ of certiorari quashing the impugned orders.
12.          Therefore, the writ application, being devoid of merit, is
dismissed.
                                                 ……………………
                                                  M.M. Das, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
November          , 2010/Himansu

                                  8
Orissa High Court,Cuttack
Dated the      th March,2009/Bks.


