                         W.P. (C) No. 15049     OF 2008
07. 04.09.2012.                Heard.
                               This writ petition has been filed against the
                order dated 23.9.2008 passed by the learned District
                Judge, Balasore     in rejecting the objection filed by the
                petitioners against the report of the learned trial court
                with regard to the question of substitution of the legal
                heirs in respect     of respondent no. 10 in the lower
                appellate court.
                               Facts reveal that a preliminary decree in a
                partition suit was passed, against which defendant no. 1
                in the suit carried an appeal being Title Appeal No. 69 of
                2000. When the appeal was pending, the said appellant –
                defendant no. 1 expired and his legal heirs were
                substituted. Again during the pendency of the appeal, the
                respondent no. 10 Katibudhi Jena, who was defendant
                no. 5 in the suit expired. There was dispute with regard
                to the status of her legal heirs     and the learned lower
                appellate court as per proviso to Rule 5 of Order 22 CPC
                sent the matter to the learned trial court for determining
                the question of legal heir-ship of the said deceased
                respondent. The learned trial court after causing an
                enquiry as provided under the said Rule remitted the
                records of enquiry along with his findings to the learned
                lower appellate court. The petitioners filed objection    to
                the said findings of the learned trial court on 17.5.2003
                but wrongly nomenclatured the objection to be one under
                Order 41, Rule 26 CPC.
                               The learned lower appellate court by the
                impugned order refused to accept the said objection.
                               The question, therefore, arises before this
                Court as to whether after enquiry by the learned trial

court as per the proviso to Rule 5 of Order 22 CPC, there
is any scope for filing of an objection by any of the parties
to the said findings on the question of legal heir-ship of
the deceased party as arrived by the subordinate court.
Rule 5 of Order 22 C.P.C. contemplates as follows:-
          “5. Determination of question as to legal
          representative.- Where a question arises as to
          whether any person is or is not the legal
          representative of a deceased plaintiff or a
          deceased defendant, such question shall be
          determined by the Court.
                        Provided that where such question
          arises before an Appellate Court, that Court
          may, before determining the question, direct
          any subordinate Court to try the question and
          to return the records together with evidence, if
          any recorded at such trial, its findings and
          reasons therefore, and the Appellate Court may
          take the same into consideration in determining
          the question”
                On a bare reading of the proviso to the said
Rule, it can be clearly deciphered to mean that the
subordinate court after trying the question with regard to
legal heir-ship and after returning the records together
with the evidence, if any, recorded at such trial, along
with its findings and reasons therefor, the learned
appellate court is required to take the same into
consideration     in   determining    the   question.   While
determining the question of legal heir-ship, if any
objection is raised by any party to the findings arrived at
by the subordinate court, who tried the said question, it
is incumbent upon the appellate court to consider such
objection before determining the said question of legal
heir-ship    of    the   deceased     party   and    directing
substitution.                       (emphasis supplied)

                The learned lower appellate court, therefore,
fell  into an error in rejecting the objection filed by the
petitioners at the threshold.
                 This Court, therefore, while setting aside
the impugned order, directs the learned lower appellate
court to consider the objection filed by the petitioners
while     determining    the   question   with   regard    to
substitution of the deceased respondent no. 10 and
thereafter    pass necessary orders for substituting the
legal heirs of the said deceased respondent no.10. Upon
substitution, notice shall be issued to the persons held
to be    legal heirs and after service of such notice,    the
learned lower appellate court      shall proceed to hear the
appeal. However, if the learned appellate court, as
contended by the opp. parties, comes to the conclusion
that there is no    necessity of substitution on the ground
that all the legal heirs of the said deceased respondent
are already on record,       he will proceed   to hear and
dispose of the appeal in accordance with law.
                Be that as it may, as the appeal is pending
since the year 2000, the learned District Judge, Balasore
shall take all expeditious steps to dispose of the said
appeal finally by the end of March, 2013.
                In view of the above order, the Misc. Case
filed by the opp. parties 6, 7, 9 and 10 for grant of
injunction is not required to be entertained in this writ
petition. However, liberty is granted to them to file any
application before the learned lower appellate court for
passing any interim order as permissible under law. This
Court expresses no opinion on the same.

             The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Interim order passed earlier stands vacated and all
pending Misc. Cases stand disposed of.
             Urgent certified copy of this order be
granted as per rules.
                                   ……………………
                                    M.M. Das, J.


