                               ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK.
                                       W.P.(C). No.15170 of 2010
              In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
              Constitution of India
                                              -----------
              Hari Priya Sahoo.                                 ……            Petitioner
                                       -Versus-
              Jagar Sahoo and others                             ……          Opp. parties
                           For Petitioner    : M/s.       B.K.Dagara &
                                                           P.K. Patnaik.
                           For opp. parties:     M/s.      S.K.Mohanty, B.K. Parija,
                                                           B.Behera & A.K.Rout.
                                        ------------------------------------
                                     Date of Judgment: 16.01.2013
                                        ------------------------------------
              PRESENT :
                             THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M.M. DAS
M. M. Das, J.              The petitioner, who is the plaintiff in C.S. No. 118 of 2007
              filed in the court of the learned Civil Judge (Junior Division),
              Kendrapara has called in question the order dated 16.8.2010 passed
              in the said suit by which the learned trial court has held that the suit
              abates under section 4 (4) of the Orissa Consolidation of Holdings and
              Prevention of Fragmentation of Land Act, 1972 (for short, ‘the Act’).
              2.           The suit was originally filed by the petitioner for a decree
              for permanent injunction restraining the defendants – opp. parties
              from interfering with her peaceful possession of her purchased plot
              no. 4097 constituting an area of Ac. 0. 17 decimals. Subsequently,,

                                   2
the plaint was amended and a prayer for declaration of right, title,
interest and possession over the boundary wall existing on a portion
of the suit land was introduced. Admittedly, the area in which the suit
schedule property is situated is under consolidation operation. The
opp. parties filed an application under section 4 (4) of the Act, inter
alia, making a prayer that necessary order regarding abatement of the
suit under the said provision of the Act may be passed and the suit be
abated. An objection was filed to the said petition by the petitioner –
plaintiff not disputing that the area is under consolidation. The
learned trial court after hearing the parties passed the impugned
order of abatement of the suit holding that the plaintiff having prayed
for declaration of right, title, interest and possession over the
boundary wall, which situates on a portion of the suit land, it is
necessary to decide the inter se right of the parties over the said wall
for passing a declaratory right and as the consolidation operation is
continuing, the civil court lacks jurisdiction to entertain the matter.
3.            Mr. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently
urged that the suit is basically for demarcation of the boundary
between the purchased land of the plaintiff and the defendants. The
purchase being disputed, the suit cannot be nomenclatured as a suit
involving any dispute with regard to title of the parties over the
property in question.
4.            Learned counsel for the opposite parties, on the other
hand, contended that this Court, in the case of Bhagaban Prasad

                                  3
Das v. Narayan Prasad Das, 49 (1980) CLT 132 in a suit for
permanent injunction held that though the suit is in the garb of a
simple suit for permanent injunction, yet it involves questions relating
to right and interest and the plaintiff has to get rid of the cloud.
Hence, though a suit for permanent injunction, as such, has not been
expressly referred to in Section 4 (4) of the Act, the Court necessarily
would have to adjudicate upon the right or interest of the plaintiff
having regard to the claim of the defendants before granting a decree
for permanent injunction. Such a suit, by virtue of Section 4 (4) of the
Act shall stand abated. He further contended that the ratio of the said
decision will be squarely applicable to the facts of the present case
and no infirmity can be found in the impugned order.
5.           Considering the facts of the present case, this Court is of
the view that the analogy of the decision in the case of Bhagaban
Prasad Das (supra) can be drawn to the facts of the present case
where in the garb of boundary dispute, the plaintiff seeks to claim
declaration of his right, title and interest over a portion of the
boundary wall existing on the suit land. Since admittedly the
consolidation operation is in force, such a relief cannot be granted by
the civil court involving disputed question with regard to title and
interest over the boundary wall. Hence, the provision of Section 4 (4)
of the Act will be squarely applicable and the trial court has rightly
held that the suit abates.

                                 4
6.           In the result, this Court finds no merit in the writ
application, which is accordingly dismissed. There shall be no order
as to cost. All pending Misc. Cases stand disposed of.
             The order of status quo passed on 23.09.2010 stands
vacated.
                                        ……………………
                                           M.M. Das, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
January 16th, 2013/Biswal.


