                       ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK.
                        CRLMC Nos. 1045 and 1647 OF 2008
       In the matter of applications under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
       Procedure.
                                      -----------
       In CRLMC No. 1045 of 2008
       Bhakta Hari Mohanty                            ……                      Petitioner
                                 -Versus-
       Bishnu Charan Swain                            ……                      Opp. party
                     For Petitioner    :  M/s. R.K. Mohanty,
                                                 D. Mohanty, S.K. Sahoo,
                                                 A.P. Bose, D.P. Pattnaik,
                                                 D. Varadwaja & P. Jena
                     For Opp. Party :     M/s. B. Baug, S. Dash
                                                 & P.C.P. Das.
       In CRLMC No. 1647 of 2008
       Basanta Manjari Satpathy                       ……                     Petitioner
                                   -Versus-
       State of Orissa and another                    ……                    Opp. Parties
                     For Petitioner     :    M/s. S. K. Sahoo, G. Sahoo,
                                                    M.K. Mallick & D. Pattnaik.
                     For Opp. Parties :      M/s. B. Baug, S. Rath,
                                                    & P.C.P. Das.
                                            Addl. Government Advocate
                                                                 (For O.P. 1)
                                    ---------------------------------
                               Date of Judgment: 15.11.2012
                                    ---------------------------------
       PRESENT :
                      THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M.M. DAS
M. M. Das, J.        Both the aforesaid criminal misc. cases are applications
       under Section 482 Cr.P.C. arising out of one complaint case, being
       I.C.C. No. 2985 of 2007 pending before the learned S.D.J.M.,
       Bhubaneswar. In both the criminal misc. cases, the petitioners have

                                     2
prayed for quashing the order dated 27.3.2008 passed in the complaint
case taking cognizance of the offences under Sections 500/203/205
I.P.C. and issuing process to the accused persons. The petitioners in
both the cases are two of the accused persons in the said complaint
case.
2.            To appreciate the rival contentions raised by the learned
counsel for the respective parties, it is felt appropriate to state the facts
giving rise to these cases, in brief, which are as follows:
              The dispute started with regard to assertion of title over a
piece of land situated in village Damana under Chandrasekharpur P.S.,
which stood recorded in the name of Tilotama Samal belonging to the
said village, who is dead.     A group of persons from village Damana
claiming to be the legal heirs of Tilotama Samal have transferred some
portions of the property to different persons.          Similarly, a group
persons from village Dihabalarampur under Patkura P.S. in the district
of Kendrapada claiming to be the successor of late Tilottama Samal
have also transferred the very same property to different persons.         In
course of mutation in the names of the alleged successors of late
Tilottama Samal and their respective purchasers, when the matter was
pending before the Board of Revenue, persons belonging to the village
Damana engaged the petitioner, Shri Bhaktahari Mohanty, in CRLMC
No. 1045 of 2008 as their Advocate, who argued their cases before the
Board of Revenue. Being unsuccessful, the matter was carried to this
Court in W.P.(C) No. 14783 of 2005.             In the meantime, persons
claiming to be the successors of late Tilottama Samal belonging to the

                                   3
village Dihabalarampur filed T.S. No. 349 of 2001 before the learned
Civil Judge (Junior Division), Bhubaneswar for establishing their right
as legal heirs of recorded tenant Tilottama Samal. The writ petition was
disposed of by this Court by order dated 27.3.2006 with the
observation that the order passed in the mutation case by the Board of
Revenue shall be subject to the decision of the civil suit. After disposal
of the writ petition, a number of purchasers, who purchased the
property from the alleged legal heirs of late Tilottama Samal belonging
to the village Damana, got themselves impleaded as parties in the
pending title suit. After being impleaded as defendants, they have filed
their written statements along with their respective counter claims.
Shri Bishnu Charan Swain, Advocate, who is the complainant in I.C.C.
No. 2985 of 2007, appeared for the alleged legal heirs of late Tilottama
Samal belonging to the village Dihabalarampur and the purchasers
from them. Shri Swain holds a Power of Attorney on behalf of the said
alleged legal heirs of village Dihabalarampur and the transfers on their
behalf were made by Shri Swain as the Power of Attorney Holder.       One
Sudhansubala Sahoo had purchased a piece of land which belonged to
the recorded tenant Tilottama Samal. Purchasers from the alleged legal
heirs of late Tilottama Samal belonging to the village Dihabalarampur
who purchased the property through the Power of Attorney Holder, Shri
Bishnu Charan Swain, disputed the title of the said Sudhansubala
Sahoo for which she had filed C.S. No. 29 of 2002 before the learned
Civil Judge (Senior Division), First Court, Bhubaneswar for declaration
of her title.    After the suit proceeded for some time, the plaintiff-

                                  4
Sudhansubala Sahoo engaged the petitioner, Shri Bhaktahari Mohanty
as her Advocate. An application was filed by the plaintiff in the said
suit to implead Shri Bishnu Charan Swain as defendant wherein
several instances of transfer made by Shri Swain as the Power of
Attorney Holder was cited.     The learned Civil Judge (Senior Division),
Bhubaneswar allowed the plaintiff’s prayer and impleaded Shri Swain
as a defendant in the suit. The original defendant being one Soubhagya
Kumar Mishra prayed for injunction in the suit upon which an order of
status quo was passed.      In the interregnum, the plaintiff coming to
know that one M/s. Z. Engineers, a company, was the real contestant,
impleaded the said company and its Managing Director as defendant
nos. 2 and 3 in the said suit and Shri Bishnu Charan Swain continued
to be defendant no. 4. Shri Swain has filed his written statement, who
was also appearing as an Advocate for the original defendant no. 1 and
also supported the case of defendant nos. 2 and 3.      The said Bishnu
Charan Swain is a practising Advocate of this Bar and also a party-
defendant in the suit filed by Sudhansubala Sahoo i.e. C.S. No. 29 of
2002. I.C.C. No. 2985 of 2007 has been filed by the said Shri Bishnu
Charan Swain, Advocate, who in the meantime on an application being
filed by him has disengaged himself as an advocate for the original
defendant no. 1 in the above suit. Allegation has been made in the
complaint petition that the accused persons 2 and 3, who are ladies,
namely, Smt. Basanti Manjari Satpathy and Smt. Sudhansubala Sahu,
have filed false affidavit and the accused no. 1, namely, Shri Bhakta
Hari Mohanty has prepared the appeal memo, written statement and

                                    5
amendment petition, which were filed in different courts including this
Court, defaming the complainant knowing fully well that those are false
in content but to vilify the character, honour and prestige of the
complainant and lower his prestige in the society. In those pleadings
and affidavits, certain derogatory words have been used deliberately
knowing the same to be false, thereby causing irreparable loss to the
complainant. All the accused persons are guilty of being authors and
propagators of those incriminating materials in open courts and before
the litigant public at large.    The accused no. 1 (Shri Mohanty) who
prepared the appeal petition in Misc. Appeal No. 299 of 2001 stated
and read over the contents before this Court by which the complainant
has been defamed. A copy of the said appeal memo was annexed to the
complaint petition.    The alleged defamatory statements made by the
complainant were quoted in the complaint petition. With regard to the
other two accused persons, it has been stated in the complaint petition
that they are two ladies, who have filed their affidavits through the
accused no. 1-Shri Mohanty as their Advocate and those affidavits were
duly placed by the accused no. 1 in open Court with a motive to harass
the complainant and strengthen his stand, thereby lowering the
prestige of the complainant on such false statements. Allegation was
also made that derogatory statement has been made in the amendment
petition filed in the civil suit (C.S. No. 29 of 2002) on behalf of the
plaintiff by the accused no. 1, who is the Advocate for the plaintiff. The
alleged statements made in the misc. appeal as well as the amendment
petition and affidavits are as follows:

                                  6
            “Para-5 - That it further appears from the records that
    this Bishnu Charan Swain had also obtained a Power of
    Attorney from Tilottama Samal in 1982 by which time
    Tilottama was already dead. Obviously a false person was set
    up as Tilotama Samal and from her as Power of Attorney was
    obtained………..”
            Para-6 ……..More interestingly the death certificate
    filed to show that Tilottama died in 19.3.92 dislcoses that
    Tilottama died at Tala Telengabazar, Cuttack.               Tala
    Telengabazar Cuttack is resident of the Power of Attorney
    Holder and Advocate Sri Bishnu Charan Swain. As indicated
    above, Tilottama of Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar died on
    5.6.67.”
            Para-7 ……..There is no such record in favour of the
    other Tilottama Samal of Dihabalarampur………. Tilottama
    Samal of Chandrasekharpur having died in 1967 could not
    have executed a Power of Attorney in 1982.”
            Para-8 - It might be that Sri Bishnu Charan Swain
    misusing his authority as an Advocate is trying to take
    advantage of the (illegible). It may also be that there was
    actually no such person in Dihabalarampur in the name of
    Tilottama Samal and the name has been invented for oblique
    ends. There was no reason why Tilottama Samal of
    Dihabalarampur in the district of Kendrapara shall die at Tala
    Telengabazar in the town of Cuttack ……...”
3.          The alleged statements made in the affidavit filed in W.P.(C)
No. 14783 of 2005 are as follows:
            “Para-2 – As a matter of fact, it is Sri Bishnu Charan
    Swain who is at the root of all the manipulations”……If Sri
    Bishnu Charan Swain was really the son of Tilottama it is
    not understood why he did not appear for Tilottama in the
    settlement camp, before the Settlement Commissioner and
    before the Mutation Court. It is also worth noting that in
    none of these cases, the village Dihabalarampur finds
    mention as the address of Tilottama……..” The rest of the
    materials in para-4, 5, 6 are also false evidence tendered
    before the court and derogatory to the prestige of the
    complainant and intentionally used as imputations and
    conveyed obliquely or indirectly, by way of question and
    irony.”

                                   7
4.           The alleged statements made in the amendment petition
filed by the plaintiff in C.S. No. 29 of 2002, which are alleged to be
defamatory, are as follows:
     (b)     The defendant no. 2, Tapan Kumar Mohanty, who
     appears to be the Director of ‘Z’ Engineer and Construction
     Pvt. Ltd. claims to have purchased the property from one
     Siprarani Jena who had purchased the same from Bishnu
     Charan Swain, Power of Attorney Holder of one Tilottama
     Samal of Diba Balarampur in the District of Kendrapara. It
     is, however, submitted that Tilottama Samal of Diba
     Balarampur was not the owner of the suit property, which is
     situated     in   village   Damana    (locally   known      as
     Chandrasekharpur) in the District of Khurda. It appears
     that the above named Bishnu Charan Swain taking
     advantage of his status as an Advocate, who was appearing
     the Revenue Courts for the other co-sharer Uchhab Sahoo
     has manipulated documents for an un-lawful gain.
     (c)     That the plaintiff apprehends that in fact there is no
     Tilottama Samal in village Diha Balarampur of Kendrapara
     District who could have died on 19.3.1992 at Tala Telenga
     Bazar in the Town of Cuttack. At any rate, Tilottama Samal
     of Damana not having sold the suit property to Siprarani
     Jena, the purchaser from her Tapan Kumar Mohanty can
     not legitimately defeat the claim of the plaintiff. It now
     appears that this Bishnu Charan Swain claiming to be the
     Power of Attorney Holder of so called sons of Tilottama
     Samal of Diha Balarampur has fought many cases against
     the purchasers from Tilottama Samal or her heirs of
     Damana. No where the Record of Right reflecting Tilottama
     Samal, wife of Dhanurdhar Samal of Damana as owner of
     the suit property has been challenged as incorrect.
     Tilottama Samal of Diha Balarampur or her so called sons
     have never come to village Damana to possess the suit
     property or to fight cases in the Revenue Courts. It is Sri
     Bishnu Charan Swain, who has been running the show and
     the plaintiff apprehends that Sri Swain has been the master
     of all manipulations and fraud. Many official records also
     appear to have been manipulated. In view of all this it is
     necessary that the suit should be decided in presence of Sri
     Swain. He is, therefore, impleaded as a defendant in this
     suit.
     (e)     That it is also appears that after procuring the
     fraudulent deeds of sale Tapan Kumar Mohanty and many
     other purchasers of the type with the active connivance of
     Sri Bishnu Charan Swain have created many documents.

                                       8
     All these being on the basis of the registered documents,
     their validity will depend upon the sustainability of the
     original transaction which again depends upon the title of
     the vendors. Defendant No. 2, therefore, has not moved in
     clean hands in as much as he is guilty of fraud and
     manipulation. He, therefore, cannot defeat the title and
     possession of the plaintiff. It is asserted here again that
     Tilottama Samal of Damana was the real owner of the
     property and she has not sold it to Sipra Rani Jena, who is
     the vendor of defendant no. 2.
     (f)       That one Uchhab Sahoo of Damana is distant agent
     of Tilottama Samal. He was assisting Tilottama Samal in the
     matter of mutation and fixation of rent after abolition of the
     Zamindari.       There also Sri Bishnu Charan Swain as
     Advocate was appearing for Uchhab Charan Sahoo who was
     claiming to be co-lessee and not for Tilottama Samal. In this
     process the said Uchhab Sahoo produced a copy of the order
     passed in M.C. Case No. 75 of 59-60 showing fixation of rent
     in favour of both Uchhab Charan Sahoo and Tilottama
     Samal. Now the plaintiff has come to learn that this certified
     copy is also a fake one and in fact there is no such order.
     The forged copy was produced only to satisfy the illiterate
     Tilottama Samal. At any rate, Tilottama Samal of Damana
     being a tenant under the Zamindar her tenancy is protected
     u/s 8 of the O.E.A. Act, especially where her name has been
     mutated in Tahasil Jamabandi and rent has been accepted
     for her.”
5.            The initial deposition given by the complainant before the
learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar is as follows:
              “Initial statement of Sri Bishnu Charan Swain, aged
     about 74 yrs. S/o. Lunjanath Swain of village Talatelanga
     Bazar, P.S. Purighat, Dist – Cuttack on S/A.
                            ------------
              I am the complainant of this case. I know all the
     three accused persons.             The alleged incident was a
     continuous one. The accused persons used to publish
     affidavits & materials in diff. court of law defaming me.
     Accused nos. 2 & 3 are the clients of accused no. 1.
     Accused no. 1 appeared for accused nos. 2 & 3 in different
     litigations pending in different courts as I appeared against
     accused nos. 2 & 3. In misc. appeal no. 299/2001 filed
     before Hon’ble High Court of Orissa, accused no. 1 has
     attacked my character, without any affidavit of the parties.
     In para-4, he has given false informations regarding
     agreement made with “Aradhana Property Development Pvt.

                                    9
      Ltd.”. Similarly the facts mentioned in para-5, 6, 7 & 8 are
      all false which are derogatory to my character as a practising
      Advocate of the Bar. Accused no. 2 also has filed an affidavit
      before Board of Revenue in OSS Case No. 1836/03 along
      with 28 other cases and the said affidavit has been marked
      as “Annexure 4” before the Hon’ble H.C. in W.P.(C) No.
      14783/05. The para-3 of that petition is blatantly false,
      fabricated and designed which clearly reveals my name. The
      damaging paras are from para 3 to 7. All the relevant
      documents have been filed (xerox copies) in this court today.
      The accused no. 3 filed a petition u/o 6 R 17, before
      CJ(S.D.), BBSR in Title Suit no. 29/02 using derogatory
      words against me in para 13 (b) to (e) in proposed
      amendment. It is stated that for my illegal gain, I have
      falsely manipulated the documents being the mastermind in
      connivance with one Tapan Kr. Mohanty. All these are
      drafted by accused no. 1. I enrolled in 1961. By this
      publication, I lost my prestige, dignity and unable to
      maintain prestige against the public. My family members
      were also shocked and ashamed. I am now working as
      President of All Orissa Revenue Court Bar.”
6.             Basing on the averments made in the complaint petition
and the initial deposition as well as the enquiry conducted under
Section 202 Cr.P.C., the learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar has passed
the impugned order taking cognizance of the offences against the
petitioners in both the Crl. Misc. Cases and the other accused persons
and issuing process.
7.             Mr. R.K. Mohanty, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the petitioner (Shri Bhakta Hari Mohanty, Advocate) in CRLMC No.
1045 of 2008 contended that from the above scenario, it is apparent
that the petitioner (Shri Bhakta Hari Mohanty, Advocate) appeared in
several cases on behalf of the plaintiff in C.S. No. 29 of 2002 as a legal
practitioner and the statements made in the affidavits and the
pleadings      of the   parties  concerned   have   been   supported    by
verifications/affidavits by the concerned party.     Thus, the petitioner

                                   10
has not exposed any thing, which can be imputed personally upon him.
He further submitted that the alleged statements stated to be
defamatory have been made in the pleadings and affidavits, which are
part of the judicial records and the same cannot come under the
definition of “Defamation”. As the petitioner appeared as an Advocate,
no personal liability can be attributed to him from the statements made
in the pleadings/affidavits of the parties.   He further urged that the
complainant except citing different portions of the pleadings and
affidavits has made no prima facie allegation with regard to the
personal involvement of the petitioner-Shri Bhakta Hari Mohanty,
Advocate and such step has been taken by the complainant to dissuade
Shri Bhakta Hari Mohanty from appearing in the litigation between the
parties as an Advocate and no offence whatsoever is made out in the
complaint petition against the petitioner Shri Bhakta Hari Mohanty.
8.           Learned counsel for the opp. parties in these Crl. Misc.
Cases, on the contrary, contended that after recording the initial
statement of the complainant, the learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar
conducted an enquiry under Section 202 Cr.P.C. and only thereafter
being satisfied about the existence of a prima facie case with regard to
commission of the offences under Sections 500/203/205 I.P.C. has
taken cognizance of the said offences and directed issuance of process
to the accused persons.      Learned counsel for the opp. parties also
brought to the notice of this Court the averments made in various
pleadings and affidavits, which have been stated in the complaint
petition, as quoted above, in support of his contentions that the

                                      11
petitioner (Shri Bhakta Hari Mohanty) in course of argument of the
misc. appeal as well as hearing of the other applications made
derogatory and defamatory submission against the complainant. Such
defamatory submission has been recorded in paragraph-6 of the
judgment passed in Misc. Appeal No. 299 of 2001 which has been
reported in 2002 (I) OLR 52, the relevant portion of which is as follows:
              “…….. On the other hand, Shri Mohanty argued with
     vehemence that Sri Swain, learned counsel for the defendant-
     respondent nos. 1 and 2 was the brain behind to fabricate the
     documents with a view to grab the suit property inasmuch as he
     has executed the sale deeds as power-of-attorney holder of late
     Tilotama Samal stated to be his natural mother and had obtained
     the death certificate of Tilotama Samal from Cuttack Municipality
     after a long lapse of time. It was also alleged that orders of some
     authorities have been interpolated to show that Tilotama Samal
     was resident of Diha Balarampur under Patkura police station and
     not a resident of village Damana or Chandrasekharpur under
     Chandrasekharpur police station …………”
9.            On the other hand, Shri Mohanty argued that Shri Bishnu
Charan Swain, the counsel who was appearing for the defendants-
respondents 1 and 2 was the brain behind the fabricated documents
with a view to grab the suit property.        Various case laws have been
relied upon by Mr. R.K. Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner as well as Mr. Baug, learned counsel appearing for the opp.
parties. .
10.           Before considering the rival contentions of the learned
counsel for the respective parties, it would be appropriate to refer to the
relevant exceptions to the definition of defamation as given in Section
499 IPC. 8th and 9th exceptions to Section 499 IPC refer to accusation
made in good faith against any person, to any of those, who have lawful
authority over that person with respect to the subject matter of

                                    12
accusation and with respect to imputation on the character of another,
provided that the imputation is made in good faith for the protection of
interests of the person making it, or of any other person, or for the
public good.   No action of libel or slander lies whether against the
Judges, counsel, witnesses or parties, for words written or spoken in
the course of any proceedings, before any court recognized by law, and
this though the words written or spoken were written or spoken
maliciously, without any justification or excuse, and from personal ill-
will and anger against the person defamed. As such words written or
spoken in the course of any proceeding are in good faith. (See Royal
Aquarium etc. v. Parkinson (1892) 1 QB 43, 451).
11.          The English Law with regard to a criminal action against
the Advocate for defamatory words spoken during the course of a
judicial proceeding is well settled that no action lies against an
Advocate for defamatory words spoken with reference to and in course
of an inquiry before a judicial Tribunal, although they are uttered by he
Advocate maliciously, and not with the object of supporting the case of
his client and are uttered without any justification or even excuse and
from personal ill-will and anger towards the person defamed, arising
out of a previously existing cause and are irrelevant to every issue of
fact which is contested before the said judicial Tribunal. This was held
in the case of Munster v. Lamb, (1883) 11 QBD 588. Counsel’s words
are absolutely privileged, although he may have exceeded his
instructions. This was held in the case of The Queen v. Kierman,
(1855) 5 lr CLR 171. The Madras High Court and the Bombay High

                                     13
Court are of the view that an Advocate cannot be proceeded against
either civilly or criminally for words uttered in his office as Advocate. He
has fullest liberty of speech in the course of a trial before a judicial
Tribunal so long as his language is justified by his instructions or by
the evidence or by the proceedings on the record. Mere fact that his
words are defamatory or that they ultimately turn out to be absolutely
devoid of all solid foundation would not make him responsible nor
render him liable in any civil or criminal proceedings. (See (1886) ILR
10 Mad 28 (FB) and (1899) 2 Bom. LR 3 (FB). The Patna High Court in
the case of Maharaj Kumar Jagat Mohan Nath Sah Deo v.
Kalipada Ghosh, (1992) ILR 1 Pat 371 has expressed similar view as
the Madras and Bombay High Courts. The Allahabad High Court also
was of the same view in Sheodatt Sharma v. Ram Swarup Sastry,
ILR (1945) All 702.
12.           With regard to pleadings and affidavits also, it has been
expressed in several decisions in no uncertain terms, that, no action
lies against a man for a statement made in a pleadings or affidavit in
course of a judicial proceeding, of defamation, even if such statements
are alleged to have been made maliciously and without any reasonable
or probable cause. However, where affidavits contain scandalous
matter, the court has jurisdiction to direct for expunging the same.
13.           Keeping the above in view, this Court, proceeding to
examine the relevant portions of the averments made in the appeal
memo, affidavit and amendment petition which are alleged in the
complaint petition to be defamatory, finds that all the said averments,

                                   14
which are alleged to be defamatory by the complainant have been
stated in connection with the claim of the party making such
averments in the pleadings, more so, when the complainant has been
impleaded as a party in the said case, i.e., C.S. No.29 of 2002.
14.          Over and above the fact that the said statements have been
made in various pleadings filed on behalf of the accused Nos.2 and 3 in
different proceedings, who were represented by the accused No.1 as
their advocate, a perusal of the said pleadings and statements do not
prima facie show that the same is defamatory and appears to have been
made in good faith with regard to the subject matter of dispute in the
said proceedings. It further appears that except the vague allegation of
the complainant and the witnesses that when the accused No.1 was
putting forth the case of his client before this Court or the civil court or
revenue court in course of argument, uttered such words, by which the
prestige of the complainant has been lowered in the estimation of the
public, no case of defamation prima facie appears to have been made
out against the petitioners in the above two Criminal Misc. Cases, who
are the accused persons in the complaint case.
15.          With regard to exercise of inherent power of this Court
under Section 482 Cr. P.C., it is now well settled that an order taking
cognizance of any offence or issuing process, where absolutely no prima
facie case is made out against the accused persons, amounts to abuse
of the process of law and should be nipped at the bud, as otherwise the
same would tantamount to abuse of the process of the court.

                                      15
16.           The Supreme Court, in the case of M/s. PEPSI Foods
Limited v. Special Judicial Magistrate and others, AIR 1998 SC
128 has expressed its view that summoning of an accused in a criminal
case is a serious matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion, as a
matter of course.     It is not that the complainant has to bring only two
witnesses to support his allegation in the complaint to have the
criminal law set into motion. The order of the Magistrate summoning
the accused must reflect that he has applied his mind to the facts of
the case and the law applicable thereto. He has to examine the nature
of the allegation made in the complaint and the evidence both oral and
documentary in support thereof and would that be sufficient for the
complainant to succeed in bringing the charge home against              the
accused.   (emphasis supplied)
17.           Applying the above principle to the facts of the present
case, this Court is of the view that the learned court below, while
passing the order in the complaint petition on 27.03.2008 taking
cognizance of the offences under Sections 500/203/205 IPC and
issuing process to the accused persons (petitioners in the above
Criminal Misc. Cases) has not applied his judicial mind to the facts of
the case and materials before him. Even if the said materials are
considered, this Court finds that there is absolutely no case made out
by the complainant with regard to commission of the above offences by
the accused persons and if the impugned order dated 27.03.2008
passed by the learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar in I.C.C. No.2985 of

                                     16
 2007 is not quashed, the same will amount to abuse of the process of
 law as well as process of the Court.
 18.          In the result, therefore, the order dated 27.03.2008 passed
 in the aforesaid complaint case filed by the opposite party, taking
 cognizance of the offence as stated above and issuing process against
 the petitioners stands quashed. As a consequence, I.C.C. No.2985 of
 2007 also stands quashed.
              The Criminal Misc. Cases are accordingly allowed.
                                            …………………..
                                              M.M. Das, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
Dated the 15th November, 2012/Kkb/Bks.


