                                 ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK.
                                    R.S.A. No. 423         OF 2010
                From a judgment and decree dated 24.11.2010 and 25.11.2010
                respectively passed by Shri D. Chaulia, learned District Judge,
                Puri passed in RFA No. 128 of 2009 confirming                   the order
                dated 5.12.2009 passed by Shri R.L. Panda, learned Civil
                Judge (Senior Division), Puri in C.S. No.527 of 2009.
                                            -----------
                Bijan Kishore Mohanty                              ……          Appellant
                                             -Versus-
                Smt. Kanakalata Das @ Mohanty
                and two others                                 ……           Respondents.
                          For appellant      : M/s.R.K.Mohanty, D.K.Mohanty,
                                                      Sangita Mohanty, D.Veradwaj,
                                                      S.Mohanty, P.Jena, A.Mohanty,
                                                      B.K.Mohanty, Sumitra Mohanty &
                                                      S.N.Biswal.
                          For respondents:        M/s. P.K.Rath, P.K. Satapathy,
                                                        R.N.Parija, A.K.Rout and
                                                        D.Pattanaik.
                                        ------------------------------------
                                    Date of Judgment: 12.09.2011
                                         ------------------------------------
             PRESENT :
                            THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M.M. DAS
M. M. DAS, J.               The plaintiff-appellant has filed this appeal challenging
             the concurrent judgments passed by the learned courts below
             rejecting the plaint under Order – VII, Rule – 11 C.P.C. on the ground
             that the plaintiff’s suit does not disclose a right in him to sue and is
             tainted with an illusory cause of action.
             2.             The plaintiff filed the suit, being, C.S. No.527 of 2009,
             before the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division), Puri for declaration of

                                   2
his contingent interest over the suit property and for permanent
injunction restraining the defendant no.1 from alienating the suit
property either herself or through her agent. The plaintiff is the son of
the defendant no.1 (mother). The defendant no.1 inherited the suit
property from her parents by way of succession. According to the
plaintiff, the defendant no.1 is not in a fit mental condition to deal
with the suit property, as she is easily influenced and has no
independent thought because of her illness. Taking advantage of such
situation, the defendant no.2, who is the younger brother of the father
of the plaintiff, has got a Power of Attorney executed by the defendant
no.1 in favour of the defendant no.3.
3.              After appearance of the defendants, an application was
filed by them under Order – VII, Rule – 11 C.P.C. for rejection of the
plaint on the ground that the plaintiff has got no semblance of right,
title and interest or possession over the suit property. The defendant
no.1 succeeded to the suit properties, which belonged to her mother
and after the death of her mother, it has been recorded in the name of
the defendant no.1
4.              The   learned  trial  court,  upon    hearing   the  said
application, by his order dated 05.12.2009, came to the conclusion
that as admitted by the plaintiff, the defendant no.1 is the full owner
of the suit properties and, thus, the plaintiff can only lay claim on the
said properties after the demise of his mother – defendant no.1, but
so long as she is alive, the plaintiff has no existing right and hence,

                                    3
the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the suit during the life time
of the defendant no.1 claiming any right, title and interest on her
property and rejected the plaint under Order VII, Rule 11(a) C.P.C.
               Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order of the learned
trial court, the appellant preferred R.F.A. No. 128 of 2009 before the
learned District Judge, Puri.
5.             The learned lower appellate court on perusing the
pleadings in the plaint and on analyzing the provisions of Order – VII,
Rule – 11 C.P.C. and relying upon various decisions of the apex
Court, endorsed the findings of the learned trial court confirming the
same.
6.             The Second Appeal has been admitted on the following
substantial questions of law:-
               (I)   Whether the learned courts below have acted
                    contrary to law in rejecting the plaint filed by the
                    appellant under Order – VII, Rule – 11 (a) C.P.C.
                    holding that the plaint does not disclose the
                    cause of action by construing the plaintiff’s suit
                    as a suit on speculative succession without
                    considering the plaint averments made in
                    paragraph – 3 of the plaint to the effect that the
                    defendant no.1 did not have the stability of mind
                    to execute the Power of Attorney, which aspect,
                    if would have been proved factually in the suit,
                    would have nullified all actions of the Power of
                    Attorney Holder, defendant no.3, who is
                    respondent no.3, herein ?
               (II) Whether the plaintiff under law can maintain a
                    suit on a contingent interest which is
                    conceptually different from a speculative
                    succession and where allegation of fraud has
                    been made ?

                                   4
7.             Mr. R.K. Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for the
appellant submitted that an application has been filed by the plaintiff
for amending the plaint, during the pendency of the Second Appeal,
for introducing a prayer in the plaint to declare the Power of Attorney
executed by the defendant no.1 in favour of the defendant no.3 as a
void document. He further submitted that Order – VII, Rule – 11 (a)
C.P.C. though provides that a plaint shall be rejected, where it does
not disclose a cause of action, but a bare reading of the plaint filed by
the appellant would go to show that at this stage, the learned courts
below could not have held that the plaintiff had no cause of action to
file the suit. Mr. Mohanty further submitted that the question,
whether the plaintiff had any cause of action or not, was to be
determined on the evidence adduced by the parties during trial of the
suit. The plaintiff has disclosed the cause of action in paragraph – 5 of
the plaint by stating that the cause of action for the suit arose on
03.11.2009, when the defendants planned to dispose of the suit land
through the agent and it could come to the notice of the plaintiff,
within the local limits of the court. It was also submitted that “cause
of action” under law, means a bundle of facts, which give occasion to
form the foundation of the suit and it is well settled in law that cause
of action can be deciphered from the entire reading of the plaint and it
is the substance and not merely the form that has to be looked into.
According to Mr. Mohanty, the pleading has to be construed, as it

                                   5
stands without addition or subtraction of words or change of its
apparent grammatical sense. It is not permissible to cull out a
sentence or a passage and to read it, out of context in isolation. For
the above contentions, Mr. Mohanty took support of the decisions in
the case of Sidramappa v. Rajashetty and others, AIR 1970 SC
1059, Smt. Puspa Devi v. the Commissioner of Income Tax, New
Delhi, AIR 1977 SC 2230 and Hardesh Ores (P) Ltd. v. Hede &
Company, 2007 (II) OLR (SC) 613.
8.             It was also contended by Mr. Mohanty that in the
instant case, a composite reading of the plaint would disclose that the
plaintiff has alleged that her mother, defendant no.1 is not in a fit
mental condition to deal with disposal of her property, as she is easily
influenced because of her illness. The above assertion in the plaint is
required to be proved during trial of the suit, if the defendants do not
admit the same. Thus, a factual adjudication is necessary to find out
the mental capacity of defendant no.1 with regard to disposal of her
properties and the plaintiff has every right to protect such property
over which, he has a contingent interest. Hence, the learned courts
below should not have thrown out the plaintiff from the precinct of
the court by rejecting the plaint at the threshold.
9.             With regard to contingent interest of the plaintiff, Mr.
Mohanty submitted that such an interest can be declared in a suit
along with the relief of permanent injunction. In support of his
contention, he also relied upon the decisions in the case of Sashi

                                  6
Kantha Acharjee and others v. Pramode Chandra Roy and
others, AIR 1932 Calcutta 600 and Tarak Chandra Das and
another v. Anukul Chandra Mukherjee , AIR 1946 Calcutta 118.
10.            Mr. P.K. Rath, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents, on the contrary, submitted that the only question to be
dealt with in the present appeal is, as to whether the learned courts
below have committed any error of law in rejecting the plaint on the
ground that the plaintiff has no cause of action to file the suit and in
this context, it is required to be examined as to whether the
contention advanced by the appellant that he has a contingent
interest over the suit properties and is entitled to a declaration
thereon, can be accepted ? Mr. Rath contended that admittedly the
defendant no.1 has inherited the property by succession, and,
therefore, in view of Section 14 of the Hindu Succession Act, she is
the only absolute owner having right to deal with the properties in the
manner she likes. He took support of Section 30 of the Hindu
Succession Act for his contention that a Hindu can dispose of his/her
properties by Will or other testamentary disposition, which is capable
of being so disposed of by him/her in accordance with law which is
applicable to Hindus. After the Hindu Succession Act came into force,
the concept of reversionary right has been given a go-bye and thus,
the plaintiff cannot claim any such right. Mr. Rath also contended
that the question of contingent interest is not recognized by the Hindu
Succession Act, 1956, which by itself is a codified law governing

                                     7
succession to property by a Hindu. Succession under the Mitakshyara
School of Hindu Law opens only upon the death of a male or female
Hindu dying intestate and during the life time of the absolute owner
of such properties even his or her legal heirs cannot claim any right
over the same anticipating the death of such person and future
succession.
11.             The Transfer of Property Act deals with “vested interest”
and “contingent interest”. Section 19 of the said Act is the provision
governing “vested interest”. The said provision may not be referred to
in the present case, as admittedly, the plaintiff does not claim a
“vested interest” over     the suit property. Section 21 of the said Act
deals with “contingent interest” which is as follows:-
              “21. Contingent interest.- Where, on a transfer of
              property an interest therein is created in favour of a
              person to take effect only on the happening of a
              specified uncertain event, or if a specified uncertain
              event shall not happen, such person thereby
              acquires a contingent interest in the property. Such
              interest becomes vested interest in the former case,
              on the happening of the event; in the latter, when
              the happening of the event becomes impossible.
              Exception.- Where, under a transfer of property, a
              person becomes entitled to an interest therein upon
              attaining a particular age, and the transferor also
              gives to him absolutely the income to arise from
              such interest before he reaches that age, or directs
              the income, or so much thereof as may be
              necessary, to be applied for his benefit, such
              interest is not contingent”.
               “Contingent interest” is also provided in section
120 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 which is as follows:-
              “120. Date of vesting when legacy contingent
              upon specified uncertain event.- (1) A legacy
              bequeathed in      case a specified uncertain event

                                     8
              shall happen does not vest until that event
              happens.
              (2)     A legacy bequeathed in case a specified
              uncertain event shall not happen does not vest until
              the happening of that event becomes impossible.
              (3) In either case, until the condition has been
              fulfilled, the interest of the legatee is called
              contingent.
              Exception:- Where a fund is bequeathed to any
              person upon his attaining a particular age, and the
              Will also gives to him absolutely the income to arise
              from the fund before he reaches that age, or directs
              the income, or so much of it as may be necessary,
              to be applied for his benefit, the bequest of the fund
              is not contingent”.
         Section 21 of the Transfer of Property Act can only be made
 applicable where there is a transfer of property. Section 120 of the
 Indian Succession Act occurs in part-VI of the said Act, which deals
 with testamentary succession and such a succession is not claimed
 by the plaintiff.
12.             In the case of T. Arivandandam v. T. V. Satyapal
and anther, AIR 1977 SC 2421, it was laid down that on a bare
reading of the plaint, if the Court finds that the plaint is manifestly
vexatious and meritless in the sense not disclosing a clear right to
sue, the Court can exercise power under Order – VII, Rule – 11 C.P.C.
and reject the plaint.
13.             Considering the rival contentions of the parties and on
perusal of the case laws relied upon by the learned counsel for the
respective parties, this Court comes to the conclusion that it is well
settled by the apex Court that for rejecting a plaint under Order – VII,
Rule – 11 C.P.C. only the averments of the plaint are to be gone into

                                  9
and the Court has to ensure that meaningless litigations, which are
otherwise bound to prove abortive, should not be permitted to occupy
the judicial time of the Court. In the above background, it is to be
examined whether the plaint in the instant case does disclose any
cause of action, which is solely based on the ground that the plaintiff
has a contingent interest over the suit properties.
14.            With regard to the contention of Mr. Mohanty, learned
counsel for the appellant that there are allegations in the plaint that
the defendant no.1 (mother of the plaintiff) is ill and not in a fit
condition of mind to deal with her properties and such allegations can
only be proved during the trial of the suit, besides cause of action
connotes a bundle facts and the plaint should not be thrown out on
the ground that the plaintiff has no cause of action to bring the suit,
this Court finds that if from perusal of the plaint itself it is seen that
the plaintiff has absolutely no interest over the suit properties, even
if, the plaintiff has alleged some facts to be existing, which are
required to be proved during the trial of the suit, the plaint can be
rejected under Order – VII, Rule – 11(a) C.P.C. for want of cause of
action.
15.            With regard to the contention of the appellant that the
appellant has a contingent interest over the disputed properties,
which can be declared in the suit for which, the appellant has relied
upon the decisions of the Calcutta High Court in the case of Sashi
Kantha Acharjee and others (supra) and Tarak Chandra Das and
another (supra), it is found that in the case of Sashi Kantha Acharjee
and others (supra), the Calcutta High Court was considering the

                                   10
question of dealing with the properties under a “Will”. The Calcutta
High Court in the said case held that reversioners under the Hindu
law are expectant heirs with a spes successionis. The ratio of the
said decision, therefore, cannot be made applicable to the facts of the
present case, where the plaintiff does not claim as a reversioner, more
so, both the aforesaid cases were decided much prior to the Hindu
Succession Act came into force, which does not recognize the right of
the reversioners. The said decisions also do not deal with the question
of contingent interest. This Court, therefore, while accepting the
contention   of  Mr.   Rath,    learned    counsel   appearing    for   the
respondents, comes to the conclusion that as held by the learned
courts below, the suit filed by the plaintiff is based on speculative
succession and it cannot be said that the plaintiff has a contingent
interest in the suit property, as envisaged under Section 21 of the
Transfer of Property Act nor any interest over the said properties,
which admittedly is the absolute property of the defendant no.1 and
thus, as held by the learned courts below, the appellant           had no
cause of action on the date of filing of the suit to bring the suit for the
reliefs claimed. I, therefore, find no error in the judgments of the
learned courts below.
16.            In the result, the appeal, being devoid of merit, is
dismissed, but in the circumstances without cost.
                                             ……………………
                                                M.M. Das, J.
Orissa High Court,Cuttack
September 12th,2011/Biswal.


