                                  ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
                                    CRLMC         NO. 816 OF         2008
           In the matter of an application under section 482 of the Code
           of Criminal Procedure.
                                                 -------------
           Rohit Kumar That                                         ……          Petitioner
                                              -Versus-
           State of Orissa and another                              ……          Opp. Parties
                        For Petitioner          :    Mr. P.K.Mishra & S.K.Dash.
                       For Opp. Parties :            Addl. Standing Counsel
                                                                 (for O.P.No.1)
                                                     M/s. Anirudha Das, G.P.Panda,
                                                              Dillip Kumar Samal,
                                                             Amarendra Das & A.Das.
                                                             (for O.P. No. 2)
                                                    -----------------------
                                          Decided on          29.01.2010.
                                                    --------------------------
           PRESENT:
                                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M. M. DAS
           ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
M.M. Das, J.                    This application under section 482 Cr.P.C. has
           been filed by the petitioner seeking quashing of the order dated
           12.5.2004 passed by the learned S.D.J.M., Dhenkanal in I.C.C.
           No. 129 of 2002 issuing process against the petitioner as well as
           for quashing of the said complaint case. On 12.7.2002, one Manoj
           Kumar        Moharana         lodged      an    F.I.R.     making       allegation      of
           commission of offence under sections 341/323/294 IPC against

                                   2
one Bishnu Moharana which was registered under the said
sections of the Indian Penal Code. The petitioner was the
Investigating Office, who was posted as Officer-in-Charge of
Motanga Police Station. In order to apprehend the said accused
Bishnu Moharana, he went to the house of the opp. party no. 2 on
the alleged date of occurrence and searched for him. It is the case
of the petitioner that the opp. party no. 2 and his family members
did not cooperate with him and rather, tried to misbehave with the
petitioner and other police personnel accompanying him. The opp.
party no. 2 lodged the complaint petition being I.C.C. No. 129 of
2002 before the learned S.D.J.M., Dhenkanal on 29.9.2002
against the petitioner as accused alleging commission of offence
under sections 294/323/427/448/457/500/504/34 IPC. In the
complaint petition, it was alleged by the complainant - opp. party
no. 2 that on 22.9.2002 at about mid-night, the accused along
with 4 to 5 persons entered inside the boundary of the house of
the complainant and knocked the door uttering abusive language
as mentioned in the complaint petition. On the complainant
asking them regarding their identity, they did not disclose their
names and identity. On the other hand, the accused persons
abused the complainant. Apprehending danger to the life and
property, the complainant did not open the entrance door of his
house. Thereafter, the accused along with others broke upon the

                                  3
entrance door of the house of the complainant and entered inside
his house and searched for his son, namely, Bishnu Moharana.
The complainant and his wife told the accused persons that their
son is staying at Dhenkanal. Being vexed with the reply, the
petitioner accused pushed the complainant as a consequence of
which he fell down on the ground and thereafter the petitioner
pulled his wife by holding her blouse in one hand and the blouse
of his wife was torn and her modesty was out-raged. It has been
further stated in the complaint petition that at that point of time,
neither the accused no. 1 nor the unknown accused persons were
in their uniform. The petitioner-accused also broke one Television
set of the complainant by throwing the same from its stand
thereby causing a loss of Rs.11,999/-          to the complainant.
Entering into the house of the complainant forcibly cannot be
construed to be a part of the duty of the accused-petitioner.
2.               After recording the initial deposition, the learned
court below directed an enquiry under section 202 Cr.P.C.
Thereupon, an enquiry under section 202 Cr.P.C. was conducted.
The complainant produced one witness during such enquiry. The
learned S.D.J.M. on 12.5.2004 recorded an order issuing process
as follows:-
                      “Advocate for the complt. is present.
                Perused the complt. petition, initial
                statement of the complt.’s evidence
                u/s.202 Cr.P.C. and found that there is a

                                   4
                case under Section 323/447/448/504/34
                IPC and cog. is taken thereunder. Issue
                summons to accused fixing 24.7.04 for
                appearance. Complt. to take steps within
                3 days.”
3.              In the initial deposition, the complainant has not
stated anything with regard to the offence of out-raging the
modesty of his wife or the mis-behaviour of the petitioner as
alleged in the complaint petition. The wife of the complainant
examined    during   the   enquiry   under    section 202   Cr.P.C.
corroborated the statement of the complainant.
4.              Mr. P.K. Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner
vehemently urged that no such incident, as alleged, took place
and the petitioner in course of investigation of the F.I.R. lodged
against Bishnu Moharana, the son of the opp. party no. 2 went to
the house of the complainant to search for the said accused. This
action on the part of the petitioner being in course of his official
duty cannot be construed to be an offence. He further submitted
that there being absence of sanction under section 197 Cr.P.C., a
prosecution would not lie against the petitioner, who is a public
servant. Mr. Mishra has relied upon several case laws in support
of his contention.
5.              Mr. A. Das, learned counsel for the opp. party
no. 2, on the contrary, submitted that protection under section

                                   5
197 Cr.P.C. is available to a public servant only when the alleged
act done by the public servant was reasonably connected with
discharge of his official duty and was not merely a cloak for doing
the objectionable act. Mr. Das also relied upon various decisions
in support of his contention.
6.              In the case of Matajog Dobey v. H.C. Bhari, A.I.R.
1956 SC 44, the Constitution Bench held that whether sanction is
to be accorded or not is a matter for the Government to consider.
The absolute power to accord or withhold sanction conferred on
the Government is irrelevant and foreign to the duty cast on the
Court which is the ascertainment of the true nature of the act. In
this respect the Court has to see whether it can take cognizance of
the case without previous sanction and for this purpose, the Court
has to find out if the act complained against is committed by the
accused while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of
official duty. Once this is settled, the case proceeds or is thrown
out. The Supreme Court further held that the office alleged to have
been committed must have something to do or must be related in
some manner, with the discharge of official duty and no question
of sanction can arise under section 197 unless the act complained
of is an offence; the only point to determine is whether it was
committed in the discharge of official duty. There must be a
reasonable connection between the act and the official duty.      It

                                  6
does not matter even if the act exceeds what is strictly necessary
for the discharge of the duty, as this question will arise only at a
later stage when the trial proceeds on the merits. What the Court
must find out is whether the act and the official duty are so inter-
related that one can postulate reasonably that it was done by the
accused in the performance of the official duty, though possibly in
excess of the needs and requirements of the situation.
                                                            (emphasis
supplied).
7.              The Supreme Court on discussing the decision of
the Federal Court   reported in 1944 F.C. 66 held that the test laid
down in the said case that it must be established that the act
complained of was an official act  appears unduly to narrow down
the scope of the protection afforded by section 197 Cr.P.C. as
defined and understood in AIR 1939 F.C. 43. In the case of Hori
Ram Singh v. The Crown, 1939 FCR 159, it has been observed
as follows:-
                “The section cannot be confined to only
              such acts as are done by a public servant
              directly in pursuance of his public office,
              though in excess of the duty or under a
              mistaken belief as to the existence of such
              duty. Nor is it necessary to go to the length
              of saying that the act constituting the
              offence should be so inseparably connected
              with the official duty as to form part and
              parcel of the same transaction.”

                                  7
               In the case of State of Bihar v. Kamal Prasad
Singh and others, AIR 1998 SC 2379, there was an allegation
that on 30.3.1982, the police party headed by the accused raided
the house of the complainant without a search warrant and
respondent nos. 2 to 4 in the said case assaulted her wife and
abused her and other inmates. The Supreme Court held that in
the facts of the case, no cognizance could be taken without a
proper sanction from the Government. In the case of Abdul
Wahab Ansari v. State of Bihar and another, AIR 2000 SC
3187, which was a case under section 302 and other sections of
the Indian Penal Code, where allegation was made that during the
course of magisterial duty, the accused gave orders of firing
without authority and in the said process one person died and
two were seriously injured, the Supreme Court held that the
Legislative mandate engrafted in sub-section (1) of section 197
debars a court from taking cognizance of an offence except with a
previous sanction where the acts complained of are alleged to have
been committed by a police servant in discharge of his official duty
or purporting to be in the discharge of his official duty and such
public servant is not removable from his office save by or with the
sanction of the Government. The question of applicability of
section 197 Cr.P.C. and the consequential ouster of jurisdiction of

                                    8
the court to take cognizance without a valid sanction is genetically
different from prima facie constitution of offence alleged.
                 In Rizwan Ahmed Javed Shaikh and others v.
Jammal Patel and others, AIR 2001 SC 2198, the Supreme
Court reiterated the position with regard to the test to be applied
to attract the applicability of section 197 (3) Cr.P.C. The facts of
the case in the decision rendered in the case of Sri Satyabadi
Padhi v. Nepal Chandra Kar and others, 2001 (I)OLR 238 are
also similar to the facts of the present case, where the Court relied
upon various earlier decisions of this Court, more specifically, on
the decision of Kremjit Mohananda v. Mohanpani Karua and
another, 1995 (II) OLR 284 in which it was held that a middle
line which is adopted to find out whether the protection under
section 197 Cr. P.C. would be available to the accused or not is
that it is not every offence committed by a public servant         in
course of    performance of his official duty entitles    him to the
protection under section 197 Cr.P.C. but what comes under the
protective umbrella is an act constituting an offence which directly
or reasonably connects with his official duty. Protection of section
197 Cr.P.C. does not extend to acts done purely in a private
capacity by a public servant and the allegation so made might be
in excess of performance of official duty, but cannot be said to be

                                    9
totally unconnected with the official duty or cannot be held to be
in non-performance of his official duty.
8.                Since the position of law, as stated above, is well
settled with regard to the protection available under section 197
Cr.P.C., applying the same to the facts of the present case, it
would be seen that on almost similar set of facts as are involved in
the present case and similar nature of allegations, this Court in
the case of Sri Satyabadi Padhi (supra) held that the petitioner
therein is entitled to the protective umbrella under section 197
Cr. P.C. and the requirement of obtaining sanction for his
prosecution being mandatory and admittedly, no sanction having
been obtained, the order of cognizance, which was challenged in
the said case was held to be bad in law and was set aside.
9.                On close scrutiny of the facts of the present case
also, it would appear that the petitioner, while performing his
official duty of investigating a criminal case on an F.I.R. disclosing
cognizable offence, went to the house of the complainant in search
of the accused named in the said F.I.R. There are allegations of
committing acts which exceed such official duty but it cannot be
ruled out that it had no nexus to the performance of the official
duty of the petitioner.
10.               In view of the above, there was a mandatory
requirement of obtaining sanction under section 197 Cr.P.C.

                                    10
which admittedly, has not been obtained and, therefore, the order
of cognizance taken by the court below is not sustainable in the
eye of law. Accordingly, the impugned order of cognizance and
issuing process to the petitioner by the learned S.D.J.M.,
Dhenkanal in I.C.C. Case No. 129 of 2002 passed on 12.5.2004 is
set aside and the complaint case is quashed in its entirety.
11.             In the result, the CRLMC is allowed.
                                       ………………………
                                          M.M. Das, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
January 29th ,2010/Biswal.


