                                  ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
                                        C.R.P. NO. 52 OF 2005
             From an order dated 16.9.2005 passed by Shri C.R. Dash, learned
             District Judge, Ganjam-Gajapati, Berhampur in C.S. No. 2 of 2005.
                                                    ------------
             Sri Sangram Mudali & another                            ……         Petitioners
                                                -versus-
             Dr. Sukant Mohapatra and others                        ……        Opp. Parties.
                             For Petitioners      :    M/s. S.P.Mishra, Sr. Advocate,
                                                                B.D. Baug, S.Mishra,
                                                                S.Dash, S.Nanda,
                                                                B.S. Panigrahi &
                                                                A. Mukherjee.
                           For Opp. parties          : M/s. R.K. Mohanty, Sr. Advocate,
                                                                D.K. Mohanty, A.P. Bose,
                                                                S.N. Biswal, P.K.Samantaray,
                                                                S.K.Mohanty & M.R.Dash
                                                                  (For O.Ps 1, 2 & 5).
                                                        M/s. S.D.Das, Sr. Advocate,
                                                                D.P. Dash, B.K.Mishra,
                                                                S.K. Barik & D.R. Swain
                                                                   (For O.Ps 3 & 4 )
                                                        M/s. B.D.Pradhan,
                                                                O.P. Mohanty, S.Mohapatra &
                                                                Mrs. D.Mishra.
                                                         ------------------
                                            Decided on             23.02.2013.
                                                       -------------------
             PRESENT:
                                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M. M. DAS
             --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
M.M. DAS, J.                        This Civil Revision has been filed against the order
             dated 16.09.2005 passed by the learned District Judge, Ganjam-

                               2
Gajapati, Berhampur in C.S. No.2 of 2005, by which the learned
District Judge granted leave to the plaintiffs to file the suit under
Section 92 C.P.C.
2.           It appears that the opposite parties filed an application
for leave/permission under Section 92 (1) C.P.C. to file the proposed
suit, plaint of which was enclosed to the application for leave. The
learned District Judge, by the impugned order, having granted such
leave to file the suit, the defendants – opposite parties in the said
suit/leave application, have preferred the present Civil Revision.
3.           Facts exposit that the opposite parties 1 and 2 as
plaintiffs, have instituted the suit before the learned District Judge,
registered as C.S. No.2 of 2005, for a declaration that the plaintiff
No.2, who is the opposite party No.1 herein, is the founder/creator of
the trust, i.e., the S.M. Charitable Educational Trust, which is the
plaintiff No.1 and he is the perpetual Chairman of the trust and the
Board of Governors of National Institute of Science and Technology
(for short, called as “ NIST”); for a further decree, directing
dispossession of the defendants from all movables and immovable
properties of the trust and to appoint a receiver/administrator to take
charge of the suit institution and its properties, manage the same till
a new Board is formed by the Court, and for a further declaration that
the Board of Trustees and Board of Governors framed in resolution
taken in the 39th Meeting of the trust dated 29.07.2005, are contrary

                               3
to law and void. It was further prayed in the plaint to direct the
defendants 1 to 3 to submit a detailed account of the trust and NIST,
which    is  to  be   operated  by  the  plaintiff  or  his   authorized
representative    along   with   consequential   relief of    permanent
injunction. The plaintiffs’ claimed that the plaintiff No.2 (opposite
party No.1 herein) - Dr. Sukanta Mohapatra is the author of the trust
named as S.M. Charitable Education Trust, i.e., plaintiff No.1. His
wife is the plaintiff No.3, whose father, mother and the brother are
defendants 3, 4 and 1 respectively and the defendant No.2 is the wife
of the defendant No.1. The Plaintiffs 2 and 3 are staying in United
States of America since long and are Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) in
status. They had the cherished ambition to promote social, cultural,
economic, educational and scientific awareness among the people of
Odisha. In order to materialize such ambition, the plaintiff No.2
created the trust and for management and control of the trust
property, a Board was constituted with five members with the plaintiff
No.2 as Chairman and plaintiff No.3 along with the defendants 1 to 3
as members. With a view to translate the objective of the trust, NIST
at Berhampur was established in the year 1996 by the trust. The
plaintiffs incurred all expenditure and provided all logistic support to
create furnished infrastructure, so that the same shall come out as a
Centre of excellence of international repute. Since the plaintiffs 2 and
3 were residing outside India, as it was not possible for them to be

                                4
present in Orissa always, defendants 1 to 3, being the members of the
trust, were looking after the management of the trust on behalf of the
trustees. In course of time, NIST set up by the trust became self
sufficient and defendants 1 to 3 forming an unholy combination,
created another trust in the name of S.J. Charitable Trust with
similar objective, as the plaintiff No.1-trust. They established another
institution called “Apex Institute of Science and Technology” at
Bhubaneswar under the said S.J. Charitable Trust. It is further
averred by the plaintiffs that the defendants 1 to 3 resorted to all
illegal methods of admission in the NIST for illegal gain thereby
defaming the trust and demeaning its objectives. The plaintiff No.2, in
order to take stock of the situation, intimated the defendants about
his arrival to NIST on 31.07.2005. On getting such intimation, the
defendants managed to pass a resolution on 23.07.2005 dropping the
plaintiff No.2 from the Board of Trustees. It is also stated that the
plaintiff No.2 arrived in the premises of NIST, when he was physically
restrained from entering into the campus. Due to such action of the
defendants, the plaintiffs, finding no other way out, filed an
application for leave under Section 92 C.P.C. In the leave application,
the plaintiff No.2 further pleaded that the defendants 1 to 3 held a
trust meeting on 29.07.2005 wherein, they removed the plaintiff No.2
from the Membership and Chairmanship of the Trust and the
defendant No.4 has been inducted as a new trust member and the

                                 5
defendant No.3 was elected as the new Chairman. The said resolution
dated 29.07.2005 is totally unauthorized, illegal and void in law.
4.            The plaintiffs further mentioned that since the plaintiffs 2
and 3 were not informed about the meeting, such resolution cannot
be treated to be a valid one. Further more, all the members of the
Board of Trustees have not been informed of the meeting and the
agenda of such meeting, which was held on 29.07.2005. The
resolution passed in such meeting is contrary to law as well as the
principles of natural justice. The plaintiffs stated that the action of the
defendants 1 to 3 in removing the plaintiff No.2 in a meeting not
properly constituted and passing a resolution for removing him from
the membership and Chairmanship of the trust, which was not
passed by 2/3rd majority of the members of the trust and inducting
another family member as trustee was only with a view to grab the
property of the trust/institution for their personal gain, which has
caused serious problem to the management/administration of the
trust/institution.
5.              The petitioner No.1, apprehending such action on the
part of the plaintiffs, filed a Caveat before the learned District Judge.
Prior to filing of the application for leave along with the plaint the opp.
party no. 1 made an application under Section 34 of the Trust Act,
which application was registered as SPJC No.9 of 2005. The present
petitioner No.1, who is a defendant, entered appearance and

                                 6
contested the said case. At that stage, when the matter was posted for
hearing, the opposite party No.1, who is plaintiff No.2 in the suit, filed
an application to withdraw the application under Section 34 of the
Trust Act and accordingly, the learned District Judge allowed the said
application. Since the petitioner No.1, who was one of the defendants,
entered appearance, the leave application along with the copy of the
plaint, was served on him and he was allowed to participate in the
hearing on question of grant of leave.
6.           Mr. Baug, learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon
various decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in support of his
contention that the learned District Judge         before granting leave
under section 92 C.P.C.        should have noticed all the defendants
inasmuch as the reliefs sought for by the opp. parties as plaintiffs
being not on behalf of the public and the trust being not a charitable
trust, section 92 could not have any application to the facts of the
present case. All the decisions cited by Mr. Baug have been taken
note of by the learned District Judge, who has elaborately discussed
the facts giving rise to such decisions, while concluding that the
present suit comes under section 92 C.P.C. and leave should be
granted.
7.           It is a settled position of law now that a suit under section
92 C.P.C. is a suit of a special nature which pre-supposes the
existence of a public trust of a religious or charitable        character.

                                 7
Such a suit can proceed only on the allegation that there was a
breach of such trust or that the direction of the Court is necessary for
the administration of the trust and the plaintiff must pray for one or
more of the reliefs that are mentioned in the section. Further, it is
also well settled that if it is clear that the plaintiffs are not suing to
vindicate the right of the public but are seeking a declaration of their
individual or personal rights or the individual or personal rights of
any other person or persons in whom they are interested, then the
suit would be outside the scope of section 92. The Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of Swami Parmatmananda Saraswati and
another v. Ramji Tripathy and another, AIR 1974 SC 2141
referring to various earlier decisions of different High Courts as well
as the Hon’ble Supreme Court also laid down that it is not every suit
claiming the reliefs specified in the section that can be brought under
the section but only the suits which, besides claiming any of the
reliefs, are brought by individuals as representatives of the public for
vindication of public rights and in deciding whether a suit falls within
section 92 the Court must go beyond the reliefs and have regard to
the capacity in which the plaintiffs are suing and to the purpose for
which the suit was brought.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in no
uncertain terms has laid down in various cases that it is only the
allegations in the plaint, which should be looked into in the first
instance to see whether the suit falls within the ambit of section 92. If

                                 8
after evidence is taken, it is found that the breach of trust alleged has
not been made out and that the prayer for direction of the Court is
vague and is not based on any solid foundation in facts or reason, but
is made only with a view to bring the suit under the section, then a
suit purporting to be brought under section 92 must be dismissed.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in a series of decisions with regard to
issuance of notice on an application for grant of leave under section
92 CPC to all the defendants has reiterated that although as a rule of
caution, the Court should normally give notice to the defendants
before granting leave under the said section to institute a suit, the
Court is not bound to do so. If a suit is instituted on the basis of such
leave granted without notice to the defendants, the suit would not
thereby be rendered bad in law or non-maintainable. The grant of
leave cannot be regarded as defeating or even seriously prejudicing
any right of the proposed defendants, because it is always open to
them to file an application for revocation of the leave which can be
considered on merits and according to law. The desirability of such
notice being given to the defendants, however, cannot be regarded as
a statutory   requirement to be complied with         before leave under
section 92 can be granted as that would lead to unnecessary delay
and in a given case, cause considerable loss to the public trust. Such
construction of the provisions of section 92 would render it difficult
for the beneficiaries of a public trust to obtain urgent interim orders

                                 9
from the court even though the circumstances might warrant such
relief being granted. (See R.M. Narayana Chettiar and another v.
N.Lakshmanan Chettiar and others, AIR 1991 SC 221)
8.            Keeping the above position of law in view, the learned
District Judge appears to have analyzed the averments of the plaint in
rightly coming to the conclusion that the trust in question is a
charitable trust and as per the settled position of law, it is not
mandatory for issuance of notice to all the defendants before granting
leave to proceed with the suit under section 92 CP.C. The learned
District Judge has also taken note of the reliefs sought for along with
the averments in the plaint holding that the suit is maintainable and
according leave, as required under section 92 C.P.C. was granted.
This Court, therefore, is of the considered view that the impugned
order has not been passed by exercise of jurisdiction not vested with
the learned District Judge nor the learned District Judge has failed to
exercise such jurisdiction vested in him or has acted in exercise of his
jurisdiction illegally or with       material irregularity. Hence, the
impugned order is immune from interference of this Court by exercise
of its revisional jurisdiction under section 115 C.P.C.
9.            In view of the above, the Civil Revision does not hold any
merit and accordingly, stands dismissed.
                                               ………………………
                                                 M. M. DAS, J.

                            10
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
February 23rd ,2013/Biswal.


