                 ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
  W. P.(C) NOS. 1361, 756, 901, 1133, 1168, 1271, 1295,
      1457, 1762, 1907, 2601, 2880 AND 6200 of 2010.
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                             -------------
Ajit Kumar Pandey & others                 (WPC 1361/10)
Nikhila Odisha NCLP Karmachari
Sangha represented by its Secretary.         (WPC 756/10)
Adikanda Sahoo and others                   (WPC 901/10)
Jay Prakash Nayak & others                  (WPC 1133/10)
Prabhat Kumar Raula & others               (WPC 1168/10)
Jayanta Kumar Biswal and others             (WPC 1271/10)
Ananda Kumar Mishra and others              (WPC 1295/10)
Sangram Kumar Mishra & others              (WPC 1457/10)
Padmanava Samal & others                    (WPC 1762/10)
Rajendra Narayan Nayak & others             (WPC 1907/10)
Santosh Kumar Sahoo & others                (WPC 2601/10)
Babita Sahu & others                        (WPC 2880/10)
Sakuntala Sahoo and others                  (WPC 6200/10)
                                               …        Petitioners
                             -Versus-
State of Orissa and others (in all)            …       Opp. Parties
          For Petitioners   : M/s. P.K.Rath, P.K. Satpathy,
                                      R.N.Parija, A.K.Rout,
                                      S.K. Patnaik & D.P.Patnaik.
                               M/s. Bijan Ray, C.Choudhury,
                                      S.Mohanty, N.K.Das,
                                      D.Chhotray & B.Moharana.
                               M/s. K.K.Jena, A.K.Mohapatr &
                                      S.N.Das.

                                                           2
                                                   M/s. S.K.Das, R.N.Mishra-II &
                                                             S.K. Mishra.
                                                   M/s.       Basudev Pujari, B.K.Nayak,
                                                             S.K.Pradhan (I) & M.R.Nayak.
                                                   M/s.       K.P.Mishra, Miss S.Mohapatra,
                                                             T.P. Tripathy & L.P.Dwivedy,
                                                   M/s.       K.K. Swain, P.N.Mohanty &
                                                             B.Jena.
                                                   M/s.       B.Routray, D.K.Mohapatra,
                                                             D.Routray, S.Jena, R.P.Dalai &
                                                             J.K.Samal.
                                                   M/s. S.K. Dalai, T.K.Swain &
                                                             N.Mohapatra.
                                                   M/s. D.N. Rath, S.N.Rath &
                                                             P.K.Rout.
                                   ( In all the cases)
                         For Opp. Parties : Advocate General &
                                                     Addl. Standing counsel
                                                     (For School & Mass Education Deptt.)
                                                               ( In all )
                                                       Mr. H.K.Mohanty
                                                      (For Board in WPC Nos. 1271 & 901/10)
                                                     M/s. P.K.Mohanty,
                                                             D.N.Mohapatra, J.Mohanty,
                                                             P.K.Nayak & S.N.Dash
                                                             (For O.P. 4 in WPC 1361/10)
                                                      -----------------------
                                                Decided on           29 .06.2010.
                                                      --------------------------
             PRESENT:
                                   THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M. M. DAS
             -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
M.M. DAS, J.                      In all the above writ petitions, the petitioners have
             challenged the resolution dated 19.11.2009 of the Government of

                                      3
Orissa in its School and Mass Education Department and the
consequential advertisement dated 5.1.2010. For convenience,
the aforesaid resolution and the advertisement, which have been
annexed as Annexures-4 and 5 to W.P. (C) No. 1762 of 2010, are
referred to.
2.                From the advertisement, it appears that the
concerned Zilla Parishad of the respective education districts
invited applications for engagement of Sikhya Sahayaks in
Primary and Upper Primary schools in the respective education
districts stipulating that the candidates may apply in any of the
education districts for one such education district and cannot
apply for being appointed in more than one education district.
The    number     of Trained     Graduate    Science   posts,   Trained
Graduate Arts/Commerce posts /+2 Science C.T. Course and
H.S.C./+2 C.T. course were indicated          in the schedule of the
advertisement for        different education districts.       The said
advertisement      was   consequential    to   the  resolution    dated
19.11.2009.     The   relevant    portion  of the    resolution   dated
19.11.2009, the validity of which has been questioned by the
petitioners, i.e., Clauses – 4.1 and 4.2, is extracted below:-
             “ENGAGEMENT
                       4.       xx             xx         xx

                            4
            4.1.     The right of children to free and
compulsory Education Act proposes to provide free
and compulsory education to every child. The
duties and responsibilities of State Government,
Local Authorities are to ensure good quality
education at elementary level. The SSA guidelines
also indicate that for quality education at
elementary schools, priority shall be given for
engagement of teachers with Science and
Mathematics background for every new Upper
Primary School having classes VI to VIII. Similarly
trained graduate Science teachers are to be
recruited for the Upper Primary Schools where
class-VIII has been opened or proposed to be
opened by way of up-gradation. As per Orissa
Elementary (Method of Recruitment and conditions
of service of teachers and officers) Rules, 1997 ,
40% of vacancies at level-V of the service shall be
filled up by the candidates having Bachelor Degree
in Arts, Science or Commerce or qualification
equivalent thereto with Bachelors Degree in
Education.
                  In order to provide adequate no. of
Trained Graduates teachers in the cadre and to
ensure quality education at Elementary level, out of
17820 vacant posts of Sikshya Sahayak, 10534 no.
of posts shall be filled up by the trained graduates
candidates having science background and 1542
no. of posts shall be filled up by the candidates
having B.A./B.Com. with B.Ed. qualification as 3rd
teacher (Arts) in Upper Primary Schools.
              Out of remaining 5744 vacant posts of
Sikshya Sahayak 2931 no. of posts shall be filled
up by the C.T.           candidates having +2 Sc.
Background and 2813 no. of posts shall be filled up
by the candidates having Matric/+2 with C.T.
qualification from recognized Board/University or
examination equivalent thereto.
             If trained +2 Science candidates are not
available, in such case, untrained +2 Science
candidates may be considered for engagement on
merit with condition that such untrained
candidates shall          acquire required training
qualification at their own cost within a period of 5
years from the time of their recruitment.

                                     5
                             Similarly, if B.Ed. candidates with
          science background are not available, in such case,
          untrained science graduates may be considered for
          engagement on merit with the condition that such
          untrained candidates shall acquire required training
          qualification at their own cost within a period of 5
          years from the time of their requirement.
                      4.2 Selection shall be made only on merit,
          i.e., on the basis of percentage of marks secured in
          Matriculation /+2 and C.T. or examination
          equivalent thereto for C.T. candidates and
          B.A./B.Sc./B.Com. examination and B.Ed. or
          examination equivalent thereto for B.Ed. candidates.
          if trained +2 Science candidates are not available, in
          such case, untrained +2 science candidates may be
          considered for engagement on merit with condition
          that such untrained candidates shall acquire
          required training qualification at their own cost
          within a period of 5 years from the time of their
          recruitment. Similarly, if B.Ed. candidates with
          science educational background are not available, in
          such case, untrained science graduates may be
          considered for engagement on merit with the
          condition that such untrained candidates shall
          acquired required training qualification at their own
          cost within a period of 5 years from the time of their
          recruitment.
                     In case two or more candidates secure the
          same marks, the candidate older in age and if ages
          are same, the candidates passing matriculation
          examination earlier will be placed above the other in
          the select list. In case of S.C.S.T. and PH categories,
          in case C.T. trained candidates are not available,
          untrained +2 Science/+2 Arts candidates against
          C.T. posts and untrained B.A./B.Sc./B.Com.
          candidates against B.Ed. posts of that category can
          only be engaged. But against S.C. and ST quota, non
          S.C./S.T. candidates shall not be engaged.
                    4.3. & 4.4. xx             xx          xx”
From the number of Science Trained Graduate teachers and Arts
Trained Graduate teachers to be engaged, as indicated above, it
shows the proportion      to be 7: 1. The rest of the posts have been
reserved to be filled up by C.T. candidates having +2 Science

                                      6
background and matric/+2 with C.T. qualification. The number
of trained and untrained teachers, if calculated, comes to 76: 24.
It is also indicated in the resolution that if trained +2 Science
candidates are not available, in such circumstance, untrained +2
Science candidates may be appointed and similar is the case with
regard to Trained Graduate teachers in Science.
3.                Mr. Routray, learned senior counsel appearing for
the petitioners in W.P. (C) No. 1762 of 2010 urged that Orissa
Education (Establishment, Recognition and Management of
Private Upper Primary School) Rules, 1991 provides the yardstick
for Upper Primary schools as one Trained Graduate Headmaster,
one I.A./I.Sc. with C.T. training. Apart from this, the Orissa
Subordinate Education (Method of Recruitment and Condition of
Services) Rules, 1993 which came into force on 17.12.1993
provides the condition of eligibility of teachers in Upper Primary
Schools as well as in the Government High Schools. In Rule 8 (1)
(d), the eligibility criteria for direct recruitment is provided that
the candidates must have obtained bachelor degree in Arts,
Science and Commerce with a degree of bachelor of education
from a recognized University. Mr. Routray further submitted that
apart from the above statutory rules, when Trained Graduate
teachers in Arts, i.e., B.A. B.Ed. and Matric C.T. candidates are
available, there is no reason to engage untrained teachers with

                                   7
science background against vacant post for Trained Graduates.
The Orissa Elementary (Method of Recruitment and Conditions of
Service of Teachers and Officers) Rules, 1997, which has been
referred to in paragraph-4.1 of the resolution under Annexure-4
itself prescribes the ratio between C.T. and B.Ed. teachers to be
60:40 and, therefore, the posts mentioned to be filled up by
Trained Graduate and C.T. candidates, on the face of it, are
contrary to the said rules.
4.              A counter affidavit has been filed by the State
wherein it has been stated that the Government decided to
engage 10,534 numbers of Sikhya Sahayaks having science back
ground     with B.Ed. (mandatory in sixth to eighth class school).
Even though, such a plea has been taken, no such mandatory
provision has been brought to the notice of this Court during the
hearing of the case nor has been mentioned in the counter
affidavit. The percentage of total number of posts to be filled up
by science graduate teachers has not been justified in the
counter affidavit. Learned    Advocate General, who appeared on
behalf of the State, vehemently urged that it has become
incumbent upon the Government to engage such teachers            in
view of coming into operation of the Right to           Free and
Compulsory Education Act, 2009 ( for short, ‘the Act, 2009’) .

                                  8
5.              The question for consideration in these writ
petitions as to whether the resolution dated 19.11.2009 under
Annexure-4     and   the   consequential   advertisement   under
Annexure-5 (in W.P. (C) No. 1762 of 2010) referred to above is
irrational and unreasonable resulting in arbitrariness.
6.              To consider the above questions, the connected
records were called for from the Government. On perusal of the
same, it appears that prior to the Act, 2009, which came into
force with effect from 1.4.2010, the note sheet reflects in the
connected record that on 23.7.2009, a note was prepared with
regard to taking a resolution for recruitment of sanctioned posts
by Sikhya Sahayaks to function as teachers in the Primary and
Upper Primary schools being appointed and engaged by Zilla
Parishads. The Additional Secretary to the Government made a
note in the file on 7.11.2009 indicating that the Finance
Department made concurrence for engagement of 17,820 Sikhya
Sahayaks during the year 2009-2010 with stipulation that
Sikhya Sahayaks shall be engaged in due observance of the
procedures as per the governing rules, norms and guidelines in
this connection and only after completion of school building and
arrangement of necessary infrastructure so as to prevent idle
engagement of Sikhya Sahayaks. The said note was approved by
the Principal Secretary of the Department and other officials

                                  9
including   the  Minister,   Finance.  Simultaneously,    a   draft
resolution was prepared to be adopted by the Government with
regard to engagement of Sikhya Sahayaks in the identified vacant
posts which was sent to the Law Department. The Law
Department gave some suggestion with regard to the age limits of
the candidates which was accordingly adopted and the resolution
dated 19.11.2009 was taken. By the time, the said resolution was
taken, the Act, 2009 has not come into operation. Hence, the
argument advanced by the learned Advocate General that in
order to give effect to the Central Act, i.e., the Act, 2009, the
above numbers of vacant posts for Science Trained Graduate,
Arts Trained Graduates, +2 C.T. and Matric C.T. candidates have
been identified is fallacious. The figures arrived at in the
resolution do not find any basis as, neither the exact number of
schools, which are upgraded to have Class-VIII and the primary
schools have been taken into account, nor the exact number of
vacancies and the required number of teachers as per the
existing rules and regulations have been taken into consideration
before passing the impugned resolution.
7.              Even considering the Act, 2009 , it appears that in
section 35 (1) under Chapter-VII of the said Act, power has been
conferred in Central Government to make guidelines for the
purpose of implementation of the provisions of the said Act and

                                  10
no such guideline has been issued. More over, section 23 (1) of
the Act, provides that a person possessing the minimum
qualification as laid down shall be eligible to be appointed as a
teacher and section 23 (2) provides that where a State does not
have adequate training institutions in teacher education or
teachers possessing minimum qualification are not available in
sufficient numbers, the Central Government may, by notification,
relax the minimum qualification required for appointment as a
teacher.
8.              No such notification has been made by the
Central Government and it is also not the case of the State
Government that teachers possessing minimum qualification are
not available. It is also strange to find that even though in the
connected file produced before this Court       by the State,    it
appears that it was indicated to take the resolution strictly in
accordance with the rules and regulations governing the field, but
the rules referred to above in this judgment have not been taken
into consideration in arriving at the figures indicated in the
resolution which is wholly contrary to the provisions for Trained
Graduates and C.T. teachers to be engaged as Primary and Upper
Primary Schools as per the rules. However, this Court finds that
in view of insertion of Article 21-A introduced into the
Constitution of India by its 86th Amendment bringing Right to

                                    11
Education under the fold of Fundamental Rights within Part-III of
the constitution, the attempt of the State Government to provide
teachers by up-gradation of Primary schools so that the children
from four years to 14 years can avail such right guaranteed
under Article 21-A, is praiseworthy. But in the present scenario,
to complete the same, requires a yeoman effort.
9.                Coming to the question raised by the petitioners,
it is trite to state that policy of the State Government is to be
reasonable, fair and non-arbitrary and must be based on the real
object sought to be achieved and such policy can be declared to
be invalid and inoperative if the same is unreasonable and
arbitrary.    It is well settled that where a particular mode is
prescribed for operating an Act, the deviation to act in a different
manner which does not disclose any discernible principle, it is
not reasonable itself, shall be levelled as arbitrary and every State
action must be informed by reason and it follows that an Act
uninformed by reasons is per se arbitrary. (See Union of India
and another v. International Trading Co. and another,
(2003)5 SCC 437 and A.K. Bhatnagar and others v. Union of
India and others (1991) 1 SCC 544). There is no substantial
difference between the rules and the regulations inasmuch as
both are subordinate legislations under the powers conferred by
the Statute. A rule framed under the Statute has statutory force.

                                  12
Any notification made by the Government contrary to such
statutory rules is to be treated as invalid and inoperative, even
though such notification is published in the official gazette. In
the instant case, it is found that even there is no notification
made, but resolution has been adopted by the Government in its
School and Mass Education department, as enumerated above.
The facts in the instant case reveal that the proportion of Science
Trained Graduate and Arts Trained Graduate teachers as well as
the T.G. and C.T. teachers in the post to be filled up is contrary
to the existing rules governing the field       for recruitment of
teachers to Primary and Upper Primary Schools.
10.             In view of what has been discussed above, the
only course open is to quash the resolution dated 19.11.2009
and the consequential advertisement vide Annexures-4 and 5 to
W.P. (C) No. 1762 of 2010.        Ordered accordingly. The said
notification   dated    19.11.2009     and     the   consequential
advertisement, which have been annexed to the other writ
petitions also stand quashed with the observation that the
Government     shall   take   immediate     necessary   steps    for
recruitment of such teachers (Sikhya Sahayaks) strictly in
accordance with the existing rules after ascertaining the exact
number of different types of teachers required to be recruited in

                                  13
the various schools already existing or to be opened/upgraded,
as proposed.
11.             The writ petitions are accordingly disposed of.
                                             ……………………
                                               M.M. Das, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
June 29th, 2010/Biswal.

14
15
16

