                           ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK.
                                  Jail Criminal Appeal No. 53 of 2002
Arising out of the judgment and order of sentence dated 31.08.2001 passed by
Shri Trinath Purohit, learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Deogarh in Sessions Trial
No.243/39 of 2000, under Section 302, I.P.C.
                                                      -----------------
Balabhadra Dehury                                                                       …          Appellant
                                                         Versus
State of Orissa                                                                         …          Respondent
                      For Appellant           :        Mr. Abhaya Kumar Parida, Advocate.
                      For Respondent :                 Mr. Sangram Das, Addl. Standing Counsel.
                                                       -----------------
PRESENT:
                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE M.M. DAS
                                                           AND
                         THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE C.R. DASH
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   Date of Hearing : 22.11.2012                                        Date of Judgment : 22.11.2012
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      This appeal is directed against the judgment and order of sentence
dated 31.08.2001 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Deogarh in
Sessions Trial No.243/39 of 2000 convicting the appellant under Section 302,
I.P.C. and sentencing him to suffer imprisonment for life.
2.                    Ghanashyam Sahu (P.W.3) is the informant. Kumari Mamata
Sahu (P.W.5) is his daughter and Daitari Sahu (deceased) is his son. The
occurrence happened on 23.12.1999 at “Bahada Nali” of village Kakharumal. It
was about noon time when the occurrence happened in presence of Mahibil

                                          2
Swain (P.W.1) and Kumari Budhei Sahu (P.W.2). Prior to the occurrence, in the
evening of 19.12.1999 Mamata Sahu (P.W.5) was alone there in the house. At
that time the present appellant approached her with ulterior motive. Mamata
Sahu (P.W.5) called her father aloud and ran out of the house. The informant
(P.W.3), who was engaged in the nearby thrashing floor, was returning to the
house at that time. Seeing him, the appellant decamped threatening Mamata
Sahu (P.W.5) to see her later. Next day, i.e. on 20.12.1999 the informant
(P.W.3) found the vegetable plants in his field to have been uprooted.
Suspecting the hands of the appellant in causing such damage, he (P.W.3)
reported the matter in the police station. On 23.12.1999 (the occurrence day) in
the morning both the appellant and the informant (P.W.3) were called to Reamal
Police Station, where the matter was compromised between the two and the
appellant agreed to pay compensation for the damage caused by him. The
appellant left the P.S. earlier to the informant (P.W.3)  At that time deceased
Daitari Sahu (son of the informant) was tending goats along with Mahibil Swain
(P.W.1) and Budhei Sahu (P.W.2) near the ‘Bahada Nali’. The appellant came
near them, climbed on a ‘Sahada’ tree with an axe and cut some branches of the
tree, which fell on the ground. At that time, the goats guarded by deceased
Daitari Sahu came there and ate leafs of the twigs cut by the appellant. The
appellant then shouted at the deceased, climbed down the tree and assaulted
the deceased with the same axe around his neck and the deceased died there at
the spot. Both Mahibil Swain (P.W.1) and Budhei Sahu (P.W.2) came running to
the village to inform the matter. Mamata Sahu (P.W.5) along with some villagers
rushed to the place of occurrence and found the deceased lying dead there. In
the meantime the informant Ghanashyam Sahu (P.W.3) arrived at the spot, found
the deceased lying dead and then lodged F.I.R. The I.O. (P.W.8) on completion

                                        3
of investigation, filed charge-sheet against the appellant under Section 302,
I.P.C.
3.             Prosecution has examined eight witnesses to prove the charge.
Besides the eye-witnesses P.Ws.1 and 2, the informant (P.W.3) and Mahata
Sahu (P.W.5) as introduced in the preceding paragraph, P.W.6 is a witness to the
inquest made by police on the dead body, P.W.7 is a witness to the seizure of
axe (M.O.-I), P.W.4 is the Medical Officer, who conducted post-mortem and
P.W.8 is the I.O.
               The defence plea is one of complete denial.
4.             Learned Trial Court, on consideration of the materials on record,
believed P.Ws.1 and 2 to sustain the charge against the appellant and found him
guilty under Section 302, I.P.C. and sentenced him accordingly.
5.             Learned counsel for the appellant submits that both P.Ws.1 and 2
having been examined by the police after about one month of the occurrence,
they cannot be believed as eye-witnesses. P.W.1 having specifically admitted
that he had been tutored to depose in the manner he has testified in the Court,
he cannot be believed as eye-witness. Relying on the evidence P.W.3 as to what
transpired in the Police Station during compromise and at what time such
compromise took place, it is submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that if
P.W.3 is believed, then at the time of occurrence the appellant must be held to
have been there in the Police Station and he could not have committed the
offence. It is also submitted that the scribe of the F.I.R. having not been
examined, the prosecution case should be thrown over board.
               Learned Addl. Standing Counsel on the other hand supports the
impugned judgment and submits that in view of the consistent evidence of

                                          4
P.Ws.1 and 2, there is no escape for the appellant from the conviction recorded
against him by learned Trial Court.
6.             Both P.Ws.1 and 2 in their cross-examination have testified that
they were examined by the police after about one month of the occurrence.
Such a question has, however, not been asked to the I.O. (p.w.8) as to on which
date he had examined P.Ws.1 and 2. For our satisfaction, on reference to the
Case Diary, we found that P.Ws.1 and 2 were examined by the I.O. on the date
of occurrence itself immediately after the spot visit. As the defence has not
confronted the discrepancy of delayed examination of P.Ws.1 and 2, as testified
by them to elicit an explanation from the Investigating Officer, it cannot take
advantage of what the witnesses have testified. The I.O. is the best person to
say as to when P.Ws.1 and 2 were examined. The I.O. having not been asked
about such fact, we do not feel inclined to accept the contention of learned
counsel for the appellant to the effect that P.Ws.1 and 2 should be disbelieved,
as they were examined after about one month of the occurrence, as testified by
them. P.Ws.1 and 2 are thoroughly consistent so far as the assault part is
concerned and the manner of assault on the deceased is concerned. P.W.1
being a child of only nine years old, has stated in his cross-examination what was
put to his mouth by the defence, as it appears from the text of the cross-
examination of P.W.1.       But, P.W.2 being more matured is found to have
withstood the cross-examination consistently and there is nothing in his cross-
examination to discredit her sworn testimony. Even if we disbelieve P.W.1 for
what he has stated in his cross-examination on the point of being tutored etc.,
there is no such thing in the evidence of P.W.2 to disbelieve her. P.Ws.1 and 2
are corroborated by the Medical Officer (P.W.4) and the immediate post-
occurrence witness P.W.5, who has also testified about the motive on the part of
the appellant and his conduct prior to the occurrence.

                                         5
7.            The Medical Officer (P.W.4) in paragraph-5 of his cross-
examination has stated thus :-
              “……The injury sustained by the deceased would be
              caused by any other weapon other than the axe examined
              by me.”……
              Taking a clue from such an opinion, it is submitted by learned
counsel for the appellant that the axe seized at the instance of the appellant must
not have been used to commit the offence. We are not persuaded to accept
such contention in as much as the sworn testimony of P.Ws.1 and 2 cannot be
disbelieved on the basis of certain opinion by the Medical Officer. P.W.3 in
paragraph-5 of his cross-examination has testified as to what transpired in the
Police Station relating to compromise between him and the appellant and what
time such compromise took. He has testified thus :-
              “……I went to the P.S. with ward-member Kishori Sahu at
              about 10.00 A.M. After our arrival, the accused arrived at
              the P.S. about one hour after my arrival. Police scribed
              the compromise, and the accused, myself and ward-
              member signed on it. I do not remember what was the
              agreed amount of compensation. First the accused did
              not agree to have damaged the plants, but when he was
              kept behind the hazat, he confessed to have damaged the
              vegetable plants. The process of compromise took about
              2 hours. Thereafter we left the P.S. The ward-member
              stayed back in Reamal.”….
              It is submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that “if it is
accepted that the accused reached at the P.S. at 11 A.M. and compromise took
for about 2 hours, the appellant could not have left the P.S. before 1.00 / 2.00
P.M. In view of such fact, the appellant could not have committed the murder of
the deceased at 12 noon.

                                          6
8.             We cannot lose sight of the fact that P.W.3 has not spoken about
the time as recorded by a watch in ‘hour’ and ‘minutes’. He is a rustic witness
with no sense or little sense about the time or fraction of it. We cannot also lose
sight of the fact that none of the witnesses, who have stated about the time of
occurrence, could have fixed the time of occurrence at 12 noon by seeing at the
watch. The occurrence time as well as the time of compromise are all of guess
work. In such a situation we cannot attach much importance to the time and
space to throw the prosecution case over-board. The occurrence might have
happened at 1.00 P.M. or the appellant might have reached near the spot at
about 12 noon after being discharged from the police station, on compromise
being reached. On this score alone, therefore, the prosecution case cannot be
thrown over-board and the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 cannot be disbelieved.
9.             In view of the above, we do not find any merit in this appeal and
the same is accordingly dismissed.
                                            ……………………
                                              M.M. Das, J.
                                            …………………….
                                              C.R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 22nd day of November, 2012. /S.K.Parida.


