                                        ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK.
                                      W.P.(C). NOS. 11550 & 11685 OF 2012
           In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the
           Constitution of India.
                                                        --------------
           In WPC 11550/2012
           Falcon Real Estate Pvt. Ltd.                                   ….                     Petitioner
                                                       -Versus-
           Janak Kumari Devi & others                                          ……             Opp. parties
                             For Petitioner          :      M/s. S.P. Mishra, Sr. Advocate,
                                                                     S.Mishra, S.S. Kashyap,
                                                                     J.K.Mahapatra &
                                                                      S.K.Samantaray.
                             For opp. parties:              M/s. B.H.Mohanty,
                                                                    D.P. Mohanty,T.K.Mohanty &
                                                                    P.K.Swain.
           In WPC 11685/2012
           Kalinga Marines & Transport Pvt. Ltd.                           ….              Petitioner
                                                       -Versus-
           Janak Kumari Devi & others                                      ……             Opp. parties
                             For Petitioner          :       M/s. Nirmal Ch.Mohanty &
                                                                     P. Rajan.
                             For opp. parties:              M/s. B.H.Mohanty,
                                                                    D.P. Mohanty, R.K.Nayak &
                                                                    T.K.Mohanty.
                                                 ---------------------------------
                                               Decided on               27.11.2012
                                                ------------------------------------
           PRESENT :
                                       THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE M.M. DAS
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
M. M. DAS, J.                     These two writ petitions have been filed by the
             petitioners, who are defendants 4 and 3 respectively in C.S. No.

                                 2
361 of 1994-I (Final Decree) against a common order dated
19.5.2012 passed by the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division),
Bhubaneswar in the said suit. Both the petitioners filed two
separate applications under Order 18, Rule 17 C.P.C.         seeking
recalling of the P.Ws, who were examined in the suit at the stage
of preliminary     decree    for   cross-examination by    the  said
defendants. The learned trial court recorded that the proceeding is
one for making the preliminary decree final and in the meantime,
the parties to the dispute have also entered into a settlement
outside the court and accordingly, a petition for compromise has
been filed in the final decree proceeding, concluded that the
function of final decree is merely to restate and apply with
precision what the preliminary decree has ordered. Thus, the final
decree proceeding is only to enforce what has already been
declared by the preliminary decree. A partition suit in which a
preliminary decree has been passed is still a pending suit and the
rights of the parties have to be adjusted on the date of final
decree. Relying upon the decision in the case of Muthangi
Ayyana v. Muthangi Jaggarao and others, AIR 1977 SC 292,
the learned trial court held that as has been held in the said case,
the final decree cannot be amended or cannot          go behind the
preliminary decree on a matter determined by the preliminary
decree. The learned trial court further    relied upon the decisions
in the cases of Taleb Ali v. Abdul Aziz, AIR 1929 Calcutta 689

                                  3
and Bnwari Lal v. Shaikh Shukrullaha, AIR 1940 Patna, 204
and recorded that it has been held in the said decisions that final
decree   is based on and controlled by preliminary decree and
cannot travel beyond the preliminary decree. On the above basis,
the learned trial court came to the conclusion that recalling of
P.Ws may disconcert        the findings of preliminary decree.   The
learned trial court further noted that the claim of the defendants 3
and 4 arose from the sale deeds executed by one Mahendra
Narayan Deo, brother of the present plaintiff and the father of the
defendant no.1 being the Power of Attorney Holder of his father
Harekrushna Harichandan Mohapatra. Thus concluding, the
learned trial court rejected both the applications. The learned trial
court, however, did not notice the peculiar and distinct facts of the
case which are totally different from the facts involved in the
decisions relied upon by him.
2.             In order to appreciate the rival contentions raised
before this Court, it would be appropriate to state the facts of the
case in brief chronologically.
               On     27.11.1946,     Harekrushna       Harichandan
Mohapatra executed a registered Power of Attorney in favour of
Mahendra Narayan Deo. On 18.2.1972, by a registered sale deed,
Mahendra Narayan Deo sold part of the suit land, i.e., khata no.
224/3, plot no. 600/149 measuring Ac. 1.47 decimals, khata No.
224/4, plot no. 800 measuring Ac. 1.580 decimals, khata no.

                                 4
224/4, plot no. 829 measuring Ac. 3.620 decimals, khata no.
224/4, plot no. 830/1495 measuring Ac. 4.648 decimals and
khata no. 83, plot no. 828 measuring Ac. 1.950, in total, Ac.
15.000 in favour of one Hadunnav Venkat Raman Murthy, who
filed    Mutation Case Nos. 668 , 669 and 670 of 1972.
On4.12.1975, the Mutation Cases were allowed. On 7.12.1977,
Hadunnav Venkat Raman Murthy by a registered sale deed        sold
the lands in favour of M/s. Paradeep Marine Pvt. Ltd. which
applied for loan to the O.S.F.C. and IPICOL. The properties were
mortgaged as security for the loan and the said company
established a Prawn Processing Unit. On 3.2.1978, Harekrushna
Harichandan     Mohapatra    filed affidavit before  the  O.S.F.C.
acknowledging the power of attorney executed by him in favour of
Mahendra Narayan Deo to sell the property. M/s. Paradeep Marine
failed to repay the loan. On 27.1.1984, the O.S.F.C. took steps
under section 29 of the S.F.C. Act and the properties under Prawn
Processing Unit were put to auction.       M/s. Kalinga Marine on
becoming the highest bidder purchased the property from the
O.S.F.C.    and on 14.5.1984 possession was delivered to M/s.
Kalinga Marine. On 31.10.1986, the O.S.F.C. executed regular
conveyance deed and on 19.10.2005, M/s. Kalinga Marine sold
the land by registered sale deed in favour of M/s. Falcon Real
Estate.

                                5
3.             The present petitioners, i.e., Kalinga Marines &
Transport Pvt. Ltd. and Falcon Real Estate Pvt. Ltd.        were not
made as parties in the suit initially, but later on, the petitioners
filed petition under Order 1 , Rule 10 C.P.C. praying therein to be
impleaded them as parties in the suit in            the final decree
proceeding. The plaintiff – opp. party no. 1 filed objection to the
said petition. However, the learned trial court allowed the petitions
and impleaded them as defendants 3 and 4. The petitioners after
being impleaded as parties filed their written statement stating
therein the fact as to how they acquired title over the property
and the O.S.F.C. handed over possession of the aforesaid land
with plant and machineries in favour of Kalinga Marine           and,
accordingly, OSFC executed      registered deed of    conveyance on
31.10.1986 in respect of ‘A’ schedule property in favour of the said
company. Thereafter, the Kalinga Marine being the absolute owner
of the property sold the land bearing Sabik khata no. 223, sabik
plot no. 800 which corresponds to hal khata no. 224/4, hal plot
no. 800 area Ac. 1.580 decimals to the petitioner in WPC No.
11550 of 2012, i.e., Falcon Real Estate Private Ltd. Pursuant to
the said sale, the said petitioner took over possession of the suit
land and mutated the land in its favour. It was mentioned that
the defendant no. 1 in the suit filed C.S. No. 998 of 2008 against
the Kalinga Marine and Transport Pvt. Ltd. (defendant no. 3 )
which was subsequently abandoned by him.

                                   6
4.             The aforesaid suit, i.e., C.S. No. 361 of 1994-I was
decreed preliminarily by judgment dated 27.11.1999 granting
1/4th share to the parties from their father’s share and half share
from the mother’s share. The said judgment was challenged by
defendant nos. 1 and 2 in F.A. No. 76 of 2000 before this Court,
which was dismissed modifying the order of the learned trial
court.     Against the order of dismissal passed in F.A. No. 76 of
2000, the defendant no. 1 preferred SLP No. 31245 of 2008 before
the Hon’ble apex Court which also was dismissed. The further
averments made in the written statement was that while the
matter stood thus,      the plaintiff – defendant no. 1 and defendant
no. 2 filed a compromise petition before the learned trial court
praying therein to partition the property as per the preliminary
decree      by passing the order as was passed in F.A. No. 76 of
2000, but the compromise was rejected by the learned trial court
by order dated 14.5.2009. Thereafter, another compromise
petition was filed which is pending.           At this juncture, the
applications were filed under Order 18, Rule 17 C.P.C. praying
therein to recall all the P.Ws for cross – examination by the
petitioners as they were not parties when the evidence was
recorded before the preliminary decree was passed. Objection was
filed to the said petitions stating therein that the petitions are not
maintainable either in law or in fact as the proceeding is a final

                                 7
decree proceeding and there is no scope for the court to decide any
other issues in the present proceeding.
6.             Mr. S.P. Mishra, learned senior counsel appearing
for the petitioner in W.P.(C) No. 11550 of 2012 contended that the
petitioner in the said writ petition having been added as a party
in the suit on the basis of an application under Order 1, Rule 10
(2) C.P.C. which has become final, the newly added party, i.e., the
petitioner,   derives all the rights to defend its case. He further
contended that after being impleaded as party as the written
statement filed by the petitioner was accepted being satisfied that
the petitioner is a necessary party, the learned court below should
have recast the issues and should have given an opportunity to
the petitioner to cross-examine the plaintiff’s witness(s). According
to Mr. Mishra, when admittedly, the petitioner was not a party in
the suit when the preliminary decree           was passed and its
property has been included in the schedule of property in the
decree and on that ground alone, the petitioner was impleaded as
party, the learned trial court was required to adjudicate the matter
as to whether       the property of the petitioner is liable to be
excluded from the preliminary decree      and the same, in the facts
of this case, would not amount to reopening the decree, but will
amount to re-adjudication of the case in the interest of justice and
the findings which have been arrived at in the preliminary decree
contrary to such facts should be treated to be vitiated.

                                8
7.            Mr. Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for the
opp. party no. 1, however, contended that in a final decree
proceeding, the court cannot go behind the preliminary decree
and is only to work out the final decree and, therefore, the learned
trial court was right in rejecting the applications filed by the
petitioners.  He  relied  upon    the  decision   in   the  case   of
Neelakantha Pillai Ramachandran Nair v. Ayyappan Pillai
Kumara Pillai, AIR 1978 Kerala 152,             in support of his
contention that the Kerala High Court relying upon the decision
of the apex Court has held      in the said case that in suits for
redemption or partition where the passing of a preliminary decree
is contemplated, the power conferred under Order 1, Rule 10
C.P.C.   is to be regarded as circumscribed by the provisions
contained in section 2 (2)     and section 97 of the C.P.C. The
impleadment of additional parties subsequent to the passing of
the preliminary decree is permissible only if none of the questions
already settled by the preliminary decree would have to be
reopened by the court as a consequence of such impleadment;
the addition of parties can be allowed at that stage only on
condition that the further proceedings to be taken in the suit will
be only on the basis of the preliminary decree       already passed,
and none of the questions settled by the preliminary decree will be
allowed to be re-agitated on the ground that the person newly
impleaded was not before the court at the time of the passing of

                                 9
the preliminary decree. As to whether or not the impleadment of a
new party should be allowed on the aforesaid condition in the
circumstances of a particular case will have to be considered by
the court on the merits of each case as and when the said
question arises. No party should be impleaded against his will if
that would involve      his    being subjected to the terms of a
preliminary decree    which was passed without his being on the
party   array, particularly when there are pleas which the said
party could have put forward in respect of the matters considered
and settled by the preliminary decree .
8.            It appears that in the said decision, the Kerala High
Court on a reference made by a learned Single Judge with regard
to the question of law as to whether subsequent to the passing of
the preliminary decree      for partition or redemption it is legally
competent for the court to implead additional parties under Order
1, Rule 10 C.P.C. While deciding the said question, the Kerala
High Court relied upon the decision in the case of         Venkata
Reddi v. Pethi Reddi, AIR 1963 SC 992 and held that the said
decision clearly indicates that in respect of the matters covered by
a    preliminary decree, the said decree is to be regarded as
embodying the final decision of the court passing it. It will not,
therefore, be reasonable to understand the provision in Order 1,
Rule 10 C.P.C. as empowering the impleadment of additional
parties in a suit in circumstances which would necessitate the

                                10
ripping open of the determination made in the preliminary decree
already passed in the suit. However, one can very well conceive of
several situations where an impleadment of an additional party
may be asked for or may be considered by the court to be
necessary for a proper and complete adjudication of the matters in
controversy in such a suit and such impleadment would not
involve the reopening of the matters already finally settled by the
preliminary decree.
9.             Mr. Mishra, learned senior counsel, however, relied
upon the provisions of Order 1, Rule 10 (5) C.P.C. which provides
that subject to the provisions of the Indian Limitation Act, 1877,
in section 22 (now the Limitation Act, 1963, section 21), the
proceedings as against any person added as defendant shall be
deemed to have begun only on the service of the summons.
Relying upon the said provision, he submitted that once the
petitioners have been added as defendants under Order 1, Rule 10
(2) C.P.C. and have been permitted to file their written statements,
it should be held that the suit for the petitioners should begin
from the stage of issuance of summons to them and they should
be given full opportunity to contest the suit for which, if required,
the court can always reopen the preliminary decree as it is a
settled law that in a partition suit, several preliminary decrees
can be passed. He further relied upon the decision of this Court
in the case of Palia Bewa v. Parbati Kumari Mohapatra and

                                 11
others, 59 (1985) CLT 552, where this Court though was dealing
with    a    suit  for    permanent     injunction,    accepted    the
contention of the defendant no. 12 therein that the said defendant
being allowed to be impleaded as a party and such impletion
having not been challenged which have become final, under sub-
rule (5) of Rule 10 of Order 1 C.P.C., the suit must be deemed to
have begun against the said defendant no. 12 and, therefore, he
has all the rights including asking for recalling of the witnesses
already examined on behalf of the plaintiff for further cross-
examination. Refusing defendant no. 12 to cross-examine the
plaintiff would amount to negation of the right and would make
the order allowing him to be impleaded as a party wholly
infructuous. This Court in the said case held that once an order
allowing an application under Order 1, Rule 10 C.P.C. is not
challenged, the newly added party has all the rights to defend his
case and so far as he is concerned, the case must be taken to have
begun afresh. Further, in the said case, the contention of the
defendant no. 12 that the order allowing recalling of the plaintiff
for cross – examination will not be “any case which has been
decided” was also accepted by this Court. This Court relied upon
an earlier decision in the case of Alekha Pradhan and others v.
Bhramar Pal and another, 45 (1978) CLT 75, wherein, it has
been held that by allowing a witness to be examined, no right or
obligation of the parties in controversy in the suit is being decided.

                                   12
10.             With regard to partition suits, in the case of Gouri
Bewa v. Ari Pradhan and others, AIR 1987 Orissa, 212, a
learned Single Judge of this Court held that a preliminary decree
can always be corrected under section 152 C.P.C. In the case of
Ganduri Koteshwaramma and another v. Chakiri Yanadi and
another, AIR 2012 SC 169, the Supreme Court, while considering
the right of daughter in coparcenery property categorically laid
down as follows:-
                 “…………….Section 97 provides that where any
                 party aggrieved by a preliminary decree passed
                 after the commencement of the Code does not
                 appeal from such decree, he shall be precluded
                 from disputing its correctness in any appeal
                 which may be preferred from the final decree
                 but that does not create any hindrance or
                 obstruction in the power of the Court to modify,
                 amend or alter the preliminary decree or pass
                 another preliminary decree if the changed
                 circumstances so require. It is true that final
                 decree is always required to be in conformity
                 with the preliminary decree but that does not
                 mean that a preliminary decree, before the final
                 decree is passed, cannot be altered or amended
                 or modified by the trial court in the event of
                 changed or supervening circumstances even if
                 no appeal has been preferred from such
                 preliminary decree. As such by passing of
                 preliminary decree in partition suit before
                 stipulated date it cannot be said that the rights
                 of daughter to share in coparcenery property is
                 lost”.
11.              With regard to the character of a preliminary
decree, the Supreme Court in the said case held that a preliminary
decree determines the rights and interest of the parties. The suit
for partition is not disposed of by passing of the preliminary
decree. It is by a final decree that the immovable property of joint

                                     13
Hindu family is partitioned by metes and bounds. After the
passing of the preliminary decree, the suit continues until the
final decree is passed. If in the interregnum, i.e., after passing of
the preliminary decree and before the final decree is passed, the
events and supervening circumstances                  occur necessitating
change in shares, there is no impediment for the court to amend
the preliminary decree or pass another preliminary decree re-
determining the rights and interest of the parties having regard to
the changed situation.                                   (Emphasis supplied)
12.            The Supreme Court in the said case relied upon an
earlier decision of the said Court in the case of Phoolchand and
another v. Gopal Lal, AIR 1967 SC 1470, where it was held as
follows:-
                        “We are of the opinion that there is
                 nothing in the Code of Civil Procedure which
                 prohibits the passing of more than one
                 preliminary decree if circumstances justify the
                 same and that it may be necessary to do so
                 particularly in partition suits when after the
                 preliminary decree some parties die and shares
                 of       other        parties      are     thereby
                 augmented…………..So               far therefore as
                 partition suits are concerned we have no doubt
                 that if an event transpires after the preliminary
                 decree which necessitates a change in shares,
                 the court can and should do so;…………………
                 there is no prohibition in the Code of Civil
                 Procedure       against     passing    a    second
                 preliminary decree in such circumstances and
                 we do not see why we should rule out a second
                 preliminary decree in such circumstances only
                 on the ground that the Code of Civil Procedure
                 does not contemplate such a possibility………
                 for it must not be forgotten that the suit is not
                 over till the final decree is passed and the court
                 has jurisdiction to decide all disputes that may
                 arise after the preliminary decree, particularly

                                   14
                 in a partition suit due to deaths of some of the
                 parties……… a second preliminary decree can
                 be passed in partition suits by which the
                 shares allotted in the preliminary decree
                 already passed can be amended and if there is
                 dispute between surviving parties in that behalf
                 and that dispute is decided the decision
                 amounts to a decree……...”
13.            Keeping the above position in law in view, this Court
is of the opinion that in view of the changed circumstances, as
narrated above, under which the property is stated to have come
to the hands of the petitioner – Falcon Real Estate Pvt. Ltd. and
the petitioners have already been impleaded as parties by allowing
their applications under Order 1, Rule 10 (2) C.P.C. and their
written   statements filed have been accepted, the learned trial
court should have construed that the suit is relegated to a position
prior to passing the preliminary decree, where the defendants 3
and 4 entered appearance and filed their written statements.
Hence, it was incumbent on the part of the learned trial court to
recast the issues under the changed circumstances and to recall
the witnesses examined by the parties before the preliminary
decree was drawn up for being cross-examined by the petitioners.
On such cross-examination and on the evidence adduced by the
petitioners, both oral and documentary, the learned trial court
was required to determine the issues recast to find out as to
whether     the property said to have been purchased by the
defendant no. 3 and, thereafter, by the defendant no. 4 from him,
is to be excluded from the preliminary decree.

                                 15
 14.            In view of the above findings, the impugned order
 dated 19.5.2012 passed by the learned Civil Judge (Senior
 Division), Bhubaneswar in C.S. No.       361 of 1994-I (F.D.) is set
 aside and the learned trial court is directed to recall the witnesses
 for cross-examination by the petitioners – defendants 3 and 4,
 after recasting the issues and pass a fresh preliminary decree as
 per the directions/observations made above. The suit being of the
 year 1994, the learned trial court is directed to expedite the
 hearing of the same so as to conclude it by the end of June, 2013.
 15.            In the result, both the writ petitions are allowed.
 There shall be no order as to costs.
                                               ……………………
                                                 M.M. Das, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
November 27th, 2012/ Biswal


