                                   ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
                                        R.S.A. NO. 201          OF 2004
             From a judgment and decree dated 21.4.2004 and 5.5.2004
             respectively passed by Shri S.K.Pattnaik, learned 2nd Additional
             District Judge, Bhubaneswar in R.F.A. No. 5/44 of 2003
             confirming the          judgment and decree dated 22..11.2003 and
             3.12.2003 passed by Shri D.S. Mishra, learned Civil Judge (Senior
             Division), Bhubaneswar in T.S. No. 447 of 2000.
                                            ------------
             Sakuntala Subudhi & another                        ……           Appellants
                                             -versus-
             Subash Chandra Panda & others                       ……          Respondents
                             For Appellants :        M/s. S.P. Mishra, Sr. Advocate,
                                                              S. Mishra, S. Nanda &
                                                              Miss S.Mishra
                           For Respondents :         M/s. B. Baug, B.K. Das,
                                                            S.S. Ghosh, B. Das & S.Rath.
                                                              (For R. No.1)
                                                    ------------------
                                            Decided on 31.07.2012
                                                   -------------------
             PRESENT:
                                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE M. M. DAS
             --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
M.M. DAS, J.                        The unsuccessful defendants 1 and 2, who are the
             appellants in this Second Appeal, have challenged the confirming
             judgments of the learned courts below decreeing the plaintiff’s suit for
             permanent injunction and directing recovery of possession.
             2.             The present respondent No.1 as plaintiff filed T.S. No.447
             of 2000 in the court of the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division),

                                2
Bhubaneswar for a decree for permanent injunction by restraining the
defendants 1 and 2 (present appellants) perpetually from disturbing
the possession of the plaintiff-respondent No.1, which also includes
the building. It was, inter alia, pleaded in the plaint that the
defendant No.4, who is the present respondent No.3, got the suit land
from the General Administration Department of the Government of
Odisha by the registered lease deed dated 28.03.1984 (Ext.1) and
thereafter, he constructed a building over the suit land and applying
for conversion of the suit land to “free hold”, the same was allowed by
the G.A. Department and a deed of conveyance was executed in his
favour vide Ext.5. Thereafter, the said defendant No.4, through his
Power of Attorney – defendant No.5, executed a registered sale deed –
Ext.6 on 29.05.2000 in favour of the plaintiff and delivered possession
of the same to the plaintiff. The plaintiff thereupon, continued to
possess the suit land along with the house and mutated his name in
the Record of Rights vide Ext.7 and paid rent obtaining rent receipts
Exts.8 & 8(a). He also got his building assessed to municipal tax and
paid municipal tax as per the receipt Ext.9. But the defendants 1 and
2, who have no manner of right, title and interest and possession
claiming that the defendant No.1 is a prospective purchaser, created
disturbance in the possession and enjoyment of the suit land and the
building of the plaintiff. The defendant No.4 vide Ext.2 had executed a
Power of Attorney in favour of the defendant No.2, which the

                               3
defendant No.4 subsequently cancelled by a registered deed of
cancellation vide Ext.3 and issued notice by registered post, of the
said cancellation vide Ext.4 to the defendant No.2. Under the said
Power of Attorney – Ext.2, possession was never handed over to the
defendant No.2 by the defendant No.4. The plaintiff had let out the
building existing on the suit land to different tenants. Hence, the
plaintiff filed the suit for permanent injunction to restrain the
defendants 1 and 2 from creating any disturbance in his peaceful
possession and enjoyment of the suit property.
3.            The defendant No.4, the original lessee of the suit land
with the building and the defendant No.5, who was a Power of
Attorney holder of defendant No.4, under a registered Power of
Attorney, filed a written statement supporting the plaintiff’s case and
admitted that the defendant No.4 has sold the suit property to the
plaintiff.
4.            The defendants 1 and 2, i.e., the present appellants filed
a joint written statement denying the plaint averments and claimed
that the defendant No.4 had executed a Power of Attorney in favour of
the defendant No.2 vide Ext.2 and the defendant No.2 had no
knowledge with regard to cancellation of the same under Ext.3 and
the defendant No.1 has got an agreement to sell in her favour for
purchase of the suit land at a cost of Rs.2,35,000/- and paid the
entire consideration amount, but the defendant No.4, instead of

                                 4
executing and registering the sale deed in her favour, delayed the
matter and sold the suit land to the plaintiff.
5.            It may be mentioned here that the defendant No.2 was
deleted from the case record.
6.            On the above pleadings, the learned trial court framed
two issues, which are as follows:-
              I. Whether the suit is maintainable ?
             II. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get a decree of
                 perpetual injunction against the defendant with
                 respect to the suit land and the house ?
Thereafter, the parties led evidence. During pendency of the suit, the
plaintiff along with the plaint had filed Misc. Case No.391 of 2000 for
grant of temporary injunction restraining the defendants 1 and 2 from
interfering with his possession over the suit land. After appearance of
the defendants 1 and 2 in the said Misc. Case, an order was passed to
maintain status quo over the suit property with a prima facie finding
of possession of the plaintiff. The said order of status quo was
ultimately made absolute. Alleging that the defendants 1 and 2
forcibly entered into the ground floor of the building on 06.07.2011 by
violating the order of status quo, the plaintiff in his evidence, stated
about such violation of the order of status quo and his forceful
dispossession by the defendants 1 and 2, when he was examined as
P.W.1. The defendants 1 and 2 did not cross-examine the P.W.1. The
defendants 1 and 2, though examined the defendant No.2 as D.W.1,

                                5
who filed his evidence-in-chief on affidavit, was cross-examined by the
defendant No.4 and partly by the plaintiff. But thereafter, on the
adjourned dates, the said D.W.1 for the defendants 1 and 2 did not
turn up for further cross-examination and consequently the evidence
of D.Ws. 1 and 2 was closed. It is revealed form the records that when
the suit was posted for argument, the defendants 1 and 2 filed an
application to allow them to exhibit certain documents, which were
allowed on 06.11.2003, but the defendants 1 and 2 did not produce
any document for being marked as exhibit. Again on 13.11.2003, on
the application of defendants 1 and 2, the learned trial court recalled
the order closing the evidence from the side of defendants 1 and 2.
But the defendants 1 and 2 neither exhibited any documents nor was
D.W.1 produced for cross-examination. Thereafter, the suit was
posted for argument and the learned trial court disposed of the suit
by its judgment dated 22.11.2003, decreeing the same for permanent
injunction and directed recovery of possession, since the defendants 1
and 2 were found to have dispossessed the plaintiff during pendency
of the suit by violating the order of status quo on 06.07.2001.
7.           The defendants 1 and 2, challenging the judgment and
decree of the learned trial court, filed R.F.A. No.5/44 of 2003 in the
court of the learned District Judge, Khurda at Bhubaneswar, which
later on was heard by the learned 2nd Additional District Judge,
Bhubaneswar. The learned first appellate court, after hearing the

                                  6
parties, by its judgment dated 21.04.2004, dismissed the appeal,
confirming the judgment and decree passed by the learned trial court.
Hence, this Second Appeal.
8.               This Second Appeal has been admitted on the
following substantial questions of law:-
             (A) Whether the learned trial judge was justified in
                  disposing of the suit on merit as per Order –
                  17, Rule – 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure
                  instead of disposing of the suit under Order – 9
                  C.P.C. ?
             (B) Whether the courts below are justified in
                  granting the relief of eviction against the
                  defendants 1 and 2, when the suit was a suit
                  simplicitor for permanent injunction ?
9.               It appears that before the learned lower appellate
court, the appellants raised the following questions:-
             (a) They were not given opportunity to file and
                  exhibit documents on their behalf;
             (b) They were not given opportunity to cross-
                  examine the P.W.1;
             (c) They would have been set ex-parte, when the
                  petition for adjournment filed by them was
                  rejected and ex-parte judgment, instead of
                  contested one, would have been passed;
             (d) They prayed for remand of the case to the trial
                  court for its fresh disposal.
10.          Mr. S.P. Mishra, learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellants drew the attention of this Court to Order – 17, Rule – 3

                              7
C.P.C. and submitted that it is provided therein that when any party
in the suit, to whom, time has been granted, fails to produce evidence,
the court may proceed to decide the suit or resort to Order – 9 C.P.C.
As it is seen in the present case, the defendant could not present
himself for cross-examination, the court should have given an
opportunity to the defendant to defend the case. According to Mr.
Mishra, the learned courts below committed serious irregularities in
projecting the case to be a contested one, denying opportunity to the
defendants to present their case or produce and prove documents.
Further, drawing the notice of this Court to the facts of the case, Mr.
Mishra submitted that the appellant No.1 got a registered Power of
Attorney from the defendant No. 4 – Prafulla Kumar Panda on
28.02.1997 which was an irrevocable general Power of Attorney. As
per the said Power of Attorney, the property in dispute, being a lease
hold property granted by the G.A. Department, the appellant No.1 was
empowered to apply for permission for transfer of the same. As per
Section – 206 of the Contract Act, a reasonable notice must be given
for revocation of such a Power of Attorney, which was never given to
the appellant No.1. Such notice is mandatory, bereft of which the
Power of Attorney in favour of the appellant No.1 cannot be treated to
be cancelled and holds good till date. The subsequent Power of
Attorney executed by the defendant No.4 in favour of the defendant
NO.5 – Ajit Kumar Mangaraj on 27.05.2000 was not an irrevocable

                                8
one, but by virtue of the second Power of Attorney, the plaintiff
purchased the suit land on 31.05.2000 from the defendant No.5. The
appellant No.1, by virtue of the irrevocable general Power of Attorney,
sold the suit land to appellant No.2 on 27.01.2001. Mr. Mishra,
further submitted that, if the holder of an irrevocable Power of
Attorney refused to give consent for cancellation, then the principal
can sue for damages. In the instant case, the defendant No.4 having
not filed any suit for damages against the appellant No.1 (defendant
No.1), he could not have executed another Power of Attorney in favour
of the defendant No.5. According to him, if the Power of Attorney
executed in favour of the appellant No.1, has not been revoked by
following due procedure of law, then a presumption arises that the
second Power of Attorney has been created for the purpose of the suit.
He also disputes the allegation of dispossession during pendency of
the suit, which is a question of fact.
11.           Basically, Mr. Mishra argued that the judgment and
decree passed by the learned trial court is an ex-parte decree and this
case is a fit case for remand and retrial.
12.            Mr. B.Baug., learned counsel for the plaintiff- respondent
No.1, on the other hand, contended that the appellants before the
learned lower appellate court, did not press the question as to
whether in a suit for permanent injunction, if the plaintiff is
dispossessed during the pendency of the suit, violating the order of

                                  9
injunction, can a direction be issued for recovery of possession ?
According to him, this ground, which was taken by the appellants
before the learned lower appellate court, was abandoned and,
therefore, cannot be raised in this Second Appeal. He further
submitted that the learned trial court, having found the right, title
and interest of the plaintiff over the disputed property and further
found that the plaintiff has been dispossessed from the same on
06.07.2001 by the defendants 1 and 2, by violating the order of status
quo, has rightly directed recovery of possession, while decreeing the
suit for permanent injunction. Learned counsel relied upon the
decision in the case of Bauri and others v. Natabar Swain and
others, AIR 1982 Orissa 268 in support of his contention. In the said
case, a similar question was raised that in absence of a prayer for
recovery of possession, the courts below acted illegally in granting the
said relief to the plaintiff. This Court, while deciding the aforesaid
issues, took note of the decisions of the Jammu and Kashmir High
Court in the case of Mohd. Sultan Wani v. Quasim Ali, AIR 1977
J & K 21 as well as the decision in the case of Sikharchand Jain v.
Digamber Jain Praband Karini Sabha, AIR 1974 SC 1178, where
the Supreme Court has held as follows :-
                 “… Ordinarily, a suit is tried in all its stages on the
             cause of action as it existed on the date of its
             institution. But it is open to a Court including a court
             of appeal to take notice of events which have happened
             after the institution of the suit and afford relief to the
             parties in the changed circumstances where it is shown
             that the relief claimed originally has (1) by reason of

                                  10
              subsequent      change    of    circumstances     become
              inappropriate: or (2) where it is necessary to take notice
              of the changed circumstances in order to shorten the
              litigation, or (3) to do complete justice between the
              parties. ( See Rai Charan v. Biswanath, AIR 1915
              Cal. 103). On the basis of the above decision, I have no
              hesitation to agree with the learned courts below that it
              was necessary for the court to take notice of the
              changed circumstances in order to shorten the
              litigation and the course they adopted, best
              subserves the ends of justice, particularly when the
              defendants are not prejudiced on account of lack of
              notice”.
13.           In view of the above, therefore, I find that the learned
courts below have committed no illegality in directing recovery of
possession of the disputed property from the defendants – appellants,
even though the suit was filed for grant of a decree of permanent
injunction, by taking note of the subsequent events. The question of
law framed as Question No. B during admission of this Second Appeal
is, therefore, accordingly answered.
14.                With regard to the substantial question of law as
mentioned in (A), it is seen from the facts of the case that defendants
1 and 2 participated in the trial, cross-examined the plaintiffs’ witness
and they also produced their evidence, but the witness examined on
their behalf, did not turn up for cross-examination and only
thereafter, the learned trial court passed a contesting judgment under
Order – 17, Rule – 3 C.P.C., which has been confirmed by the learned
lower appellate court.
15.           In order to find out as to whether in the facts of the
present case, Rule – 2 of Order – 17 C.P.C. applies or Rule – 3 thereof

                                   11
applies, it would be apt to extract the provisions of Order – 17, Rules –
2 and 3 C.P.C., which are as follows:-
                                  “ORDER XVII
              1.     xxx                xxx          xxx
              2. Procedure if parties fail to appear on day fixed. –
                 Where, on any day to which the hearing of the suit
                 is adjourned, the parties or any of them fail to
                 appear, the Court may proceed to dispose of the
                 suit in one of the modes directed in that behalf by
                 Order IX or make such other order as it thinks fit.
                          (Explanation – Where the evidence or a
                       substantial portion of the evidence of any
                       party has already been recorded and such
                       party fails to appear on any day to which
                       the hearing of the suit is adjourned, the
                       Court may, in its discretion, proceed with
                       the case as if such party were present.)
              3. Court     may proceed notwithstanding either
                 party fails to produce evidence, etc. – Where any
                 party to a suit to whom time has been granted fails
                 to produce his evidence, or to cause the attendance
                 of his witness, or to perform any other act
                 necessary to the further progress of the suit, for
                 which time has been allowed, [the Court may,
                 notwithstanding such default, -
                         (a) if the parties are present, proceed to
                             decide the suit forthwith, or
                         (b) if the parties are, or any of them is,
                             absent, proceed under rule 2].”
16.           This Court, in the case of M/s. Radhika Engineering
Industries v. M/s. Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd., Koraput Division,
1993 (II) OLR 37, analyzing the provisions of Rules – 2 and 3 of Order
– 17 C.P.C. held thus :-
                “4. Rules 2 and 3 of Order 17 provide for distinct and
          different sets of circumstances. Rule 2 applies where an
          adjournment has been generally granted and not for any
          special purpose, whereas Rule 3 applies where the
          adjournment has been given for one of the purposes
          mentioned in said Rule 3. Whereas Rule 3 empowers the

                                12
         Court to decide the suit forthwith, Rule 2 speaks disposal
         of the suit in one of the modes specified. Rule 2 does not
         apply unless the party has failed to appear at the hearing,
         whereas Rule 3 will apply where the party appears, but
         has committed default referred to in Rule 3. But it has
         been held in several cases that even where a party is
         physically present in Court but refuses to take part in the
         proceedings after his application for adjournment is
         rejected, he cannot be said to have appeared at the hearing
         so as to bring the matter within Rule 3 of Order 17, Code
         of Civil Procedure. Even where a party to whom time had
         been granted at his instance for doing one of the acts
         mentioned in Rule 3 of Order 17, but he fails to do the
         same, and also does not appear at the hearing of the suit,
         then the Court should proceed only under Rule 2. This is
         the view expressed by this Court as well as several other
         High Courts in several cases. (See AIR 1967 Orissa, 14
         (Parikshit Sai and another v. Indra Bhoi and others) :
         41 (1975) CLT 1117, (Adhikari Devanidhi Das v.
         Krupanidhi Nanda) : 43 (1977) CLT, 63 (Dr. Lakhiram
         Gupta v. S. Paikrai) AIR 1977 Madhya Pradesh, 282 (FB)
         (Rama Rao and others v. Shantibai and others) : AIR
         1964 Kerala, 99 (P. Govinda Menon, son of Lakshmi
         Amma and another v. Visalakshi Amma and others) :
         AIR 1961 Andhra Pradesh, 201 (FB) (W. Agaish v. Mohd.
         Abdul     Koreem)     and    AIR    1977    Madras,    108
         (Chidambaram v. Kalidas and others)………..”
17.          Applying the above principle to the facts of the said case
and finding that the suit having been adjourned on 10.10.1986, it was
an adjournment generally and for any special purpose or for any of
the purposes mentioned in Rule – 3 of Order – 17 C.P.C. and on
19.11.1986, no evidence had been led by either party and the
defendants’ application for adjournment was rejected and the Lawyer
appearing for the defendants also did not further participate in the
proceeding and finally, the court, on the evidence of the plaintiff,
concluded the matter. The said disposal of the suit cannot be held to
be one under Order – 17, Rule – 3 C.P.C., but Rule – 2 thereof.

                                  13
18.           In the case of Prakash Chander Manchanda and
another v. Smt. Janki Manchanda, AIR 1987 SC 42, the Supreme
Court interpreted Order 17, Rules – 2 and 3 C.P.C. and                   held as
follows:-
                       “If on a date fixed, one of the parties to the suit
          remain absent and for that party no evidence has been
          examined up to that date the Court has no option but to
          proceed to dispose of the mater in accordance with O. 17,
          R. 2 in any one of the modes prescribed under O. 9 of the
          Civil P.C. After the Amendment by Act 104 of 1976 to O.
          17, Rr. 2 and 3 in cases where a party is absent only
          course is as mentioned in O. 17, R. 3(b) to proceed under
          R. 2. Therefore, in absence of the defendant, the Court had
          no option but proceed under R. 2. Similarly the language
          of R. 2 as now stands also clearly lays down that if any one
          of the parties fails to appear, the Court has to proceed to
          dispose of the suit in one of the modes directed under O. 9.
          The explanation to R. 2 gives discretion to the Court to
          proceed under R. 3 even if a party is absent but that
          discretion is limited only in cases where a party which is
          absent has led some evidence or has examined substantial
          part of their evidence.”                 (Emphasis supplied)
19.           As already stated in the present case, the plaintiff was
examined as P.W.1 in full and was cross-examined by the defendants
1 and 2 (appellants). Thereafter, the evidence from the side of the
plaintiff was closed, then the defendant No.2 was examined as D.W.1
upon filing his affidavit evidence and examined in chief. He did not
exhibit any document and thereafter he was cross-examined by the
defendants 4 and 5 and partly cross-examined by the plaintiff, when
the case was adjourned to the next date for further cross-
examination. On the adjourned dates, D.W.1 did not appear for
further cross-examination and took adjournments. Lastly, such time
petition was rejected and the evidence from the side of defendants 1

                                14
and 2 was closed and the suit was posted for argument. The
defendants remained absent. In the facts of the present case,
therefore, it is seen that the defendants 1 and 2, to whom time was
granted, failed to produce D.W.1 for further cross-examination.
Hence, it can be said that they failed to perform an act necessary to
the further progress of the suit, for which time was allowed. In such
event, in Rule – 3 (b), since the defendants were absent, the court was
to proceed under Rule – 2. As per the explanation to Rule – 2, as the
substantial portion of the evidence on behalf of the defendants was
already recorded, when the defendants failed to appear on the date, to
which the hearing of the suit was adjourned, the court rightly
exercised its discretion and proceeded with the case, as such parties
were present. The net result, therefore, is that the court, having
exercised its discretion under the explanation given in Rule – 2, not
having disposed of the suit in one of the modes directed in that behalf
by Order – IX, the judgment cannot be stated to be an ex-parte one,
but amounts to a judgment on contest.
20.          This Court, therefore, answers the said substantial
questions of law by holding that there is no illegality committed by the
courts below in decreeing the suit on contest.
21.          The    Second   Appeal   being  devoid    of  merit stands
dismissed, but in the circumstances, without any cost in respect of
this appeal.

                            15
                               ………………………
                                M. M. DAS, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
July 31st ,2012/Subha.


