                                                                              #35
$~
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+       W.P.(C) 7182/2010
        KULDEEP SINGH                    ..... Petitioner
                            Through      Mr. A. Maitri with Ms. Radhika
                                         Chandershekhar, Advocates
                            versus
        UNION OF INDIA & ORS.            ..... Respondents
                            Through      Mr. Rakesh Mittal, Advocate for R-1
                                         and 2.
%                                  Date of Decision : 06th March, 2014
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
                            JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J: (Oral)
1.      Present writ petition has been filed primarily seeking a direction to
restrain respondent nos. 2 and 3 from terminating/cancelling the petitioner’s
allotment of STD/ISD/PCO booth at Railway Yatri Niwas, New Delhi.
Petitioner      also  challenges     the    policy/guidelines/notification    No.
2000/TG/IV/10/P/STD/PCO dated 20th October, 2009 issued by the Railway
Board.
2.      The relevant facts of the present case are that petitioner is a physically
handicapped person who had been allocated an STD/ISD/PCO booth by
respondent no. 2 in Delhi in 1993.
W.P.(C) 7182/2010                                             Page 1 of 4

3.      Subsequently, agreement for fixed period was executed between the
parties. Admittedly, as of today, agreements between petitioner and
respondent no. 2 have come to an end by efflux of time.
4.      It is pertinent to mention that agreement between the parties not only
contains an arbitration clause but also permits the respondent no. 2 to
terminate the same after giving a thirty days notice.
5.      In 2002, a new STD/ISD/PCO booth policy was issued by respondent
no. 2. According to this policy, booths were not to be granted beyond ten
years to any particular allottee (Refer Clause 8.7 of Policy).
6.      In the present case, ten years have already lapsed, since the 2002
policy came into effect.
7.      Learned counsel for petitioner challenges the cancellation of
petitioner's booth on the ground that it is vitiated by malafide as according to
him the impugned decision of the respondent is part of a design to take over
all the STD/ISD/PCO booths. He lays emphasis on the fact that petitioner is
physically handicapped and at the moment 34 STD/ISD/PCO booths are
lying vacant with respondent in Delhi.
8.      He also states that due to mobile revolution, no one is coming forward
to accept respondent's STD/ISD/PCO booth.
9.      Though this Court has sympathy for the physically handicapped, yet it
is of the view that State largesse should not be monopolized/cornered by a
few physically handicapped individuals.
10.     It is also settled law that it is neither within the domain of the courts
nor the scope of the judicial review to embark upon an enquiry as to whether
a particular public policy is wise or whether better public policy can be
evolved. Nor are our courts inclined to strike down a policy at the behest of
W.P.(C) 7182/2010                                              Page 2 of 4

a petitioner merely because it has been urged that a different policy would
have been fairer or wiser or more scientific or more logical. [See: Balco
Employees' Union (Regd.) vs. Union of India and Others, (2002) 2 SCC
333].
11.     Consequently, the maximum time period of ten years prescribed in
2002 Policy is fair and reasonable.
12.     This Court is further of the view that the present writ petition is not
maintainable as the disputes between the parties are contractual in nature. It
is pertinent to mention that petitioner has no legal right to continue with
possession of the booth in question as the Agreements have expired by
efflux of time and they are determinable in nature. Further, the Agreements
have a dispute resolution mechanism, namely an arbitration clause.
13.     However, keeping in view the intent and objectives of Persons with
Disabilities      (Equal Opportunities,   Protection  of   Rights      and Full
Participation) Act, 1995 as well as 2002 policy, respondents are directed to
allocate all vacant STD/ISD/PCO booths in accordance with its 2002 policy
within a period of three months.
14.     Out of the STD/ISD/PCO booths to be allocated to the physically
handicapped, it is directed that the vacant booths in the said category would
be allocated first and the petitioner would be asked to vacate / handover
possession after all the vacant booths have been awarded to the physically
handicapped. In the event, petitioner’s booth is specifically bid for, then the
petitioner would be accommodated in a vacant booth, if available, in the same
category on completion of formalities. It is also clarified that in the event,
no application is received for petitioner's STD/ISD/PCO booths, respondents
will allow the petitioner to continue to occupy the booth in his possession.
W.P.(C) 7182/2010                                          Page 3 of 4

15.     With the aforesaid observation and direction, present petition stands
disposed of.
                                                          MANMOHAN, J
MARCH 06, 2014
rn
W.P.(C) 7182/2010                                         Page 4 of 4


