                                                                             #25
$~
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+       W.P.(C) 5751/2015 & CM APPL. 10341/2015
        M/S. GOEL & GOEL AND ORS.                 ..... Petitioners
                            Through       Mr. Jitender Mehta, Advocate
                            versus
        UNION OF INDIA & ORS.             ..... Respondents
                            Through       Mr. Jagjit Singh, Sr. Standing
                                          Counsel for Railways.
%                                  Date of Decision: 07th September, 2016
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
                                JUDGMENT
MANMOHAN, J: (Oral)
1.      Present writ petition has been filed with the following prayers :-
        “(a) To issue a writ of certiorari or any other writ or direction
        calling for the records and proceedings of Stalls/trolleys of the
        Petitioners. Trolley No. 1 & 2 at Railway Station Ambala Cantt
        of M/s Goel & Goel, Trolley No. 3 & 4 at Railway Station
        Ambala Cantt of Naveen Kumar, Stall No. 2 & 3 at Railway
        Station Chandigarh of M/S ESS ESS Caterers and Stall No. 1 &
        Trolley No. 2 at Railway Station Chandigarh of M/S Classic
        Caterers.
        (b) To issue any appropriate writ or direction and declare
        that the proceedings of closer of Trolley No. 1 & 2 at Railway
        Station Ambala Cantt of M/s Goel & Goel, Trolley No. 3 & 4 at
W.P.(C) 5751/2015                                                Page 1 of 3

        Railway Station Ambala Cantt of Naveen Kumar, Stall No. 2 &
        3 at Railway Station Chandigarh of M/S ESS ESS Caterers and
        Stall No. 1 & Trolley No. 2 at Railway Station Chandigarh of
        M/S Classic Caterers is illegal, arbitrary, unconstitutional, null
        and void-ab-initio and is liable to be quashed and set aside,
        (c) To issue writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ,
        order or direction thereby commanding all Respondents to state
        the reason for not inviting fresh bids/tenders as per the
        direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.
        (d) Any other appropriate writ or direction in favour of the
        petitioners and against the respondents;
        (e) Such further or other order or orders be passed and/or
        direction or directions be given as to this Hon’ble Court may
        deem fit and proper.”
2.      Learned counsel for the petitioner states that even though the
petitioner’s tenure has expired, but as there is a renewal clause in the
contract, the petitioner is entitled to renewal.
3.      He also states that Railways have been renewing the contracts of other
similarly placed contracts.
4.      Mr. Jagjit Singh, learned senior standing counsel for Railways states
that no contract where contract had been transferred from IRCTC to the
Railways has been extended.
5.      Since admittedly in the present case the contract between the parties
has expired, there is no pre-existing legal right in favour of the petitioner to
file a writ petition to seek renewal of the contract and that too only on the
basis that the contract contains a provision for renewal. This Court is of the
view that it would not be justified in issuing a direction for re-writing the
W.P.(C) 5751/2015                                           Page 2 of 3

contract and for enforcement of a non-existing contract; non-existing in the
sense that the contract between had already come to an end by efflux of
time.
6.      Moreover, the Supreme Court in Union of India and Others vs. M.K.
Sarkar, (2010) 2 SCC 59, has held as under::-
        "26. A claim on the basis of guarantee of equality, by reference to
        someone similarly placed, is permissible only when the person
        similarly placed has been lawfully granted a relief and the person
        claiming relief is also lawfully entitled for the same. On the other
        hand, where a benefit was illegally or irregularly extended to
        someone else, a person who is not extended a similar illegal
        benefit cannot approach a court for extension of a similar illegal
        benefit. If such a request is accepted, it would amount to
        perpetuating the irregularity. When a person is refused a benefit
        to which he is not entitled, he cannot approach the court and
        claim that benefit on the ground that someone else has been
        illegally extended such benefit. If he wants, he can challenge the
        benefit illegally granted to others. The fact that someone who may
        not be entitled to the relief has been given relief illegally, is not a
        ground to grant relief to a person who is not entitled to the relief."
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
7.      Consequently, present writ petition and application being bereft of
merits, are dismissed. The interim orders stand vacated.
                                                                MANMOHAN, J
SEPTEMBER 07, 2016
rn
W.P.(C) 5751/2015                                               Page 3 of 3


