                                                                                        #9
$~
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+       ITA 1479/2010
THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX                                   ..... Appellant
                                 Through: Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, Advocate
                          versus
M. S. BINDRA & SONS P. LTD.                                       ..... Respondent
                                 Through: None.
%                                         Date of Decision: 28th September, 2010
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MANMOHAN
1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
MANMOHAN, J
1.      The present appeal has been filed under Section 260A of Income
Tax Act, 1961 (for brevity “Act”) challenging the order dated 20th July,
2009 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (in short
“Tribunal”) in ITA No. 504/Del/2009, for the Assessment Year 2001-
2002.
2.      Mr. Sanjeev Sabharwal, learned counsel for the revenue
submitted that the Tribunal had erred in law in dismissing the revenue‟s
appeal whereby the penalty under Section 271(1)(c) of the Act
amounting to ` 45,40,297/- imposed by the Assessing Officer (in short,
“AO”) had been deleted. Mr. Sabharwal further relied upon a judgment
ITA 1479/2010                                                                Page 1 of 5

of the Supreme Court in Union of India and Ors. Vs. Dharamendra
Textile Processors and Ors. (2008) 13 SCC 369.
3.      In fact, Section 271(1)(c) came to be interpreted by the Apex
Court in Union of India & Ors. vs. Dharamendra Textile Processors
& Ors. (2008) 306 ITR 277 (SC). The three Judge Bench of the Apex
Court over-ruled the decision in Dilip N. Shroff vs. Joint CIT (2007)
291 ITR 519 (SC) and approved the decision in Chairman, SEBI vs.
Shriram Mutual Fund and Anr. (2006) 5SCC 361. In the said case,
the Supreme Court held:-
       “27. The Explanations appended to section 272(1)(c) of
        the Income-tax Act entirely indicate the element of strict
        liability on the assessee for concealment or for giving
        inaccurate particulars while filing the return. The judgment
       in Dilip N. Shroff’s case [2007] 8 Scale 304 (SC) has not
       considered the effect and relevance of Section 276C of the
       Income-tax Act. The object behind the enactment of section
       271(1)(c) read with the Explanations indicates that the said
       section has been enacted to provide for a remedy for loss of
       revenue. The penalty under that provision is a civil liability
       as is the case in the matter of prosecution under Section
       276C of the Income-tax Act.”
 4.     The aforesaid decision was taken note of in Commissioner of
 Income Tax vs. Reliance Petroproducts Pvt. Ltd.(2010) 322 ITR 158
 (SC). While considering the phrase „concealment of particulars‟, the
 Apex Court referred to Section 271 and held as follows:-
       “9.Therefore, it is obvious that it must be shown that the
       conditions under Section 271(1)(c) must exist before the
       penalty is imposed. There can be no dispute that everything
       would depend upon the return filed because that is the only
       document, where the assessee can furnish the particulars of
       his income. When such particulars are found to be
       inaccurate, the liability would arise. In Dilip N. Shroff v.
ITA 1479/2010                                                   Page 2 of 5

       Joint CIT [2007] 6 SCC 329, thisCourt explained the
       terms “concealment of income” and “furnishing inaccurate
       particulars”. The Court went on to hold therein that in
       order to attract the penalty under Section 271(1)(c), mens
       rea was necessary, as according to the Court, the word
       “inaccurate” signified a deliberate act or omission on
       behalf of the assessee. It went on to hold that clause (iii) of
       section 271(1)(c) provided for a discretionary jurisdiction
       upon the assessing authority, inasmuch as the amount of
       penalty could not be less than the amount of tax sought to be
       evaded by reason of such concealment of particulars of
       income, but it may not exceed three times thereof. It was
       pointed out that the term “inaccurate particulars” was not
       defined anywhere in the Act and, therefore, it was held that
       furnishing of an assessment of the value of the property
       may not by itself be furnishing inaccurate particulars. It
       was further held that the Assessing Officer must be found to
       have failed to prove that his explanation is not only not bona
       fide but all the facts relating to the same and material to the
       computation of his income were not disclosed by him. It was
       then held that the explanation must be preceded by a
       finding as to how and in what manner, the assessee had
       furnished the particulars of his income. The Court ultimately
       went on to hold that the element of mens rea was essential.
       It was only on the point of mens rea that the judgment in
       Dilip N. Shroff v. Joint CIT was upset. In Union of India
       v. Dharamendra Textile Processors, after quoting from
       section 271 extensively and also considering section
       271(1)(c),the Court came to the conclusion that since
       Section 271(1)(c) indicated the element of strict liability on
       the assessee for the concealment or for giving inaccurate
       particulars while filing return, there was no necessity of
       mens rea. The court went on to hold that the objective
       behind the enactment of Section 271(1)(c) read with
       Explanations indicated with the said section was for
       providing remedy for loss of revenue and such a penalty was
       a civil liability and, therefore, willful concealment is not an
       essential ingredient for attracting civil liability as was
       the case in the matter of prosecution under Section 276C of
       the Act. The basic reason why decision in Dilip N. Shroff v.
       Joint CIT was overruled by this Court in Union of India v.
       Dharamendra Textile Processors, was that according to
       this Court the effect and difference between Section
       271(1)(c) and        Section 76C of the Act was lost sight of
       in the case of Dilip N. Shroff v. Joint CIT. However, it must
       be pointed out that in Union of India v. Dharamendra
       Textile Processors, no fault was found with the rasoning in
       the decision in Dilip N. Shroff v. Joint CIT, where the court
ITA 1479/2010                                                    Page 3 of 5

       explained the meaning of the terms “conceal” and
       “inaccurate”. It was only the ultimate inference in Dilip N.
       Shroff v. Joint CIT to the effect that mens rea was an
       essential ingredient for the penalty under Section 271(1)(c)
       that the decision in Dilip N. Shroff v. Joint CIT was
       overruled………”
        Thereafter, so stating their Lordships‟ proceeded to hold as
       follows:-
        “11. …….A mere making of the claim, which is                   not
        sustainable in law, by itself, will not amount                  for
        furnishing inaccurate particulars             regarding         the
        income of the assessee. Such claim made in                      the
        return cannot amount to the inaccurate particulars.”
5.     In the present case, we find that both the Commissioner of
Income Tax (Appeals) [in short, “CIT(A)”] and the Tribunal have given
cogent reasons for setting aside the penalty levied under Section
271(1)(c) of the Act. The relevant portion of the impugned order of the
Tribunal is reproduced hereinbelow:-
       “6. None appeared on behalf of the assessee. We, therefore,
       heard the learned DR and gone through the records. In view of
       the categorical finding of the CIT (Appeals) that the issue is
       contentious in nature and is debatable, therefore, it would not
       be a case of concealment of penalty. Otherwise also, the
       assessee having disclosed all the facts in the return of income
       filed with the department and having offered the amount under
       Section 41(1) in assessment year 2002-03 shows the bonafides
       of the assessee and, therefore, in this account also, it cannot be
       a ground for concealment to income or furnishing of inaccurate
       particulars thereof. It was held by the Tribunal in the case of
       Shobha Trading Company (P) Limited Vs. ITO (1995) 52 ITD
       188 (Del.) that penalty for concealment cannot be levied merely
       because certain deductions, relief or benefits have been denied
       to the assessee. Accordingly, we do not find any reason to
       interfere with the order of the CIT (Appeals) and the same is
       upheld.”
ITA 1479/2010                                                        Page 4 of 5

6.       From the aforesaid, it is apparent that the respondent-assessee
had made full disclosure and there was neither any concealment of
income nor furnishing of inaccurate particulars.        In fact, both the
CIT(A) and Tribunal have found that the justification furnished by the
respondent-assessee was bonafide. Consequently, keeping in view the
conclusion of facts arrived at by the Commissioner as well as by the
Tribunal, the explanation offered by the respondent-assessee is bona
fide and the respondent-assessee‟s case would fall within the ambit of
Explanation 1 to Section 271 of Act.
7.     Accordingly, the respondent-assessee is not liable to pay penalty
under Section 271(1)(c) of Act and thus the present appeal being devoid
of merits is dismissed in limine but with no order as to costs.
                                              MANMOHAN, J
                                              CHIEF JUSTICE
SEPTEMBER 28, 2010
js
ITA 1479/2010                                                   Page 5 of 5


