*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+     LPA 6/2008
%                                    Date of decision: 05.02.2008
      STATE COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL                         ..... Appellant
      RESEARCH & TRAINING
                        Through:Ms. Avnish Ahlawat, Advocate
                   versus
      RAVI DWIVEDI                                    ..... Respondent
                        Through:Nemo
      CORAM:
       HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
       HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
      1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
         to see the judgment ?      yes
      2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?      yes
      3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ? yes
DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ: (oral)
1.     This appeal is directed against the order dated 21st
November, 2007 passed by the learned Single Judge allowing the
writ petition filed by the respondent herein. The respondent filed
a writ petition in this Court seeking a direction to the appellant to
admit him to a two year educational diploma course, i.e., DCET.
Counsel appearing for the State points out that the said course is
called the “ETT”. Be that as it may, it can be stated that the said
diploma course is being conducted in nine institutes run by the
Government and ten privately managed ones with a total of 1640
LPA No.6/2008                                     page No. 1 of     10

seats in all. A prospectus was also issued by the State Council of
Educational Research & Training wherein it was mentioned that
15% of the total seats are reserved for the candidates domiciled
other than in Delhi. In view of the provisions of The Persons with
Disabilities(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995(hereinafter called as the “Act”), three per
cent seats are reserved for physically handicapped candidates,
under     which   three  categories  of  handicaps/disabilities  are
envisaged:-
   (i) Orthopaedically Handicapped;
   (ii) Visual Handicapped; and
   (iii) Hearing Impairment.
2.       There is no dispute with regard to the fact that there are
49 seats reserved for the disabled. The respondent applied for
being considered under the disabled quota, assuming that one
per cent out of three per cent in terms of the Clause II(3)(C) at Sl.
No.4 would be reserved for candidates with hearing impairment.
The respondent      secured 50.02% marks. Since the respondent
did not possess the cut off marks in the disabled category, he was
denied admission.
LPA No.6/2008                                   page No. 2 of 10

3.     The respondent challenged the aforesaid policy of the
appellant of not compartmentalizing the three per cent disability
quota, enabling candidates suffering from different disabilities to
avail of the benefit, so that each category could avail of such
reservation.   The appellant asserts that like Section 33, under
Section 39 of the aforesaid Act, such compartmentalization of
quota must be done and in support of the said contention
reference was made to the provisions of Section 2(1)(I)(iv) of the
Act, which defines “Hearing Impairment” as meaning “loss of
sixty decibels or more in the better ear in the conversational
range of frequencies”.
4.     Even before the learned Single Judge reference was made
to the aforesaid Section 2(1) (I)(iv), Section 33 as also 39 and
other provisions of the Act, which were perused by the learned
Single Judge, and on a harmonious interpretation of all the
provisions the learned Single Judge concluded that the appellant
acted in violation of provisions of Section 33 of the Act in not
suitably providing for admission to persons who are hearing
impaired, like the respondent. Consequently, it was ordered that
the appellant should admit the respondent to the course and in
LPA No.6/2008                                 page No. 3 of 10

case no vacancy exists, or in the likelihood of his being unable to
satisfy attendance norms, in case of his admission at this stage,
he shall be admitted to the course for the next academic session
2008-2009.      The aforesaid findings and conclusions are now
challenged in this appeal which is filed by the State Counsel of
Educational Research & Training contending, inter alia, that the
interpretation given by the learned Single Judge to the provisions
of Section 33 and 39 of the Act is erroneous. In support of the
said contention, the counsel relied upon a decision of the
Supreme Court in All Kerala Parents Assn. Hearing Imp. & Anr. v.
State of Kerala & Ors. 2002(7) Scale 198.
5.      We have considered the aforesaid contention of the
counsel appearing for the appellant. So far Section 2(i) defines
disability it also includes the expression “hearing impairment”.
“Hearing Impairment” is again defined in clause 2(l) as meaning
“loss of sixty decibels or more in the better ear in the
conversational range of frequencies”. Chapter V of the Act deals
with the head “Education”, wherein it is provided that it will be
the responsibility of the appropriate Governments and the local
authorities to provide children with disabilities free education.
LPA No.6/2008                                  page No. 4 of 10

Section 29 of the Act provides that the appropriate Governments
shall set up adequate number of teachers' training institutions
and    assist   the   national    institutes  and    other     voluntary
organizations     to   develop     teachers'   training    programmes
specializing in disabilities so that requisite trained manpower is
available for special schools and integrated schools for children
with disabilities.    Section 33 of the Act provides that every
appropriate Government shall appoint in every establishment
such percentage of vacancies not less than three per cent for
persons or class of persons with disability of which one per cent
each shall be reserved for persons suffering from (i) blindness or
low vision; (ii) hearing impairment; (iii) locomotor disability or
cerebral palsy, in the posts identified for each disability. In other
words, the said legislation has envisaged that each one of the
said three categories will have reservation to the extent of 1%
each of the posts which are to be identified. So far Section 39 is
concerned,    the    same    also   provides   that   all   Government
educational    institutions   and    other   educational     institutions
receiving aid from the Government, shall reserve not less than
three per cent seats for persons with disabilities.
LPA No.6/2008                                     page No. 5 of  10

6.      The    learned   Single   Judge   has     given     harmonious
construction to the aforesaid provisions of the statute and
thereafter held that when provisions of both the Sections, i.e.
Sections 33 and 39, are read together it is established that
educational institutions shall have to provide for separate quotas
for different categories of the disabled. It is also held that Section
33 cannot be said to be exhaustive of all sub-categories within
the disabled and to that extent is merely illustrative.
7.      The learned Single Judge on appreciation of the records
found that the comparison of cut off marks prescribed for the
disabled candidates and the candidates who are wards of Delhi
School Teachers and employees of SCERT/DIET, in this case, is
telling and the purpose for providing reservations to the disabled
was to enable them access to institutions, which otherwise would
not be possible because the general examination and evaluation
methods are not suited to their physical limitations.           Having
referred to the various decisions of the Supreme Court like
Gazula Dasaratha Rama Rao v.The State of Andhra Pradesh &
Others (1961) 2 S.C.R. 931 and Yogendra Pal Singh v. Union of
India 1987(1) SCC 631 and following the ratio of the aforesaid
LPA No.6/2008                                     page No. 6 of 10

decisions it was held that the reservation and filling up of as
many as 31 seats in favour of the teachers working in DIETS is
suspect. However, the learned Single Judge did not interfere with
the aforesaid reservation provided so that the same may not at
that stage lead to anamoly.       However, it was held that the
appellant acted in violation of Section 33 of the Act in not suitably
providing for admission to persons who are hearing impaired, like
the respondent.
8.     In this connection, we may also refer to the Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the Act which provides that one of the
reasons for which the Act was enacted as a welfare legislation
was to spell out the responsibility of the State towards the
prevention of disabilities, protection of rights, provisions of
medical care, education, training, employment and rehabilitation
of persons with disabilities.   A hearing impaired student is also
facing disability and is required to be given education and is
required to be rehabilitated as he is a person with disability which
is recognized under the provisions of the aforesaid Act.         That
being the position, the contention that Section 39 does not
envisage any categorization and, therefore, such reservation
LPA No.6/2008                                   page No. 7 of 10

would not be available percentage wise to each of the categories,
in our considered opinion, is a misplaced argument and cannot be
accepted. The provisions of Section 33 are clear and the said
Section gives a message as to how the persons with disabilities
are required to be treated and how the posts are to be reserved
when it specifically states that each one of the three categories
would have one per cent each reserved seats in their favour.
Section 39 envisages again three per cent seats for persons with
disabilities, which is similar to Section 33. Same interpretation is
required to be given that three of the categories as mentioned
and highlighted in Section 33 are entitled to one percent seats
each reserved for them. The same having been made applicable
to the case in hand there was an illegality committed by the
appellant, which was sought to be rectified by the impugned
judgment.
9.      So far the decision of the Supreme Court in All Kerala
Parents Assn. Hearing Imp. & Anr.(supra), which is relied upon, is
concerned, a bare perusal of the same would also indicate that
the Supreme Court in the said decision held that the High Court
was wholly in error in construing Section 39 of the Act to mean
LPA No.6/2008                                   page No. 8 of 10

that it relates to reservation in Government employment and not
in relation to admission of students with disabilities in the
Government institutions as well as educational institutions
receiving aid from the Government. In the said decision it was
held that Section 39 of the Act deals with the reservation of seats
for   persons    with   disabilities in  Government       educational
institutions as well as educational institutions receiving aid from
the Government, and necessarily therefore the provisions thereof
must be complied with. In the said decision findings of the High
Court in relation to Section 39 of the Act to mean that it relates to
reservation in Government employment and not in relation to
admission of students with disabilities were set aside. The facts
in respect of which the said decision was rendered were in
different context and are clearly distinguishable. Here is a case
where the reserved seats for students with disabilities are being
ordered to be distributed for all the categories as is being
provided for under the provisions of Section 33 of the Act for the
persons with disability of hearing impairment are also ordered to
be accommodated.
10.      In our considered opinion, the decision which is rendered
LPA No.6/2008                                   page No. 9 of 10

by the learned Single Judge in no manner is contradictory or in
conflict with the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court.      We
find no reason to take a different view than what is taken by the
learned Single Judge. The appeal has no merit and is dismissed.
No costs.
                                 CHIEF JUSTICE
                                 REVA KHETRAPAL, J
      FEBRUARY 05, 2008
      Rohtash
LPA No.6/2008                                 page No. 10 of 10


