*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+      LPA 55/2008
%                              Date of decision : 28th March, 2008
       M/s Suresh Kumar Gupta                                ..... Appellant
                         Through Mr.Pradeep Gupta with Ms.Laxmibai
                                  Leitanthem, Advocates
                   versus
       The Commissioner of Food & Supplies & anr.       ..... Respondents
                         Through Mr.S.D. Salwan with Mr.Neeraj
                                  Choudhary, Advocates.
       CORAM:
       HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
       HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
       1. Whether reporters of local papers be allowed
          to see the judgment ?                                        Yes
       2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?                      Yes
       3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest ?Yes
       DR. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA, CJ :
1.The present appeal is directed against the judgment passed by the
learned Single Judge on 1st November, 2007 whereby the writ petition
filed by the appellant as a writ petitioner was dismissed.
2. The appellant herein was issued a Fair Price Shop licence in 1979 for
Majlis Park. In terms of the said licence, the appellant was required to
be engaged in the sale of controlled commodities, offered through the
LPA No.55/2008                                                   page 1 of 8

Public Distribution System. The appellant operated the said licence till
2000. A plea was taken in the writ petition filed by the appellant that
from 25th July, 2000 to 25th January, 2001, he was seriously ill and was,
therefore, unable to operate the licence or offer Public Distribution
System commodities for sale to the public. The appellant was served a
memo dated 23rd November, 2000, which was replied to by the
appellant by submitting a reply on 28th January, 2001 wherein he
stated that he was suffering from Typhoid.       On 11th March, 2003 a
notice was issued to him directing him to show cause as to why his
licence should not be cancelled.      The same was replied to by the
appellant.   Even subsequent thereto another show cause notice was
issued on 5th January, 2005, by the respondent as against which reply
was also filed. An order was passed by the respondent on 26th May,
2005 whereby the licence granted to the appellant was cancelled. The
said order was passed pursuant to show cause notice dated 11th March,
2003, which was based on the report that the aforesaid Public
Distribution System shop was neither functioning nor the appellant had
submitted any draft for lifting SFAs since long.        After making a
reference to the aforesaid, the following order was passed:
                   “It has been reported by the FSO circle-
              56 that M/s Suresh Kumar Gupta FPS
              No.5368 situated at A-69 Majlis Park, Delhi
              under circle No.56 is neither functioning nor
              submitted any draft for lifting SFAs since
              long.
LPA No.55/2008                                               page 2 of 8

                 A    show      cause     notice      No.AC
            (N)/F&S/2001/404/ dated 11.3.03 was issued
            by the then AC(N) to appear before him on
            21.3.03 and again reminder issued vide
            No.AC(N) F&S/2005/86 dated 5.1.05 for final
            appearance on 20.1.05.
                 Sh. Suresh Kumar Gupta, proprietor of
            FPS present before the then AC(N) on 1.2.05
            and submitted his written reply.         In his
            defense, he has stated that his FPS was not
            functioning since Oct, 2000 due to his illness
            but in support of his version, he submitted
            only “copy of medical certificate” about the
            treatment taken by him in the month of Oct,
            2000 in which he was advised three months
            rest up to 25.10.2000 by a BHM doctor and
            except this, he has not submitted further any
            evidence about non-functioning of his FPS.
            Neither he has applied for any kind of leave
            during the said period in view of
            department’s instruction No.F.28/4/97 /F&S/
            P&S/1105 dated 15.7.99 about grant of leave
            to PDS units.
                 Vide departments order dated 12.10.04
            and 11.11.04, worthy CFS has already issued
            directions that PDS units which are neither
            functioning nor submitting any draft for
            period of more than three months be
            cancelled forthwith.
                 On going through carefully the written
            reply filed by the licensee, his verbal
            arguments / averments made before the
            then AC(N) recorded in the case file on
            1.2.05 and available relevant past record
            now placed before me for deciding the case,
            I am of the considered view that merely on
            production of a medical certificate and that
            too from a private doctor, the grounds for
            non-functioning of FPS by him do not justify
            and hence it will not be in “public interest” to
LPA No.55/2008                                               page 3 of 8

             allow him to continue FPS further and the
             ends of justice will be met in case his
             authorization is cancelled in view of
             directions issued by the department as
             mentioned above.
                  Accordingly I, O.P. Dewan AC (North) in
             exercise of the powers conferred upon me
             under the relevant provision of Delhi
             specified articles (R&D) order 1981 hereby
             cancel the authorization of FPS No.5368 of
             M/s Suresh Kumar Gupta with immediate
             effect.”
3. Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the appellant preferred an
appeal to the Commissioner, who by his order dated 3rd November,
2005 rejected the same. In the said order, the Commissioner held that
the explanation given by the appellant for his inability to operate the
licence for the six months period between 25th July, 2000 to 25th
January, 2001 was unsatisfactory, since he claimed illness only after
receipt of the notice and not prior to the same. The main ground on
which the Commissioner dismissed the appeal was on the basis of his
information that the appellant had not operated the Public Distribution
System shop for more than five years, although he had deposited the
enhanced security amount of Rs.4500/-.
4.Being aggrieved by the said order, a writ petition was filed.     The
learned Single Judge considered the contentions raised before him in-
depth and thereafter passed a reasoned order dismissing the writ
petition. The learned Single Judge on appreciation of the records held
LPA No.55/2008                                              page 4 of 8

that the appellant did not operate the Fair Price Shop for about five
years, which is unacceptable when one views this from the larger
perspective of the public interest in ensuring periodic and regular
supplies to the consumers.     Reference was also made to one of the
replies to the show cause notice wherein the appellant had taken up a
plea that lifting the stocks of Public Distribution System was unviable
because the prices of Public Distribution System items had become
uneconomic. Therefore, the intention of the appellant was found to be
unacceptable and an afterthought.
5.Being aggrieved by the said order passed by the learned Single
Judge, the present appeal was filed on which we have heard the
learned counsel appearing for the parties.       Similar pleas were also
raised before us. The counsel appearing for the appellant submitted
before us that the appellant was unwell and was suffering from
different ailments between the period from 2000 – 2005 and, therefore,
it was not possible for him to lift the Public Distribution System items.
He also drew our attention to the Circular dated 22nd March, 2004 and
by making reference to paragraph 2 thereof, he submitted that even if
the licence for Fair Price Shop was lying non-functional for one reason
or the other even for a period longer than three years, one time
opportunity should be granted to such licensees, to apply within three
months from the date of issuance of those instructions for revival of
LPA No.55/2008                                                 page 5 of 8

their old licences.    It was also submitted by him that there were
sufficient reasons given by the appellant for non-functioning during the
aforesaid five years.
6.The aforesaid submissions made before us were considered by us in
the light of the records. The original records were also placed before
us for our perusal.    A bare reference to the aforesaid Circular dated
22nd March, 2004 would clearly establish that such one time
opportunity could be granted to a licencee for revival of the old licence
provided cancellation procedure had not been initiated.            In our
considered opinion, even on the face of the provisions enumerated in
paragraph 2 thereof, the benefits of the Circular could not be given to
the appellant as the cancellation procedure was initiated prior to the
issuance of the aforesaid Circular. The said position is clear on a bare
perusal of the records.     In this connection we may refer to the two
communications      issued regarding initiation of the said proceedings.
The relevant portions of the same are reproduced below for reference :
             “ Memo dated 23rd November, 2000
             It has been observed that you are not submitting
             your D/D Drafts of S.F.A. since last seven months
             without any intimation to this Circle office. You are
             hereby directed to explain the reason of not
             submitting the Draft and closer(sic. closure) of your
             F.P. shop. Your reply should reach this office within a
             week of issuing of this memo, failing which necessary
             action will be taken.”
LPA No.55/2008                                                 page 6 of 8

             Show Cause Notice Dated 11th March, 2003
             “WHEREAS FPS No.5368 FPS/KOD Lic.No.___situated
             at A-69 Majlis Park, Delhi inspected/checked by Circle
             Staff on 3.1.03 and the following discrepancies have
             been observed/reported in records/stocks:
             Not functioning since long.
             By committing the above discrepancies, you have
             violated the provisions of Delhi Specified Food
             Articles (Regulation of Distribution) Control Order
             1981 and Delhi Kerosene Oil (Export & Price) Control
             Order 1962. You are therefore directed to submit
             reply within 7 days on the receipt of this notice. If no
             reply is received with the stipulated period it will be
             presumed that you have accepted the charges and
             ex-parte decision will be taken.
             Besides written reply, you are directed to appear
             before the undersigned on 21.3.2003 at 11.00 a.m.
             along with relevant records pertaining to the case.”
7.The appellant neither deposited any draft for long five years nor
lifted any stocks. Therefore, due to the conduct of the appellant, the
beneficiaries of the Public Distribution system, who had been placed
under the appellant, suffered for untimely and irregular supply or no
supply of the food grains and other commodities under the Public
Distribution System.      The appellant as a licence holder failed to
discharge his duties as was expected of him.        He failed to lift such
supplies, although he was given the licence under which he was
obliged to lift the stocks so as to meet the objectives of the Public
Distribution System. Even as per Departmental Instructions No.
LPA No.55/2008                                                 page 7 of 8

F.28/4/97/F&S/P&S/1105 dated 15th July, 1999, no Fair Price Shop
holder can avail leave on medical ground for a period exceeding one
year, as in that case either the shopkeeper has to give resignation or
notice will be given to him for termination of license. It also appears
that the appellant was not interested in running the Fair Price Shop as
is evident from reply submitted by him to the notice dated 11 th March,
2003, wherein he has stated that the lifting of stocks was unviable
because the prices in the PDS had become uneconomic.
8.In that view of the matter, we find no reason to interfere with the
reasoned order passed by the learned Single Judge.         We find the
reasons given by the learned Single judge in dismissing the writ
petition to be cogent. There is no merit in this appeal which is
accordingly dismissed.
                                   CHIEF JUSTICE
                                   REVA KHETRAPAL, J
     MARCH 28, 2008
     nm
LPA No.55/2008                                               page 8 of 8


