*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                 Judgment Reserved on: July 17, 2014
%                                Judgment Delivered on: July 21, 2014
+                         CRL.A. 482/1998
       NAIN SINGH & ANR                                    ..... Appellants
                          Represented by:     Mr.Rakesh Sherawat and
                                              Mr.Kamal Choudhary, Advs.
                          versus
       STATE                                               ..... Respondent
                          Represented by:     Mr.Lovkesh Sawhney, APP for
                                              State with SI Somil Sharma, PS
                                              Nand Nagri.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA
MUKTA GUPTA, J.
1.     By the present appeal the appellants, the two brothers, challenge the
judgment dated September 24, 1998 passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge convicting them for offences punishable under Sections
304/34 IPC and the order on sentence dated September 25, 1998 directing
them to undergo imprisonment for life each and to pay a fine of `2,000/-
each. The conviction is based on the testimony of PW-4 Kamlesh, wife of
the deceased, corroborated by medical evidence and proof of motive by the
testimony of PW-3 Rajbala, the sister of the deceased.
2.     Learned counsel for the appellants contends that though the learned
Trial Court rightly disbelieved PW-1 Narain Singh, brother of the deceased
however, it erred in believing Kamlesh. Both the witnesses were planted.
Though both Narain Singh and Kamlesh claim that they took the deceased to
the hospital however, their blood stained clothes were not seized. The three-
Crl.A.No.482 of 1998                                               Page 1 of 8

wheeler driver in whose vehicle the deceased was taken was neither
examined nor blood stains seized from the said vehicle. Though Kamlesh
stated that she was injured in the incident, she was not examined medically
and no MLC has been prepared. The hockey stick recovered on the
disclosure of the Appellant No.2 Ombir has been rightly disbelieved by the
learned Trial Court. Further the two dandas allegedly recovered also do not
connect to the offence committed. The juvenile whose inquiry was
conducted before the Juvenile Justice Board has already been acquitted and
hence the appellants be also acquitted of the charges.
3.     Learned APP for the State on the other hand submits that even as per
the site plan, the house of Narain Singh was just near the place of occurrence
and thus he was a natural witness. Kamlesh had accompanied the deceased
to the market when the incident took place and thus she is also a natural
witness. The appellants threatened the deceased to withdraw the case against
his family members. Thus. motive has been proved by the prosecution by
producing PW-3 Rajbala, the sister of the deceased and the relevant records.
In view of the overwhelming evidence of the eye witnesses duly
corroborated by other evidence on record, the appellants be not acquitted.
4.     We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5.     The case of the prosecution is based on the testimony of Narain
Singh, maker of the FIR and Kamlesh. Kamlesh has deposed before the
Court that on September 07, 1992 at about 9.30 AM she had gone to
purchase vegetables with her husband Gulab Singh. When they reached the
intersection of Gali No.3, Nain Singh and his brother ‘R’ (Juvenile) came
there and stopped her husband and forcibly asked him to compromise the
matter with regard to the report lodged by the Rajbala, sister of Gulab Singh
Crl.A.No.482 of 1998                                              Page 2 of 8

on September 05, 1992. ‘R’ then exhorted that in case they do not come to
compromising terms “Inka Kaam Tamam Kar do”. Nain Singh took out a
knife and gave blow over the eyes. ‘R’ gave hockey blow on the person of
Gulab Singh. Thereafter Nain Singh and Ombir, the appellants herein gave
number of lathi blows on the person of her husband continuously. She raised
alarm and tried to save her husband but could not do so. She was also
beaten by the accused person by fist and blows. Her brother-in-law Narain
Singh threw certain brick-bats from the roof in order to avert the incident.
Some people from the neighbourhood also collected. After injuring her
husband Gulab Singh, the accused fled away leaving behind the lathis Ex.P-
1 and Ex.P-2 on the spot. This witness is a resident of A-2/230, East
Gokapuri whereas the incident took place in front of house of Narain Singh
A-3/38, East Gokal Puri, Delhi. Immediately after the incident, this witness
and Gulab Singh had been taken to the hospital by Narain Singh as is
evident from Ex.PW-9/A, DD No.7A dated September 07, 1992 at 11.00
AM.
6.     PW-2 Dr.R.K.B Chaudhary has proved the MLC of the deceased
Gulab Singh vide Ex.PW-2/A and PW-15 Dr.Basant Lal has proved the
post-mortem report Ex.PW-15/A. The cause of death was opined to be due
to cranio-cerebral damage consequent upon blunt force impact to head.
There was fissure and depressed fracture of the frontal right temporal
parietal bones and coronal suture separation, depressed fracture of pareto
temporal bone, frontal aspect. Thick extensive extradual hematoma was
found in the left hemisphere and on the right tempo parietal region. There
was contusion on left outer temporal region and right temporal lobe.
7.     The following injuries were found on the body of the deceased:
Crl.A.No.482 of 1998                                            Page 3 of 8

       i.    Lacerated wound 9 x 2 x bone exposed (3 cm) situated on
             right parietal eminence 7 cm above the mid of the right
             eye brow in sagittal plane at 5 cm outer to mid line.
             Clotted blood present
       ii.   Lacerated wound 6 x 1 x bone deep situated 1.5 cm outer
             to the back ½ of the injury no.1 clotted blood present.
       iii.  Lacerated wound 6 x 1 x bone deep on the left upper
             middle of head 13 cm above the middle of left eye brow
             3.5 cm from midline in sagittal plane. Clotted blood was
             present.
       iv.   Lacerated wound 4 x 1 x 0.5 cm on the left parietal
             eminence 8 cm above the upper border of left pinna
             where clotted blood was present.
       v.    Lacerated wound 5 x 2 x bone deep (3 cm) on the right
             forehead just above the eye brow and 2 cm outer to mid
             line. Curved irregular. Clotted blood present.
       vi.   Lacerated wound 2 x 1 x 0.5 cm on the upper middle of
             right ear.
       vii.  Abrasion 13 x 4 cm situated on right lower of face
             starting from the angle of mouth and along with the
             mendibular border, bluish redish in colour.
       viii. Lacerated wound 2 x 0.3 cm x oral cavity deep situated 1
             cm below the right lip lower margin transversely placed
             with contusion inside the lip with laceration on mucous
             membrane of mouth, lips. The front teeth on right side
             loosened, right upper central incisor, lateral incisor and
Crl.A.No.482 of 1998                                             Page 4 of 8

             canines right lower central incisor, lateral incisors and
             canines were loosened and easily separable.
       ix.   Lacerated wound 2 x 0.4 x 2.5 cm bones exposed,
             situated on the upper aspect of inner chin of right side
             mandible exposed.
       x.    Contusion 10 x 4 cm on the upper front of right arm with
             superficial laceration 1.5 x 0.8 x 0.5 cm with abrasion on
             its upper and around in an area of 3.5 x 1 cm. Reddish
             bruise in colour.
       xi.   Multiple abrasion pinpoint to pin-head size in an area 7 x
             3 cm on the back of the right elbow reddish in colour.
       xii.  Multiple abrasion on the back of the right hand and
             nearby area of index finger in an area of 5 x 2.5 cm
             reddish in colour.
       xiii. Abrasion 1 x 1 cm on the back and near of little toe of
             right foot reddish in colour.
       xiv.  Abrasion 1 x 1 cm on the back and middle of middle toe
             of right foot reddish in colour.
       xv.   Abrasion 7 x 4 cm on the back outer of left foot near toes
             and upto the middle of toes reddish in colour.
       xvi.  Multiple abrasion pin head to small sizes in the back of
             all the four fingers in an area of 8 x 3 cm at places on the
             left hand.
       xvii. Superficial laceration 2 x 0.3 x 0.1 cm on the lower front
             middle of left wrist.
8.     The prosecution has been able to prove previous enmity also as PW-3
Crl.A.No.482 of 1998                                               Page 5 of 8

Rajbala, sister of Gulab Singh appeared in the witness box and testified that
on September 05, 1992 at about 3.00 PM she had gone to the house of her
brother-in-law and was giving water to her child from the hand pump. The
appellant Nain Singh came there and caught hold of her hair from behind,
gave her a slap and hit her head with the wall as a result of which her
bangles broke. She raised alarm and on hearing the same, children of her
brother-in-law reached there. The appellant Nain Singh threatened that he
knew timings of her husband’s duty and he would make her widow within
ten days and threatened to kidnap her children. On this, a report was lodged
on September 05, 1992 which was exhibited as Ex.PW-3/A.             Thus the
version of Kamlesh with regard to the motive stands corroborated by
evidence of Rajbala and Ex.PW-3/A the report lodged on September 05,
1992.
9.     In view of the statement of Kamlesh, who was an eye witness and
whose presence with the deceased at the spot is fortified by Ex.PW-9/A and
duly corroborated, we find that the prosecution has proved its case. Learned
counsel for the appellant has sought to assail the presence of Kamlesh on the
ground that the MLC does not speak about her presence and though she
alleges that she was beaten however, there is no MLC on record. No doubt
the prosecution has not proved the MLC of Kamlesh however, Ex.PW-9/A
is the DD entry no.7/A recorded on September 07, 1992 at PS Nand Nagri at
11.00 AM on an information received from duty constable Sansar Singh
from GTB Hospital wherein it is informed that Gulab Singh s/o Gur Sahai
and Kamlesh wife of Gulab Singh, after a fight, in injured condition have
been brought to the hospital by Narain Singh, s/o Gur Sahai. From a reading
of DD entry it is evident that Kamlesh also reached hospital along with the
Crl.A.No.482 of 1998                                             Page 6 of 8

deceased Gulab Singh in injured condition. The lapse of the prosecution in
not exhibiting the MLC of Kamlesh would not discredit her otherwise
credible testimony.
10.    Learned counsel for the appellant submits that recovery of the hockey
stick at the instance of appellant No.2 Ombir is not believed by the learned
Trial Court. Though it is not material for this Court to go into that issue for
the reason that ‘R’ (juvenile) the third brother of the appellants, has already
been acquitted, had allegedly yielded a blow on the deceased by the said
hockey. According to the learned Trial Court the hockey stick was not sent
for chemical examination and was not shown to Kamlesh. Thus it was not
connected with the offence. However, this finding of the learned Trial Court
is incorrect as the CFSL report Ex.PW-7/C shows that a hockey stick having
brown stains was sent for CFSL examination and on examination it was
found to be containing human blood of ‘A’ group origin being that of the
deceased. Though this Court is not required to comment on the role of ‘R’,
the fact remains that at the instance of the appellant No.2, a hockey stick,
used by a co-accused, had been recovered which had blood stains and the
blood grouping was that of the deceased. Hence we are of the considered
opinion that the learned Trial Court wrongly erred in discarding the recovery
of hockey stick at the instance of appellant No.2.
11.    The contention of learned counsel for the appellant that neither the
three wheeler driver was examined nor his vehicle, which was allegedly
blood stained, thus casts a doubt on prosecution case, is fallacious. It is a
matter of common knowledge that public transport used in taking the injured
to the hospital would not wait or be subjected to police investigation as the
same would hinder the earning of the person running the public transport. If
Crl.A.No.482 of 1998                                              Page 7 of 8

the investigating agency starts resorting to this mechanism people would
refrain from taking injured to the hospital. Moreover at that stage family of
the injured is only interested in treatment of the injured and not what all
evidence would have to be collected if the injured dies.
12.    Learned Trial Court has disbelieved the testimony of Narain Singh
PW-1 on the ground that as per his own testimony he did not rush to the spot
to help his brother and sister-in-law and that the incident took place in front
of his house however, he went to the roof of his house and pelted one or two
stones of small size. Admittedly 30-40 persons have collected and he could
not have saved his brother by pelting stones. Even discarding the testimony
of PW-1 Narain Singh in our considered opinion, the prosecution has proved
its case beyond reasonable doubt by adducing evidence of Kamlesh, eye
witness, CFSL report and the post-mortem report. Though in a case of eye
witness account no motive is required to be proved however, in the present
case the prosecution has even proved the motive behind the offence.
13.    Hence, we find no infirmity in the impugned judgment convicting and
sentencing the appellants by the impugned judgment and order respectively.
14.    Appeal is dismissed. Appellants are on bail. Their bail bonds and the
surety bonds are cancelled. They are directed to surrender before the
Superintendent, Tihar Jail within two weeks to undergo the remaining
sentence.
                                                    (MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                        JUDGE
                                               (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                                         JUDGE
JULY 21, 2014/‘vn’
Crl.A.No.482 of 1998                                              Page 8 of 8


