*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                    Reserved on: 25.10.2018
                                    Date of decision :03.12.2018
+      ARB.P. 355/2018
       S P SINGLA CONSTRUCTIONS PRIVATE LIMITED
                                                            ..... Petitioner
                           Through: Mr.Anirudh Wadhwa, Mr.Hiresh
                                        Choudhary, Mr.S.Abhishek Iyer,
                                        Advs.
                           versus
       STEEL AUTHORITY OF INDIA LIMITED & ANR.
                                                         .... Respondents
                           Through: Mr.Santosh Kumar, Mr.Ram
                                        Gupta, Mr.Shivam Parihar, Advs.
                                        for R-1
                                        Mr.Vivek Mathur, Adv. for R-2
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE NAVIN CHAWLA
1.     This petition under Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’) has been filed by the
petitioner praying for the following reliefs:
        “a. Declare that the Respondent No 1 has failed to act in
        terms of the agreed procedure between the parties as
        regards the constitution of the arbitral tribunal, and has as
        such forfeited its right to nominate an arbitrator and
ARB.P.355/2018                                                      Page 1

         consequently appoint an arbitrator on its behalf as also a
         presiding (third) arbitrator;
         b. Declare that the Respondent No 2 has failed to
         perform the functions in terms of the ICA Rules of Domestic
         Arbitration and that the ICA Rules of Domestic Arbitration
         are no longer applicable to the disputes between the
         parties;
         c. Direct the Respondent No 2 to refund the remaining
         amounts paid by the Petitioner to the Respondent No 2
         amounting to about Rs 10,48,500;
         d. Declare that the arbitration between the Petitioner and
         the Respondent No.1 is required to be conducted as per the
         default statutory procedure under the Arbitration and
         Conciliation Act, 1996.”
2.     The disputes between the parties have arisen in relation to Contract
No. DGM/PCC/TK/2010/316 executed between the petitioner and the
respondent no.1 on 14.07.2010 relating to the construction of Flyover at
three locations and Road Network (PKG.111-01) at Bhilai Steel Plant.
3.     Article 9 of the Contract contains the Arbitration Clause and is
reproduced hereinunder:
         “Article 9 Arbitration (Reference GCC Clause 6)
        9.1 Conciliation and Arbitration
        Any disputes, differences, whatsoever, arising between
        the parties out of or relating to the construction,
        meaning, scope, operation or effect of this Contract shall
        be settled between the Employer and the Contractor
        amicably. If however, the Employer and the Contractor
        are not able to resolve their disputes/differences amicably
        as aforesaid the said disputes/differences shall be settled
        by Conciliation, failing which, through Arbitration.
ARB.P.355/2018                                                    Page 2

        Conciliation shall be resorted to prior to invoking
        Arbitration. The Arbitration Clause is to be invoked by
        the parties to the Contract only on failure of conciliation
        proceedings to amicably settle the disputes.
        The arbitration shall be governed in accordance with The
        Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996 (hereinafter
        referred to as the "Act") of India. The language of
        Arbitration shall be English.
        9.2 Subject to the stipulations made hereinabove,
        Arbitration shall be conducted as per forum specified
        below:
        Arbitration of contracts, with Indian parties, where
        contract value is more than India Rs. 5 crore and the
        contracts with foreign parties for value of more than
        Indian Rs. 5 crore and up to Indian Rs. 20 crore shall be
        governed by the Rules of Indian Council of Arbitration
        (ICA)/ “SCOPE Forum of Conciliation and Arbitration”
        (SCFA) as agreed by the party. The venue shall be New
        Delhi.
        During the pendency of the Conciliation or Arbitration
        proceedings both the parties (i.e. the Contractor and the
        Employer) shall continue to perform their contractual
        obligations.
        The arbitral tribunal shall give reasons for its award. The
        tribunal shall apportion the cost of arbitration between
        the parties, the award rendered in any arbitration
        hereunder shall be final and binding upon the parties.
        The parties agree that neither party shall have any right
        to commence or maintain any suit or legal proceeding
        concerning any dispute under this agreement until the
        dispute has been determined in accordance with the
        arbitration proceeding provided for herein and then only
        to enforce or facilitate the execution of an award
        rendered in such arbitration.
        Unless otherwise mentioned, the Arbitration shall be held
        at Durg, Chhattisgarh, India. The court of Durg,
        Chhattisgarh, India (with exclusion of all other courts)
ARB.P.355/2018                                                    Page 3

         shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all matter of
         dispute.”
4.     Disputes having arisen between the parties, the petitioner invoked
the Arbitration Agreement vide its letter dated 24.11.2016 proposing
arbitration in accordance with Rules of Arbitration of the Indian Council
of Arbitration (‘ICA Rules’). The respondent no.1, vide its letter dated
22.05.2017, gave its consent for the arbitration to be conducted under the
ICA Rules. Accordingly, the petitioner addressed a letter dated
03.07.2017 to the ICA seeking appointment of an Arbitral Tribunal.
5.     Respondent no.2 (ICA) vide its notice dated 20.07.2017 called
upon the parties, that is, the petitioner and respondent no.1 to deposit
their share of advance deposit in terms of Rule 28 of the ICA Rules and
further called upon the respondent no.1 to nominate its nominee
Arbitrator.
6.     The petitioner made the deposit and nominated its nominee
Arbitrator vide letter dated 21.08.2017. ICA, vide its letter dated
23.08.2017, granted further opportunity to respondent no.1 to deposit its
share of the deposit. Further time to do the same was granted to the
respondent no.1 by the ICA vide its e-mail dated 07.09.2017 and
20.09.2017.
7.     The petitioner objected to grant of extension of time relying upon
Rule 18 and 23 of the ICA Rules. The petitioner submitted that the
timelines stipulated in the said Rules are non-extendable and therefore,
the respondent no.1 should be proceeded against in default. This
ARB.P.355/2018                                                   Page 4

submission of the petitioner was, however, rejected by the ICA vide its
communication dated 19.09.2017.
8.      The respondent no.1 finally nominated its Arbitrator and
communicated the same to the ICA vide its e-mail dated 16.09.2017 and
filed its Statement of Defence on 18.10.2017.
9.      The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the ICA having
granted extension of time to the respondent no.1 for filing its Statement
of Defence as also for nominating its Arbitrator, is deemed to have failed
to act in accordance with its rules thereby making the present petition
maintainable.
10.     Rule 18 and 23 of the ICA Rules are reproduced hereinbelow:
          “Rule 18
         (a) On receipt of the application together with the claim
         statement, the Registrar shall send to the other Party
         (Respondent) a copy of the claim statement and attached
         documents and ask such other party to furnish within thirty
         days or within any extended date not exceeding thirty days,
         a defense statement setting out his case accompanied by
         all documents and information in support of or bearing on
         the matter.
         (b) Any communication sent by the Registrar under
         Registered Post to the Respondent on the address
         appearing in the Arbitration Agreement/the contract
         between the parties, as per the information supplied to the
         Council, will be deemed to be duly served on the
         Respondent, if it is delivered to the addressee personally or
         at his place of business, habitual residence or mailing
         address last known, even if the Respondent refuses to
         accept the said communication or if it is returned to the
ARB.P.355/2018                                                     Page 5

        Council by the postal authorities as unclaimed by the said
        party. The Registrar may proceed further with the
        arbitration proceedings as per the rules as if such
        communication had been duly served on the concerned
        party. The Registrar may in such cases make an additional
        communication to the Parties by Registered Letter or by
        other means which may provide a record of attempts to
        deliver it.
        (c) A copy of the defence statement and all appended
        documents, if any, shall be sent to the Claimant for
        information.
        (d) The communication is deemed to have been received on
        the day it is so delivered.
        xxxxx
        Rule 23
        The appointment of sole arbitrator or three arbitrators
        shall be made in the following manner:
        (a) In case a Sole Arbitrator has to be appointed, the
        Registrar shall, by a notice in writing, call upon the parties
        to the dispute to forward the name of an agreed arbitrator
        from among the Panel of Arbitrators. The said notice shall
        specify the period within which the nomination shall be
        made which shall not be more than thirty days from the
        date of the said notice to the respective parties. If the
        parties fail to agree on the person to be appointed as sole
        arbitrator within the time granted by the Registrar, the
        Registrar in consultation with the Chairman of the
        Committee and in his absence in consultation with the
        member of the Governing Body designated by the
        Chairman, shall appoint the sole arbitrator from among
        the Panel of Arbitrators. The sole arbitrator so nominated
        shall constitute the arbitral tribunal to hear the dispute
        and shall be appointed as such in writing by the Registrar.
        The Registrar shall give notice to the Parties of the
        constitution of the arbitral tribunal.
ARB.P.355/2018                                                     Page 6

         (b) Where the reference is to three arbitrators, the
         Registrar shall in the first instance call upon the parties to
         nominate one arbitrator each from among the Panel of
         Arbitrators by a notice in writing, sent to them. The said
         notice shall specify the period within which the nomination
         shall be made which shall not be more than thirty days
         from the date of the said notice to the respective Parties. If
         a Party to the dispute refuses or neglects to appoint an
         arbitrator on his behalf within the period specified or if he
         requests the Registrar to nominate an arbitrator on behalf
         of that party, the Registrar in consultation with the
         Chairman of the Arbitration Committee and in his absence
         in consultation with the members of the Governing Body
         designated by the Chairman shall appoint the arbitrator
         from the Panel of arbitrators on behalf of that party. On
         receipt of the nominations from the respective parties or
         on the appointment as aforesaid by the Registrar, the
         Registrar shall appoint another person as the Presiding
         Arbitrator of the arbitral tribunal in consultation with
         Chairman of the Committee and in his absence in
         consultation with members of the Governing Body
         designated by the Chairman, from among the panel of
         arbitrators to be additional arbitrator to act as Presiding
         Arbitrator of the arbitral tribunal.”
11.     Though, a reading of the above provisions would indicate that
rigid timelines are provided for the filing of the Statement of Defence
and for the nomination of the Arbitrator, it must also be remembered that
these are rules of a private institution and not laws of limitation having a
statutory flavour. In any case, the primary reason of the petitioner for
filing the present petition is the refusal of respondent no.1 to pay its share
of the deposit demanded by the ICA and refusal of the ICA to appoint the
Arbitral Tribunal unless the petitioner deposits the respondent no.1’s
ARB.P.355/2018                                                      Page 7

share of such deposit and ICA further proceeding to close the reference
before it, as communicated vide its letter dated 01.02.2018. I say so, as
even after being aware of the delay by the respondent no.1 in filing of its
Statement of Defence and nominating its Arbitrator, the petitioner sought
appointment of the Presiding Arbitrator by the ICA vide its letter dated
12.01.2018.
12.   The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that as the ICA has
refused to appoint the Arbitral Tribunal, the petitioner has filed the
present petition. The counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on
Rule 28 and 38 of the ICA Rules to contend that the respondent no.2
could not have refused to appoint the Arbitral Tribunal on the failure of
the petitioner to pay the respondent no.1’s share of the deposit. He
submits that the effect of such non payment has to be considered by the
Arbitral Tribunal itself and not by the Registrar of the ICA.
13.    Rule 28 and 38 of the ICA Rules are quoted hereinunder:
         “Rule 28
        The Registrar may require the Parties before passing the
        case on to the arbitrators under Rule 38, to deposit in
        advance such sums of money as he deems necessary to
        defray expenses of the arbitration including the
        administrative charges, arbitrator's fee and stamp duties.
        As a general rule, the deposits shall be called for in equal
        shares from the Claimant( s) and the Respondent( s). The
        arbitral tribunal may, during the course of the arbitration
        proceedings or in the arbitration award, require further
        sums to be deposited by the Parties or any one of them to
        meet the expenses of the arbitration. When one of the
        Parties neglects or refuses to make the deposit, the
        Registrar or the arbitral tribunal, as the case may be, may
ARB.P.355/2018                                                   Page 8

        require such deposit whether in relation to a claim or a
        counter-claim, to be made by the other Party to the dispute
        (Claimant or Respondent as the case may be). Should the
        whole or part of the deposit be not made by the Parties or
        any one of them, the Registrar shall inform the Parties or
        the Party concerned that the claim or counterclaim, as the
        case may be, will not be the subject matter of the
        reference. The arbitral tribunal shall proceed only in
        respect of those claims or counter-claims for which the
        deposits has been duly paid to the Council and otherwise
        may order the suspension or termination of the arbitral
        proceedings.
        All deposits towards costs and expenses shall be made with
        the Council and no payment shall be released to the
        arbitrators directly by the parties. The deposit made shall
        be taken into account by the arbitral tribunal in
        apportioning the cost while making the award. Any deposit
        made in excess shall be refunded to such of parties as the
        arbitral tribunal may direct. The Council shall have a lien
        for the arbitral award on any unpaid cost of the
        arbitration.
        xxxx
        Rule 38
        (i) The Arbitral Tribunal shall be deemed to have entered
        on the reference on the day on which the arbitrator or all
        the arbitrators, as the case may be, have received notice in
        writing of their appointment by the Registrar after disposal
        of the challenge to their appointment, if any, made.
        (ii) The Registrar shall send copies of all papers relating
        to arbitration such as claim statement, defence statement,
        counter claims, reply, statements, or other documents
        received from the parties to the dispute to the Arbitrator/
        Arbitrators constituting the Arbitral Tribunal with a
        request to proceed with the arbitration.
         (iii) If the Claimant does not file all the requisite
        documents, papers, etc. or does not deposit the
ARB.P.355/2018                                                   Page 9

         appropriate fees as per the Rules after having been given
         due opportunity for the purpose by the Registrar or the
         arbitral tribunal, the Registrar or the arbitral tribunal may
         dismiss/ close the case on file for lack of pursual by the
         Claimant. Similarly, if the Respondent fails to produce any
         requisite documents, papers including the statement of
         defence or information or fails to deposit administrative
         fees, or arbitrators fees etc. after having been given due
         opportunity for the purpose by the Registrar or the arbitral
         tribunal, the Registrar or the arbitral tribunal may
         proceed further with the arbitration proceedings as per the
         Rules, notwithstanding such failure or refusal by the
         Respondent.”
14.    I am unable to agree with the above submissions of the counsel for
the petitioner. Rule 28 in no ambiguous terms states that incase one of
the parties neglects or refuses to make the deposit as demanded by the
Registrar in accordance with ICA Rules, the Registrar may require such
deposit to be made by the other party to the dispute. It further provides
that incase the whole or part of the deposit is not made by the parties or
any one of them, the Registrar shall inform the parties or the party
concerned that the claim will not be the subject matter of the reference.
The reference to the Arbitral Tribunal in Rule 28 is only in relation to the
direction of the Arbitral Tribunal to the deposit of further sums by the
parties and not to the initial demand by the Registrar.
15.    Rule 38 of the ICA Rules again clarifies that in case of failure of
the claimant to deposit the appropriate fee, the Registrar or the Arbitral
Tribunal may dismiss/close the case on file for lack of pursual by the
claimant. Rule 38 of the ICA Rules does not stipulate that the Arbitral
ARB.P.355/2018                                                      Page 10

Tribunal would necessarily be constituted by the Registrar, ICA even
though the full amount of initial deposit has not been made by the parties
to the arbitration.
16.    In view of the above, the refusal of the ICA to appoint the Arbitral
Tribunal on account of non deposit of the fee cannot be faulted.
17.    Section 11(6) of the Act allows a party to request the Supreme
Court or the High Court, as the case may be, to take necessary measures
for the appointment of an Arbitral Tribunal where inter-alia the
institution empowered to appoint an Arbitrator has failed to perform the
function entrusted to it. Section 11(6) of the Act is reproduced
hereinunder:
         “11(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed
         upon by the parties,—
             (a)     a party fails to act as required under that
         procedure; or
             (b)     the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators,
         fail to reach an agreement expected of them under that
         procedure; or
             (c)     a person, including an institution, fails to
         perform any function entrusted to him or it under that
         procedure,
         a party may request [the Supreme Court or, as the case
         may be, the High Court or any person or institution
         designated by such Court] to take the necessary measure,
         unless the agreement on the appointment procedure
         provides other means for securing the appointment.”
18.    In the present case, as the institution, namely ICA, has acted in
accordance with its Rules, it cannot be said that it has failed to perform
ARB.P.355/2018                                                   Page 11

the function entrusted to it, thereby justifying the filing of the present
petition under Section 11 of the Act.       In similar circumstances, the
Supreme Court in Antrix Corporation Ltd. v. Devas Multimedia P. Ltd.,
MANU/SC/0514/2013 held that the provision of Section 11 (6) of the
Act cannot be resorted to.
19.    The reliance of the counsel for the petitioner on the LCIA
Arbitration Rules or the Arbitration Rules for the International Chamber
of Commerce or the SIAC Rules is also ill-founded. Each institute is to
be governed by its own rules and therefore, even assuming that these
institutes provide for different consequences incase the payment of initial
deposit is not made, the same cannot have any effect on the interpretation
and working of the ICA Rules. I may only hasten to add that Article 24.3
read with 24.4 of the LCIA Rules, Article 16 of the ICC Rules and Rule
34.6 of the SIAC Rules do not support the contentions raised by the
counsel for the petitioner.
20.    The learned counsel for the petitioner has further submitted that
the respondent no.1 having failed to deposit its share of the fee demanded
by the ICA, it should be deemed to have decided not to proceed under the
ICA Rules. He submits that in view of such failure and refusal, the first
part of the Arbitration Agreement contained in Article 9.1 of the
Agreement, being independent of Article 9.2, which provides for
institutional arbitration, would survive and as the parties have failed to
agree on the appointment of the Arbitral Tribunal, this Court will have
the jurisdiction to entertain the present petition and to appoint the
Arbitral Tribunal.
ARB.P.355/2018                                                     Page 12

21.     I am unable to agree with the said submission of the counsel for
the petitioner. Mere non-deposit of the fee by the respondent no.1 cannot
be considered as its refusal to the arbitration being conducted under the
ICA Rules. Rule 28 of the ICA Rules provides for the consequence of a
party not making the deposit of its share of fees and expenses. Therefore,
by mere non-deposit of its share of the fee and expenses, the respondent
no.1 cannot be said to have abandoned the arbitration under the ICA
Rules. Both parties were aware of the ICA Rules when they entered into
the Arbitration Agreement, including the Rules relating to the
consequence of non-deposit of fee and are, therefore, bound by the same.
22.    The counsel for respondent no.1 has submitted that in view of the
arbitration proceedings having been terminated by the ICA by its letter
dated 01.02.2018, the same amounts to termination of the arbitration
proceedings under Section 32 (2) of the Act and the remedy, if any, of
the petitioner is not in form of an application under Section 11 of the Act.
23.    In my view, the said submission has no force. Section 32(2) of the
Act provides for termination of the arbitral proceedings by the Arbitral
Tribunal. In the present case, the Arbitral Tribunal has not been
constituted and therefore, Section 32(2) of the Act shall have no
application. However, for the reasons stated hereinabove, the petition
under Section 11 of the Act would equally not be maintainable.
24.    The learned counsel for the respondent no.1 has further submitted
that the parties had agreed to arbitration only through the ICA or through
the SCOPE Forum of Conciliation and Arbitration (SCFA). The parties
having already agreed not to proceed with SCFA and the proceedings
ARB.P.355/2018                                                    Page 13

with ICA having been terminated, the Arbitration Agreement perishes.
He has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Newton
Engineering and Chemicals Ltd. v. Indian Oil Corporation and Ors.,
MANU/SC/1266/2012.
25.     I am unable to agree with the submission of the counsel for the
respondent no.1. A reading of Article 9.1 and 9.2 of the Agreement
would show that the Arbitration Agreement is independent of the Rules
governing the same. The same would survive even where for some
justified reasons, arbitration cannot take place under the ICA or SCFA
Rules. Reliance can be placed on judgment of the Supreme Court in TRF
Ltd. v. Energo Engineering Projects Ltd. (2017) 8 SCC 377.
26.     Learned counsel for respondent no.1 has further contended that
once the petitioner has refused to deposit the fee as demanded by the
ICA, it is deemed to have repudiated the Arbitration Agreement. The
respondent no.1 accepts such repudiation and therefore, the Arbitration
Agreement ceases to operate any further.
27.     In my view, mere filing of the present petition after non-deposit of
other party’s share of fee cannot amount to an act of repudiation of the
Arbitration Agreement by the petitioner.
28.     In view of the above, the present petition is dismissed as not
maintainable, leaving it open to the petitioner to avail such other remedy
as may be available to it in law. There shall be no order as to cost.
                                                     NAVIN CHAWLA, J
 DECEMBER 03, 2018/Arya
ARB.P.355/2018                                                    Page 14


