                                             PIL No.18 of 2016
                             BEFORE
       HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
          HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
14.6.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
        Mr.N Barman and Ms.J Barman, learned counsel for the
        petitioner.
        Mrs. RB Bora, learned Junior Government Advocate,
        Ms.VL Singh, learned Standing Counsel for Respondent
        Nos.3 and 4 and Mrs. RS Deuri, learned counsel for
        Respondent No.8.
        In the year 2014, one Northeast Tribal Museum and
Cultural Centre was built at Nazirakhat on the outskirt of
Guwahati. But unfortunately, on 18.8.2015, a major fire
destroyed the Museum to a great extent. The construction work
of the Museum was done by respondent No.8. An enquiry was
ordered by the Government to probe into the cause of fire.
According to the enquiry report, the cause of fire was accidental
due to natural calamities.
        The petitioner claiming himself to be a social activist has
filed the present Public Interest Litigation (PIL) seeking probe
into process of construction. And after issuance of notice to the
respondents, he approached respondent No.8 and demanded
Rs.50,000/- for not pursuing the matter. Respondent No.8, in
turn, made a report to the police against the illegal demand of
petitioner. The police laid a trap and caught the petitioner red-
handed while accepting Rs.50,000/-. The entire cash of
Rs.50,000/- has also been recovered from the possession of
petitioner whereafter, he was arrested and sent to Jail. It is
                                                        Page 1 of 2

reported that petitioner has been released on bail after
remaining two months in Jail. This conduct of the petitioner
clearly establishes that he has filed the PIL for ulterior motives.
The investigation also reveals that he was an ex-employee of
respondent No.8. The court cannot allow its process to be
abused for oblique considerations by persons like petitioner.
This is an appropriate case which deserves to be thrown out by
rejection at the threshold with an exemplary cost of Rs.25,000/-
We, accordingly, dismiss the petition with a direction to the
petitioner to immediately deposit cost of Rs.25,000/- with the
Secretary to the Assam State Legal Services Authority, failing
which, the Deputy Commissioner, Kamrup (Metro) shall recover
the amount from him as arrears of land revenue.
          JUDGE                                  CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                         Page 2 of 2


