                                                   PIL 118/2015
                            BEFORE
      HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
20.07.2017
(Ajit Singh, CJ)
         Ms. N Deka, learned counsel for the petitioner.
         Mr. D Saikia, learned Senior Additional Advocate
General, Assam, assisted by Mr. B Gogoi, learned Standing
Counsel, Health and Mr.S Sarma, learned Senior Central
Government Standing Counsel.
         This Public Interest Litigation has been filed by the
petitioner-Miss Alin Mahanta-stating inter-alia that Kanaklata
Civil Hospital, situated at Sonitpur District of Assam has no
basic infrastructure to provide adequate treatment to the
patients. A fact-finding team consisting of social activists and
lawyers conducted a survey in the said hospital on
01/03/2015 and found that pregnant women, who came for
delivery, were lying in the floors of the hospital due to
shortage of beds. The said hospital is a 200 bedded hospital,
but considering the frequency of the patients, the same is too
meager and there was no move from the state government to
augment the same. Only 35 beds were allotted to the
maternity ward although it should have been 50. Besides,
other facilities such as ambulance, staff nurses, gynecologists,
radiologists, surgeons, pediatrician etc. are not adequate. It
has also been contended that the rate of deliveries carried out
in the said hospital in a day is much higher than what the
hospital could accommodate. According to the Indian Primary
Health Standard (IPHS, in short hereinafter) the hospital
should not have cracked walls, those should be free from
seepage, there must not be any broken window, pans etc.,
but the said standards are not seen to have been maintained
in the said hospital. Besides, there is no Intensive Care Unit
                                                      Page 1 of 4

(ICU) in the hospital and only 5(five) beds are there in the
labor room, which is inadequate. Therefore, appropriate natal
and post-natal facilities are lacking in the said hospital causing
infringement of the Fundamental Rights of the people at large
especially the women from the lower strata of the society as
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, and
hence it has been prayed that manpower in the said hospital
may be enhanced as well as facilities may be provided as per
the IPHS guidelines, ambulance services may be increased
and a review of the maternal deaths in the district may be
conducted.
         The respondent no.2-Commissioner and Secretary to
the Government of Assam, Department of Health and Family
Welfare, has filed affidavit-in-opposition stating that various
government schemes for family planning and benefiting the
mothers and their babies have been widely implemented in
the said hospital without any discrimination, whatsoever. It
has also been stated that the government has enacted the
Assam public Health Act, 2010 to provide for protection and
fulfillment of rights in relation to health and well-being of the
public at large and as such every endeavor has been made to
safeguard the interest of the people. It has been stoutly
denied that proper hygiene is not maintained in the said
hospital and on the contrary, it has been stated that regular
treatments are being rendered to both the indoor and outdoor
patients and surgeries, too, are being carried out successfully.
Considering the rush of people, the numbers of beds have
been increased to 263 from the earlier 200 beds, out of
which, 81 beds have been exclusively allotted to the
Obstetrics and Gynecology Ward. Repair and renovation
works have very recently been carried out and the IPHS
Guidelines have been strictly adhered to, in the said hospital.
Besides, the number of nurses allotted duty in the Obstetrics
and Gynecology Ward are also apportioned as per the said
                                                       Page 2 of 4

Guidelines. Further, the ambulance services are provided for
transporting pregnant women by means of 108 and 102
ambulance services and they are also transported to their
respective homes after delivery by ‘Adarani’ ambulances.
Besides, there is facility for round the clock institutional
delivery and other allied services.
        The petitioner has stated in the affidavit-in-reply that
during a subsequent visit by a team on 04/09/2016 it was
found that the maternity ward was too crowded and there
was shortage of beds and there was shortage of other
medical facilities too. However, it has not been denied that
the numbers of beds have been increased, facilities under
various Government Schemes have been implemented, cash
delivery assistance has been provided to the mothers etc.
        Upon hearing the learned counsel for the parties and
upon perusal of the records, we are of the view that the
Government has been making reasonable and sufficient
endeavor to provide the basic facilities to the needy. Various
welfare schemes especially for the welfare of the pregnant
women have been implemented as far as possible. They have
been provided with ambulance facilities whenever needed and
have been also provided with cash delivery assistance.
Further, the repair and renovation works also reported to
have been done in the hospital recently. However, the
authorities are required to review the same regularly so that
proper hygiene is maintained. No doubt, with the increase of
population in the nearby area and patients frequenting the
hospital, the beds and other facilities are bound to be
increased. We hope and expect that the respondent
authorities shall make every endeavor to increase the same
adequately.
        The respondent authorities have stated that the IPHS
Guidelines have been strictly adhered to in the said hospital
                                                     Page 3 of 4

and the State Government will soon be appointing Radiologist,
Dermatologist and Orthopedic Surgeon in the hospital. The
authorities are, therefore, directed to monitor/review the
same periodically and adhere to the IPHS Guidelines strictly
for providing better facility to the poor and needy. We also
direct   the   State    Government   to  appoint    Radiologist,
Dermatologist and Orthopedic Surgeon in the hospital within
45 (forty five) days from today.
        With the above observations, the instant Public
Interest Litigation is disposed of.
        The Registry shall supply a copy of this order to Sri D.
Saikia, Senior Additional Advocate General, Assam, for
information and compliance. No order as to costs.
                JUDGE                        CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                     Page 4 of 4


