                                                            PIL No.19 of 2016
                                      BEFORE
            HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
25.07.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
        Ms. T Som, learned counsel for the petitioner.
        Mr.R Dhar, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate,
        Assam for the Respondents.
        In the present Public Interest Litigation, the main grievance of the
petitioner is that transit certificates are being issued in violation of Rule
96 of the Transport of Animals Rules, 2001. According to the petitioner,
transit certificates are being issued by the Sub Divisional Officer, Animal
Husbandry & Veterinary Department, Sadiya in Tinsukia District, who,
under the Rules, is not competent to issue such certificates.
        In reply, the State Government has denied the submission of the
petitioner by making a specific statement that transit certificates are
being issued in a prescribed form by the competent officer.
        The amended Rule 96 of the Transport of Animals Rules, 1978
reads as under:-
        “96. Issue of certificate before transportation.-
        (1) A valid certificate issued by an officer or any person or Animal
            Welfare Organization duly recognized and authorized for this
            purpose by the Animal Welfare Board of India or the Central
            Government shall be procured by any person making transport of
            any animal before transportation of such animal verifying that all the
            relevant Central and State Acts, rules and orders pertaining to the
            said animals including the rules relating to transport of such animals
            have been duly complied with and that the animal is not being
            transported for any purpose contrary to the provision of any law.
            (2) In the absence of such certificate, the carrier shall refuse to
            accept the consignment for transport.”
                                                                         Page 1 of 2

        From the perusal of the above quoted Rule 96, it is clear that a
certificate for transportation of animals can be issued by an officer or any
person or Animal Welfare Organization duly recognized and authorized
for this purpose by the Animal Welfare Board of India or the Central
Government. From Annexure-1 dated 20.12.2010 filed by the State, it is
clear that Animal Welfare Board of India has duly authorized the State
Government to issue certificates by an Officer not below the rank of
Assistant Director/Sub Divisional Officer (District Animal Husbandry
Officer) under Rule 96 for transportation of animals. And, in compliance
of this authorization, we are prima facie of the view that transit
certificates are being issued by the Sub Divisional Officer, Animal
Husbandry & Veterinary Department. If the petitioner has any confusion
that certificates are not being issued by the competent officer, he is free
to make a complaint before the Animal Welfare Board of India for an
appropriate action.
        With the above observation, the petition is dismissed.
              JUDGE                                    CHIEF JUSTICE
skd/-
                                                                   Page 2 of 2


