                                  PIL (Suo Motu) No.2 of 2017
                              BEFORE
       HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
          HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
20.9.2017
(Ajit Singh,CJ)
        Mr. SS Dey, learned Amicus Curiae, assisted by Mr. HK
Das, learned counsel.
        Mr.RKD Choudhury, learned Additional Senior Government
Advocate, Assam for respondent Nos. 1 to 5. Mr. RK Borah and
Mr. R Phukan, learned counsel for respondent No.6.
        Mr. Pranjal Bora, Assistant Commissioner of Police, Azara
is also present in person.
        One child Raja Ali, aged 14 years, son of Md. Suleman Ali,
was arrested by the police of Police Station Bharalumukh for
offences under Sections 457/380 of the Indian Penal Code vide
Case No.60/2017. At the time of arrest, condition of Raja Ali was
normal, but he died on 9.2.2017, while in custody. His post-
mortem report reveals that he died due to ante mortem injuries
caused by blunt force impact. And, on the intervention of this
Court, the police have registered offences under Sections 302/34
of the Indian Penal Code at Bharalumukh Police Station vide
Case No.413/2017 against Inspector-Uma Kanta Borah, Sub-
Inspector-Azijur Rahman and Sub-Inspector -Tamizuddin Ahmed
(Retired), who have also been temporarily released awaiting
report of chemical analysis from Directorate of Forensic Sciences,
Kahilipara and also pathological report from the Department of
Pathology.
        Having regard to the serious nature of crime and
involvement    of   police   personnel,  we   direct  both   these
                                                       Page 1 of 2

Departments to prepare and hand over the reports to the
Investigating   Officer   within   15   days   from    today.    The
Investigating Officer shall collect the reports from both the
Departments and inform this Court on the next date of hearing
about the action taken.
       List the case for further order(s) on 23.10.2017, on which
date, the Investigating Officer shall remain present in person.
       A copy of the order be supplied to Mr. RKD Choudhury,
learned Additional Senior Government Advocate, Assam for
information and compliance.
             JUDGE                              CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                         Page 2 of 2


