                                                       PIL No.37 of 2016
                                  BEFORE
            HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
25.07.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
        Mr. AK Talukdar, learned counsel for the petitioners.
        Mr.B Sarma, learned counsel for Respondent No.1, Mr. YS
        Mannan, learned counsel for Respondent Nos.3, 4, 5 and 6.
        According to the petitioners, National Highway Nos. 6, 8 and 37
are lifeline of Barak Valley and these Highways connect all the 4 Districts
of Barak Valley, States of Mizoram, Manipur and Tripura with the rest of
Country via Guwahati. The petitioners also allege that the Highways, in
question, have become Highways of woes for the public because of their
extremely pathetic condition. In support of their submission, the
petitioners have filed certain photographs which reveal that Highways
are indeed in pathetic condition with big potholes all over. The
petitioners, therefore, in the present Public Interest Litigation, have
prayed for a direction against the respondents to immediately
construct/repair these Highways.
        In response to the notice and pursuant to our direction, Mr.
Nripendra      Kumar Bora, Chief Engineer, Public Works Department
(National Highway Division), Assam, appeared before us and stated that
construction work of all the three Highways is going on and it will be
completed by the end of March, 2018. He also informed that in National
Highways Nos.6, 8 and 37, now construction of only 2 kms, 4 kms, and
25 kms respectively, remains to be completed.
        We, therefore, having regard to the aforesaid positive statement
made by the Chief Engineer, finally dispose of the petition with a
                                                                 Page 1 of 2

direction that he shall ensure that construction work of these Highways is
completed positively by the end of March, 2018. We also direct the Chief
Engineer to ensure that construction work is of the prescribed quality
and he will submit a report to the Registrar (Judicial), Gauhati High
Court, in the 1st week of April, 2018 regarding completion of the
construction work, in question.
             JUDGE                                    CHIEF JUSTICE
skd/-
                                                                 Page 2 of 2


