*               IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                            CRL.A. NO. 67/2009
+                             Date of Decision: 17th September, 2013
#      RAM DHAWAN @ RAMDEV                                   ..... Appellant
!                                Through:Mr. Bhupesh Narula, Advocate
                                    versus
$      STATE                                              ..... Respondent
                                 Through:Mr. Sanjay Lao, APP for the State
     CORAM:
*     HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.P. VAISH
                         JUDGMENT
P.K. BHASIN, J:
        This is a case of rape of a minor daughter by her father and the
appellant herein is the father who stands convicted for having raped
his minor daughter and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment by
the learned Additional Sessions Judge.
2.     Hon’ble Supreme Court in the year 2006 in a judgment reported
as 2006 Crl.L.J. 139, “State vs. Asha Ram” had made the
following observations while reversing the judgment of
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                 Page 1 of 17

acquittal by the High Court in a case of rape of a girl by her
father:
          “1. There can never be more graver and heinous crime than
          the father being charged of raping his own daughter. He not
          only delicts the law but it is a betrayal of trust. The father is
          the fortress and refuge of his daughter in whom the daughter
          trusts. Charged of raping his own daughter under his refuge
          and fortress is worst than the gamekeeper becoming a
          poacher and treasury guard becoming a robber.”
3.     In that case the trial Court had convicted the accused-father for
having raped his daughter and five years sentence of imprisonment
was awarded. The accused-father challenged his conviction and in
appeal the High Court acquitted him. The State approached the Apex
Court where the High Court’s decision was set aside. The facts of that
case are almost similar to the facts of the present case, which
situation rarely arises in criminal cases. The unfortunate daughter who
was raped by her father had deposed like this during the trial:
          "In the year 1988, I was living with my father Asha Ram
          (accused) and sister Uma Devi in the servant quarters known
          as Raj Bhawan. At about 12.30 a.m./on the intervening night
          of 23 and 24th August, 1988 my father (accused) entered my
          room, switched off its light. He desired me to serve him meals.
          I served meals to my father (accused) in his own room. The
          meals were brought from the kitchen. When I was serving the
          meals, the accused bolted the room from inside. My father the
          accused desired me to sleep in the same room. He forcibly
          made me to sleep on the cot lying there in his room. He
          switched off the light.
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                       Page 2 of 17

          He untied the string of my salwar. I told him that look here
          Papa I am your daughter. Despite this, the accused committed
          sexual intercourse with me. I raised hue and cry upon which he
          gagged my mouth with a piece of cloth.
          xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
          My mother had been living separately. My mother had been
          earning her livelihood by doing manual work at the house of
          one Shri Atwal. I narrated the whole story to her. I
          accompanied my mother to report the occurrence to the
          police……………………………………………………………………………………."
4.     In the present case the 14 years old daughter(PW-1) who was
made a victim of his sexual lust by the appellant had deposed before
the trial Court as under:
          “I was living with my sister Sandhya and my father Ram
          Dhawan @ Ram Dev who is accused present in the court today
          (correctly identified) at Prem Nagar. My mother Promila
          alongwith my brother and another sister were living in
          Ghaziabad separately. In the month of September, 2005 while
          I was present in my house, my father who is accused present in
          the court today had done the wrong act with me in the night.
          He had removed my underwear and had done sex with me. My
          father accused has done sex with me number of times in night
          in our house. I used to protest and resist him from doing so but
          my father accused used to threat me to kill me.
          On 28/09/05, my mother had come from Ghaziabad and I had
          narrated the entire incident to my mother. My mother took
          me to Police Station Patel Nagar and my statement -Ex.PW-
          1/A was recorded which bears my signatures at point A1. I
          was also medically examined in the Government hospital.
          Police had also seized my salwar which I was wearing at the
          time of incident…………………………………………………………………….
          I was produced in the court by the police where my statement was
          recorded by a lady Judge and I had also narrated that my father used
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                           Page 3 of 17

          to rape me ever since daily when my other brothers and sisters used
          to go to sleep…………………………………………………………….”
5.     The brief cross-examination of the prosecutrix is as under:
          “I do not know why my mother is residing separately from my
          father. I do not know when marriage of my father and mother
          took place. I do not know from how much time my mother is
          living separately from my father. My mother used to visit our
          house one or two times in a month. I never visited my
          mother’s residence at Ghaziabad. There are two rooms in the
          house where we are residing at Prem Nagar. One room is at
          ground floor and another is at first floor. My brother used to
          sleep in the room at first floor and my father used to sleep in
          the room at ground floor. I used to sleep in the corridor
          alongwith my sister Sandhya on a single bedsheet.
          Q.       In what manner you protested and resisted against the
                   wrongful act i.e. sexual intercourse committed by the
                   accused with you?
          A.       I cannot tell.
          The accused had committed sexual intercourse with me at
          about 12.00 pm night without my consent. After the
          committal of the above sexual intercourse with me by accused
          without my consent in the month of September, my mother
          came to Prem Nagar in the month of December with my
          younger sister Soni. We used to sleep at about 11.00 pm daily.
          When I told the act of committal of sexual intercourse with me
          by the accused to my mother, no other person was present at
          Prem Nagar at that time with us. Only my mother and myself
          had gone to Police Station to lodge the complaint. I alongwith
          my mother and three lady police officials had gone to DDU
          Hospital for my medical examination. I did not tell the fact of
          rape committed with me by the accused i.e. my father ever
          since daily either to my brother and sister or any of the
          neighbourer. It is incorrect to suggest that my mother is
          residing separately due to some illicit relations with some
          other person to which my father i.e. accused had objected. It
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                          Page 4 of 17

          is correct that my father i.e. accused was not happy with the
          visiting terms of my mother with us at Prem Nagar and he
          always directed her not to visit our house so her illicit relations
          should not effect our lives. It is incorrect to suggest that I have
          falsely implicated my father accused in this case at the
          instance of my mother. It is incorrect to suggest that my
          mother told me that my father wanted to sell me to some
          person. It is incorrect to suggest that my mother lured me for
          marriage in a good family and instigated me to implicate my
          father accused in a false case.”
6.     In our opinion, nothing favourable to the appellant-accused
could be elicited from the mouth of the prosecutrix in her cross-
examination and, in fact, she categorically maintained that her father
had sexual intercourse with her. There is nothing in her statement
from which it can be said that she could falsely say all these things
against her father.
7.     It was contended by the learned counsel(amicus curiae) for the
appellant , as is usually the argument advanced in such like rape cases
on behalf of the accused, that there is no real corroboration of the
testimony of the prosecutrix and so the trial Court was not justified in
convicting the appellant. We are not impressed with this submission.
It is now too well settled that testimony of a victim of rape can by
itself be made the basis of conviction unless some serious flaws in her
testimony are pointed out. In this regard, we may extract some of the
paragraphs from the judgment of the Apex Court in Asha Ram’s
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                          Page 5 of 17

case(supra) wherein the submissions made regarding the requirement
of corroboration of the testimony of a victim of rape were considered.
This is what was observed by the Apex Court:
          “5…………It is now well settled principle of law that conviction
          can be founded on the testimony of the prosecutrix alone
          unless there are compelling reasons for seeking corroboration.
          The evidence of a prosecutrix is more reliable than that of an
          injured witness. The testimony of the victim of sexual assault is
          vital unless there are compelling reasons which necessitate
          looking for corroboration of her statement, the courts should
          find no difficulty in acting on the testimony of a victim of
          sexual assault alone to convict an accused where her
          testimony inspires confidence and is found to be reliable. It is
          also well settled principle of law that corroboration as a
          condition for judicial reliance on the testimony of the
          prosecutrix is not a requirement of law but a guidance of
          prudence under given circumstances. The evidence of the
          prosecutrix is more reliable than that of an injured witness.
          Even minor contradictions or insignificant discrepancies in the
          statement of the prosecutrix should not be a ground for
          throwing out an otherwise reliable prosecution case.
         xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
          14. In the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai vs. State of
          Gujarat, AIR 1983 SC 753 at pp.756-757, this Court pointed out
          that in the Indian setting, refusal to act on the testimony of a
          victim of sexual assault in the absence of corroboration as a
          rule, is adding insult to injury. Why should the evidence of the
          girl or the woman who complains of rape or sexual
          molestation be viewed with the aid of spectacles fitted with
          lenses tinged with doubt, disbelief or suspicion? It was further
          pointed out that on principle the evidence of a victim of sexual
          assault stands on par with evidence of an injured witness. Just
          as a witness who has sustained an injury (which is not shown
          or believed to be self inflicted) is the best witness in the sense
          that he is least likely to exculpate the real offender, the
          evidence of a victim of a sex-offence is entitled to great
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                         Page 6 of 17

          weight, absence of corroboration notwithstanding. The
          aforesaid observation was made by this Court because of the
          following factors: (1) A girl or a woman in the tradition bound
          non- permissive society of India would be extremely reluctant
          even to admit that any incident which is likely to reflect on her
          chastity had ever occurred. (2) She would be conscious of the
          danger of being ostracized by the Society or being looked
          down by the society including by her own family members,
          relatives, friends, and neighbours. (3)She would have to brave
          the whole world. (4) She would face the risk of losing the love
          and respect of her own husband and near relatives, and of her
          matrimonial home and happiness being shattered. (5) If she is
          unmarried, she would apprehend that it would be difficult to
          secure an alliance with a suitable match from a respectable or
          as acceptable family. (6) It would almost inevitably and almost
          invariably result in mental torture and suffering to herself. (7)
          The fear of being taunted by others will always haunt her.
          (8)She would feel extremely embarrassed in relating the
          incident to others being overpowered by a feeling of shame on
          account of the upbringing in a tradition bound society where
          by and large sex is taboo. (9) The natural inclination would be
          to avoid giving publicity to the incident lest the family name
          and family honour is brought into controversy. (10) The
          parents of an unmarried girl as also the husband and
          members of the husbands' family of a married woman, would
          also more often than not, want to avoid publicity on account
          of the fear of social stigma on the family name and family
          honour. (11) The fear of the victim herself being considered to
          be promiscuous or in some way responsible for the incident
          regardless of her innocence. (12) The reluctance to face
          interrogation by the investigating agency, to face the Court, to
          face the cross-examination by counsel for the culprit, and the
          risk of being disbelieved, act as a deterrent.”
8. It was also the submission of the amicus curiae that as per the first
information report(Ex.PW-1/A) the first incident of rape was on 01st
September, 2005 while the matter was reported to the police on 29th
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                       Page 7 of 17

September, 2005 and that delay makes the prosecution case doubtful
and supports the plea of the appellant that he had been falsely
implicated at the instance of his wife. We are, however, not inclined
to reject the prosecution case on this ground, firstly, because the
prosecutrix did not give the exact date of the month of September
when she was raped for the first time secondly because she was not
confronted with her first information statement(Ex.PW-1/A) wherein
she had so claimed and thirdly because now it is also well settled by
various judicial pronouncements of the Supreme Court that in rape
cases the delay in lodging FIR is not considered to be fatal like in cases
of other crimes and that the delay in lodging an FIR in rape cases is to
be considered with a different yardstick. Reference in this regard can
be usefully made to one such decision only which is reported as
2010(VIII) Supreme Court Cases714, “Satpal Singh vs State of
Haryana”. Relevant paras of this judgment are re-produced below:
       “14. In a rape case the prosecutrix remains worried about her
       future. She remains in traumatic state of mind. The family of the
       victim generally shows reluctance to go to the police station
       because of society's attitude towards such a woman. It casts doubts
       and shame upon her rather than comfort and sympathise with her.
       Family remains concern about its honour and reputation of the
       prosecutrix. After only having a cool thought it is possible for the
       family to lodge a complaint in sexual offences.
       15. This Court has consistently highlighted the reasons, objects and
       means of prompt lodging of FIR. Delay in lodging FIR more often
       than not, results in embellishment and exaggeration, which is a
       creature of an afterthought. A delayed report not only gets bereft of
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                     Page 8 of 17

       the advantage of spontaneity, the danger of the introduction of a
       coloured version, an exaggerated account of the incident or a
       concocted story as a result of deliberations and consultations, also
       creeps in, casting a serious doubt on its veracity. Thus, FIR is to be
       filed more promptly and if there is any delay, the prosecution must
       furnish a satisfactory explanation for the same for the reason that
       in case the substratum of the evidence given by the
       complainant/informant is found to be unreliable, the prosecution
       case has to be rejected in its entirety.
       16. However, no straight jacket formula can be laid down in this
       regard. In case of sexual offences, the criteria may be different
       altogether. As honour of the family is involved, its members have to
       decide whether to take the matter to the Court or not. In such a
       fact-situation, near relations of the prosecutrix may take time as to
       what course of action should be adopted. Thus, delay is bound to
       occur. This Court has always taken judicial notice of the fact that:
               “ordinarily the family of the victim would not intend to get
               a stigma attached to the victim. Delay in lodging the First
               Information Report in a case of this nature is a normal
               phenomenon.”
       17. In State of Himachal Pradesh Vs. Prem Singh AIR 2009 SC 1010,
       this Court considered the issue at length and observed as under:-
               “6. So far as the delay in lodging the FIR is concerned, the
               delay in a case of sexual assault, cannot be equated with
               the case involving other offences. There are several factors
               which weigh in the mind of the prosecutrix and her family
               members before coming to the police station to lodge a
               complaint. In a tradition bound society prevalent in India,
               more particularly, rural areas, it would be quite unsafe to
               throw out the prosecution case merely on the ground that
               there is some delay in lodging the FIR.”
       18. Thus, in view of the above, the delay in lodging FIR in sexual
       offences has to be considered with a different yardstick. ………………”
                                                                 (emphasis laid)
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                           Page 9 of 17

9.     In any case, in the present case the delay is also well explained.
It is undisputed from the side of the appellant that his wife was living
separately in Ghaziabad because of strained relations with him and
also that she used to come and meet her two daughters and one son
living with the appellant, including the prosecutrix, after some
intervals. So, the prosecutrix could not disclose to her mother, to
whom only she could be expected to disclose the bad deeds of her
father, whom the learned trial Judge has described as a wolf, and it
was only when in the last week of September, 2005 her mother, PW-2,
came to Delhi to meet her children living with the appellant that the
prosecutrix narrated everything to her. It was not suggested to her in
cross-examination that before 28th September also her mother had
come to meet her. The prosecutrix had also claimed in her first
information statement to the police as well as before the trial Court
that the appellant had been threatening to kill her when she had
protested against his sexual acts with her. We have no reason to
disbelieve the prosecutrix and, in fact, her statement to that effect
was not even challenged in her cross-examination. Thus, the delay
stood explained quite satisfactorily and the learned trial Judge was
right in not considering the delay on the part of the prosecutrix in
going to the police to be fatal for the prosecution.
10.    It was also submitted by the learned amicus curiae that since the
relations between the appellant-accused and his wife(PW-2) were
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                              Page 10 of 17

strained chances of her falsely implicating the appellant cannot be
ruled out. We find that at the time of recording of his statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the appellant had taken a plea that he had
been falsely implicated by his wife to grab his property. However, no
such suggestion was given to her when she was in the witness box as
PW-2 who had also claimed in her deposition before Court that she
had been told by her daughter about the appellant having raped her
on 28th September when she had come to Delhi to meet her children
living with the appellant and then the matter was reported to the
police. To the prosecutrix it was suggested in her cross-examination
that she had been told by her mother that the appellant wanted to
sell her and so she had falsely deposed against him. The prosecutrix
denied that suggestion. That plea in any case the appellant had given
up at the time of recording of his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
So, the argument of false implication of the appellant accused for this
reason also cannot be accepted.
11.     Similar argument was raised before the Supreme Court also in
Asha Ram’s case(supra) also but was rejected with the following
observations:
          “13.       It is contended by the counsel for the accused that
          because of the strained relationship between PW3 – mother of
          the prosecutrix and the accused, the prosecution case has
          been foisted against the accused at the instigation of the
          mother and deserves outright rejection. From the evidence it is
          clearly established that P.Ws. 1 and 2 despite of strained
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                     Page 11 of 17

          relationship between their mother and father were happily
          staying with the accused and there is no rhyme or reason as to
          why the daughter should depose falsely so as to expose her
          honour and dignity and also expose the whole family to the
          society risking the outcasting or ostracization and
          condemnation by the family circle as well as by the society. No
          girl of self respect and dignity who is conscious of her chastity
          having expectations of married life and livelihood would
          accuse falsely against any other person of rape, much less
          against her father, sacrificing thereby her chastity and also
          expose the entire family to shame and at the risk of
          condemnation and ostracization by the society. It is
          unthinkable to suggest that the mother would go to the extent
          of inventing a story of sexual assault of her own daughter and
          tutor her to narrate a story of sexual assault against a person
          who is no other than her husband and father of the girl, at the
          risk of bringing down their social status and spoil their
          reputation in the society as well as family circle to which they
          belong to.”
12.    So, in our view, the testimony of the prosecutrix in the present
case alone is sufficient to maintain the conviction of the appellant-
accused.
13.    The testimony of the prosecutrix, in any case, is corroborated
also by the medical evidence adduced by the prosecution. PW-10
Dr. Ekta Bajaj, Sr. Resident, Gynae Department, DDU Hospital, Delhi,
who had examined the prosecutrix after the matter was reported to
the police, had deposed as under:
          “On 29.09.2005, one Sanju, 14 years female was referred to
          me after her initial examination by Dr. Swati Aggarwal, who
          had prepared the MLC Ex.PW-9/A. I examined the girl Sanju
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                       Page 12 of 17

          vide my observations at portion B1 on the MLC Ex.PW-9/A
          which bears my signatures at point C1.
          On local examination, there was no fresh external injuries
          seen, no bleeding, pubic hair present scanty, secondary sexual
          characters well developed, gentle local examination with one
          finger done easily, hymen torn, suggestive of sexual
          intercourse.”
14.    Realising the strength of the prosecution case learned counsel
for the appellant then made a fervent plea for reduction of the
sentence of life imprisonment awarded to the appellant by the trial
Court. Counsel for the appellant, however, could not highlight any
mitigating circumstances. Learned additional public prosecutor on the
other hand, opposed this plea also and submitted that these kind of
persons deserve no reprieve and this Court should not reduce the
sentence of life imprisonment. In support, he relied upon the
following strong observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court made in
Asha Ram’s case(supra) (which observations have , in fact, been relied
upon by the learned trial Judge also while awarding life imprisonment
to the appellant), while setting aside the High Court’s judgment of
acquittal and enhancing the sentence of imprisonment of five years
only awarded to the accused by the trial Court to imprisonment for
life:
          “21.       This leads us to consider as to the quantum of
          punishment. The Trial Court on conviction sentenced the
          respondent to 5 years’ rigorous imprisonment and a fine of `
          1,000/- and in default, rigorous imprisonment for 3 months.
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                    Page 13 of 17

          Here is the case where the crime committed by the respondent
          not only delicts the law but it has a deleterious effect on the
          civilized society. Gravity of the crime has to be necessarily
          assessed from the nature of the crime. A crime may be grave
          but the nature of the crime may not be so grave. Similarly, a
          crime may not be so grave but the nature of the crime may be
          very grave. Ordinarily, the offence of rape is grave by its
          nature. Moreso, when the perpetrator of the crime is the
          father against his own daughter it is more graver and the
          rarest of rare, which warrants a strong deterrent judicial hand.
          Even in ordinary criminal terminology a rape is a crime more
          heinous than murder as it destroys the very soul of hapless
          woman. This is more so when the perpetrator of the grave
          crime is the father of the victim girl. Father is a fortress,
          refuge and the trustee of his daughter. By betraying the trust
          and taking undue advantage of trust reposed in him by the
          daughter, serving food at odd hours at 12.30 a.m. he ravished
          the chastity of his daughter, jeopardized her future prospect of
          getting married, enjoying marital and conjugal life, has been
          totally devastated. Not only that, she carries an indelible
          social stigma on her head and deathless shame as long as she
          lives.(emphasis supplied)
          22. Having said so, regarding sentence we are tempted to
          quote the observation of Justice Pandian in case of Madan
          Gopal Kakkad (supra) where it has been observed that “Judges
          who bear the Sword of Justice should not hesitate to use that
          sword with the utmost severity, to the full and to the end if
          gravity of the offences so demand.”
15.    It appears that these observations of the Supreme Court that in
cases of rape of a daughter by the father extreme punishment of life
imprisonment is the appropriate punishment were kept in mind,
though not specifically referred to, by a Division Benche of this Court
in a judgment reported 2009(3) 1768 “Prabhu Nath vs State” while
observing that in rape cases where the offender is in a dominating
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                                      Page 14 of 17

position and breaches the confidence of the victim, particularly when
the victim is closely related to the offender, extreme punishment of
life imprisonment should be awarded.        In an earlier judgment of
another Division Bench of this Court reported as 2008 (7) 2497 “ Khem
Chand vs State of Delhi” also it was observed that while considering
the quantum of punishment to be awarded to the rapist of minor girls
the Courts should keep in mind whether the act of the rapist involved
betrayal of trust. There cannot be a closer relationship than that of
father and daughter. We also came across another decision of a
Division Bench of this Court rendered on 25th February, 2010 and
reported as 2010 (2) JCC 1143 “Arun Kumar Rao Vs. State of NCT of
Delhi”, which is subsequent to the one rendered in Prabhu Nath’s case
(supra), and in which case also a father was held guilty of having raped
his minor daughter. The trial Court had awarded life imprisonment to
the guilty father. However, in appeal, the Division Bench reduced the
sentence of imprisonment to 10 years rigorous imprisonment.
Though, in the said judgment the Division Bench had referred to the
judgment in Prabhu Nath’s case (supra), in which, as noticed already,
the Division Bench had observed that where the offender is in a
dominating position and breaches the confidence of a victim, who is
closely related to the offender, the extreme punishment of
imprisonment for life should be imposed but it appears that this
observation escaped the attention of the Division Bench which
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                             Page 15 of 17

rendered the subsequent judgment in Arun Kumar Rao’s case and the
sentence of imprisonment of guilty father came to be reduced from
life imprisonment to 10 years rigorous imprisonment. However, in
view of the decision of the highest Court of the land in Asha Ram’s
case (supra) and the decision of the earlier Division Bench of this Court
in Prabhu Nath’s case (supra) we are not inclined to reduce the
sentence of imprisonment. The appellant herein had made his own
young daughter a victim of his animal lust and sexual perversion and
that fact by itself disentitles him to claim any clemency or reprieve
from this Court. Another factor which has to be kept in mind that if
the appellant comes out of jail he can repeat the same acts not only
with the prosecutrix but his other daughter also.
16.      So, the judgment dated 26th September, 2008 passed by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge whereby the appellant Ram
Dhawan @ Ramdev had been convicted for the offences punishable
under Sections 376 and 506 IPC is affirmed. We also maintain the trial
Court’s order dated 30th September, 2008 whereby for committing the
offence of rape the appellant was sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for life and also to pay fine of ` 5,000/- and in default
of payment of fine was ordered to undergo further imprisonment for a
period of six months and to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of two years and fine of ` 1,000/- and in default of payment of
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                             Page 16 of 17

fine further imprisonment for a period of three months for his
conviction under Section 506 IPC. This appeal is consequently
dismissed.
       Since the appellant is lodged in jail he shall be delivered a copy
of this judgment through the concerned Jail Superintendent.
                                                          P.K.BHASIN, J
                                                          V.P. VAISH, J
SEPTEMBER 17, 2013
CRL. A. No.67/2009                                              Page 17 of 17


