*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                        R.C.R. NO. 174 OF 2011
%                                   Date of Decision: 13th April, 2012
!      MANOJ KUMAR BHATT & ANR.                           ...Petitioners
                       Through:         Shri Chetan Sharma, Sr. Adv.
                                        with Ms. Garima Prashad,
                                        Advocate
                                Versus
$      RAJ KUMARI & ANR.                              …Respondents
^                                Through:     Mr. N.K. Jain, Advocate
       CORAM:
*      HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.K.BHASIN
                                ORDER
P.K.BHASIN, J:
       This revision petition under Section 25-B(8) of the Delhi Rent
Control Act, 1958(in short „the Rent Act‟) has been filed by the
petitioners-landlords against the order dated 06.04.2011 passed by the
learned Additional Rent Controller (“the Controller” in short)
dismissing their eviction petition filed under Section 14(1)(e) of the
Rent Act against the respondent-tenant in respect of one shop no.
16/385, built on Plot no. 24, Khasra No. 235/35-36-39, Block BD,
Ward No. 16, Joshi Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi(hereinafter to be
referred as „the tenanted shop‟).
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                        Page 1 of 13

2.    The brief facts which led to filing of this petition are that the
petitioners-landlords had filed an eviction petition against the
respondent-tenant seeking his eviction from the tenanted shop on
many grounds, one of which was the bona fide requirement of the
tenanted shop. The Controller when took up the eviction petition for
the first time on 01.06.2009 had passed the following order:
               “Heard. Issue summons of the eviction petition to the
               respondent in the form prescribed under Schedule-III of
               DRC Act on filing of PF/RC, for 20.08.09.”
       Summons under Schedule III of the Rent Act are ordered to be
issued to a tenant when his eviction is sought by his landlord from the
tenanted premises under Section 14(1)(e) of the Act, which provision
was also invoked by the petitioners-landlords in the present case.
Whenever summons prescribed under Schedule III are issued as
provided under Section 25-B(2) of the Rent Act in an eviction petition
under Section 14(1)(e) the tenant is supposed to obtain permission of
the Rent Controller to contest the eviction petition within fifteen days
from the date of receipt of the summons and if that is not done the
averments made in the eviction petition are to be taken as admitted by
the tenant and the Controller is to pass eviction order straightaway.
This is so provided under Section 25-B(4)          of the Rent Act.
3.     The respondent-tenant in the present case was duly served with
the summons which was returnable for 20/08/2009 but he did not file
any application seeking leave of the Controller to contest the eviction
petition within 15 days and instead presented his written statement on
07/08/2009. On 20.08.2009 the learned Controller was on leave and so
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                           Page 2 of 13

the ahalmad of the Court fixed the case for 24.10.2009 after recording
in the order-sheet that written statement had already been filed. On
24.10.2009 the following order was passed by the Controller:
               “Written submissions filed on behalf of the Petitioner on
               23.10.2009. it is submitted by the proxy Counsel for the
               Respondents that main Counsel is not available.
               At request put up on 19.12.2009 for filing of
               rejoinder/arguments on the written submissions.”
       It appears that instead of writing „written statement‟ „written
submissions‟ came to be typed in the proceedings of 24 th October.
Thereafter, the petitioners raised a grievance before the Controller that
since the respondent-tenant had not sought leave to contest the
eviction petition his written statement should not have been taken on
record and eviction order should have been passed straightaway. From
the side of the respondent-tenant it was claimed that since the
petitioners had filed the eviction petition on many grounds available to
them under the Rent Act ordinary summons should have been issued
and wrongly the same had been issued under Schedule III as if the
petition was only under Section 14(1)(e) of the Rent Act. That is
evident from the following the proceedings of 23.03.2010 recorded by
the learned Controller;-
               “Ld. Counsel for the petitioner submits that the in the
               present petition, application for leave to defend has not
               been filed by the respondents and therefore, respondents
               are liable to be evicted.
               Ld. Counsel for the respondents submits that the present
               petition is not covered under the summary proceedings and
               that is why application for leave to defend was not filed and
               WS was filed because the present petition has been filed
               under Section 14(1)(a) read with Sections 6A & 7 (2), 14
               (1)(b), 14(1)(j) and 14(1)(e) of The Delhi Rent Control Act,
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                                 Page 3 of 13

               1958 and he seeks more time for submitting relevant
               authorities on this point.
               Put up for further arguments, for 11.05.10.”
4.     Then vide order dated 06.04.2011 the learned Controller not
only rejected the objection of the petitioners-landlords that written
statement should not have been accepted but the eviction petition itself
was also rejected as far as the ground under Section 14(1)(e) of the
Rent Act was concerned for the reason that the same was not
maintainable in view of the bar under Section 14(6) of the Rent Act it
having been filed within a period of five years from the date of the
purchase of the property in question by the petitioners from its
erstwhile owners. The Controller however decided to proceed with the
eviction petition on other grounds which had also been invoked by the
petitioners-landlords.      It was also observed by the controller that
earlier summons as prescribed in Schedule III of the Rent Act were
wrongly and inadvertently issued.
5.     Feeling aggrieved by the order dated 06.04.2001, the
petitioners-landlords filed this revision petition.
6.     It was argued by Shri Chetan Sharma, learned senior counsel for
the petitioners, that the order dated 06.04.2011 is not in accordance
with law and suffers from a serious infirmity in that the learned
Controller had no option but to pass an eviction order in the matter on
the failure of the respondent-tenant to apply for leave to contest after
he had been served with the summons requiring him to apply for leave
to contest within fifteen days. It was also argued that with the issuance
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                        Page 4 of 13

of the summons under Schedule III of the Rent Act it became clear
that the learned Controller had confined the eviction petition only to
the ground of bona fide requirement covered under Section 14(1)(e)
and there was nothing wrong in that decision of the Controller and the
petitioners had also not raised any grievance that why their petition
had been confined only to the ground of bona fide requirement of the
tenanted shop. Therefore, there was no occasion for taking on record
the written statement of the respondent-tenant. The learned senior
counsel further argued that as far as the bar under Section 14(6) of the
Rent Act, because of which the Controller dismissed the eviction
petition qua the ground under Section 14(1)(e), is concerned, there
was no dispute that the property in question having been purchased by
the petitioners-landlords within a period of five years prior to the
filing of the eviction petition on the ground of bona fide requirement
in normal course would not have been maintainable but in the present
case the petitioners had also claimed that that bar was not attracted
here since the petitioners were claiming the benefit of the exception to
that bar as provided under Section 25-C(1) of the Rent Act but the
learned Controller had not even considered that part of the case of the
petitioners and had straightaway dismissed the eviction petition based
on the ground of bona fide requirement and that has gravely
prejudiced the petitioners.
7.     Elaborating his submission on the applicability of Section 25-
C(1) of the Rent Act, the learned senior counsel for the petitioners had
submitted that the petitioners had purchased the tenanted shop as well
as three others shops in the same property of which the shop in
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                       Page 5 of 13

occupation of the respondent was a part and those four shops were
adjoining to their residence at Joshi Road where they have been
carrying on their business but the business had to be stopped in the
residential premises in view of some order passed by the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court in the case of “M.C. Mehta Vs. Union of India &
Ors.”, W.P.(Civil) No.4677/1985, whereby commercial activities in
the residences were ordered to be stopped. In this regard my special
attention was drawn to the following averments made in the eviction
petition:-
                “18-(a)D. Because besides above noted grounds, an
               overriding ground for eviction under section 14(1)(e) as
               modified by the Supreme Court of India in the case of
               Satyawati Sharma Vs Union of India decided on 16-04-08
               is that the petitioners are bona fide registered business men
               & the shop has been purchased for there bona fide
               requirement & need for themselves & for their family
               members for expanding business/commercial activities
               which are not permissible in the residential
               accommodations under Master Plan 2021, Delhi. Hence the
               petitioners therefore seek the eviction & recovery of
               possession on the basis of summary trial by exercising the
               power conferred under procedure & provisions contained
               in sections 25A to 25C of the Chapter III A of The Delhi
               Rent Control Act, 1958 so as to meet the ends of justice.
               19(a). That the four shops of Municipal Corporation
               properties nos. 16/384, 16/385, 16/386 and 16/387 were
               built on Plot No.24 Khasra No.235/35-36-39 Block BD
               Ward No.16 abutting Joshi Road Karol Bagh, New Delhi-
               05 regarding which eviction against occupants is sought by
               the petitioners alongwith recovery of possession to the
               petitioners......
               ………………………….
               …………………………..
               (j).. That on the other hand, the petitioners of this petition
               being the abutting owner/resident of the same plot no.24 &
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                                 Page 6 of 13

               are bonafide businessmen and regular tax payers of their
               business were facing acute shortage of suitable commercial
               accommodation for their growing needs & requirements of
               expanding business activities such as Jewellery Shop &
               Auto Spare Parts Shop etc. which are not allowed in the
               residential houses under Master Plan 2021 of Delhi. After
               carefully studying the provisions of The Delhi Rent Control
               Act, 1958 read with the spirit of modified provisions of
               section 14(1)(e) by the Honourable Supreme Court of India
               in case of Satyawati Sharma Vs Union of India & Others
               decided on 16-04-08 in Appeal(Civil) 1897/2003, the
               petitioners purchased the aforesaid four shops.
8.     Mr. Sharma had, however, very fairly not disputed that if an
eviction petition under Section 14(1)(e) is on the face of it not
maintainable because of the bar under Section 14(6) and no benefit of
Section 25-C(1) is claimed by the landlord then the same could be
rejected by the Controller even if the tenant had failed to apply for
leave to contest the eviction petition.
9.     Mr. N.S.Jain, learned counsel for the respondent-tenant on the
other hand fully supported the decision of the Controller rejecting the
eviction petition based on the ground of               bona fide requirement
because of the bar under Section under Section 14(6) of the Rent Act
and argued that the learned Controller had rightly observed that he had
committed a mistake initially in issuing the summons under Schedule
III of the Rent Act when the eviction petition was filed on many
grounds available to the petitioners in the Rent Act and it had to be
treated as an ordinary eviction petition not to be tried as per the special
procedure under Section 25-B of the Rent Act.
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                              Page 7 of 13

10.    After hearing arguments from both the sides the matter was
earlier reserved for orders but before orders could be pronounced in
some other revision petitions filed by unsuccessful landlords a point
had arisen as to the maintainability of revision petition under Section
25-B(8) of the Rent Act at the instance of a landlord. So, order was not
passed by me and it was decided to give opportunity to the parties in
the present case also to address the Court, if they so desired, on this
aspect. Counsel for the petitioner made submissions but no
submissions were made from the side of the respondent perhaps
because he had not raised any such objection earlier regarding the
maintainability of this revision petition.
11.    The point about the maintainability of such a revision petition
under Section 25-B(8) arose in view of a decision of the Supreme
Court in “Major D.N. Sood v. Shanti Devi 1997(10) SCC 428
wherein it was held that a revision petition at the instance of a landlord
is not maintainable. A Division Bench of this Court in the case of
“R.S.Bakshi vs H.K.Malhari & anr.”, 2002(62) DRJ 272 had held
even after noticing the decision of the Apex Court in Maj. Sood‟s
case(supra) that a revision petition at the instance of a landlord is also
maintainable. The Division Bench decision of this Court in
R.S.Bakshi‟s case(supra) had held the Supreme Court‟s decision in
Maj. Sood‟s case(supra) to be per incuriam because of the fact that
earlier three Judges Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in “Vinod
Kumar Chaudhary vs. Smt. Narain Devi”:AIR 1980 Supreme
Court 2012, wherein it was held that a revision petition even at the
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                        Page 8 of 13

instance of an unsuccessful landlord is maintainable under the Rent
Act, was not brought to the notice of the two Judges Bench which had
given the judgment in Major Sood‟s case. In Vinod Kumar‟s case the
landlord had lost after trial, like in the present case. So, in view of the
Division Bench decision of this Court given after considering the two
conflicting judgments of the Supreme Court to the effect that such a
revision petition is maintainable, I shall now proceed further to
consider the petition on its merits.
12.    Section 14(6) of the Rent Act reads as under:-
               “Where a landlord has acquired any premises by transfer,
                no application for recovery of possession of suit premises
                shall lie under sub-section (1) on the grounds specified in
                clause (e) of the proviso thereto unless a period of 5 years
                has elapsed from the date of acquisition.”
and Section 25-C(1), benefit of which is being claimed by the
petitioners, reads as follows:-
               “25C (1)        Nothing contained in sub-section (6) of
               section 14 shall apply to a landlord who, being a person in
               occupation of any residential premises allotted to him by
               the Central Government or any local authority is required
               by, or in pursuance of, an order made by that Government
               or authority to vacate such residential accommodation, or
               in default, to incur certain obligations, on the ground that
               he owns a residential accommodation either in his own
               name or in the name of his wife or dependent child in the
               Union territory of Delhi.”
13.    With the issuance of the summons prescribed under Schedule
III of the Rent Act it is clear that the Controller had limited the
eviction petition of the landlord to Section 14(1)(e) of the Rent Act
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                                Page 9 of 13

only to which the landlords also did not have any objection. The
Controller could have very well done that. It cannot be said that he had
committed any mistake in ordering issuance of summons only in
respect of the ground of bona fide requirement. I am also in full
agreement with the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioners that once having ordered issuance of summons under
Schedule III to the Rent Act the learned Controller should not have
taken on record any written statement from the side of the respondent-
tenant. That course of action is not permissible in an eviction petition
which has been treated as a petition under Section 14(1)(e) of the Rent
Act. The respondent-tenant‟s only right is to seek permission from the
Controller to contest the eviction petition on whatever grounds he
wants to contest it. Without seeking the permission of the Controller
the tenant cannot decide for himself that the eviction petition as
framed could not be proceeded with only under Section 14(1)(e) and
consequently he could file the written statement straightway. If this
kind of practice is accepted by the Controllers then that would mean
that every tenant would be at liberty to present a written statement and
then defend the eviction petition without any prior permission from
the Controller. That is not at all permissible and should not have been
allowed to be done by the Controller.
14.    In the present case, the learned Controller should have taken up
the eviction petition for considering whether because of the failure of
the respondent-tenant to seek leave to contest eviction order deserved
to be passed straightway or for any other reason the same could not be
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                        Page 10 of 13

passed. Since in the present case admittedly the eviction petition on
the ground of bona fide requirement had been filed by the petitioners
within a period of 5 years from the date of purchase of the property in
question by them the same was obviously not maintainable in view of
the bar contained under Section 14(6) of the Rent Act, which position
was not disputed even by the learned senior counsel for the petitioners
during the course of hearing of this revision petition. Therefore, the
learned Controller was fully justified in dismissing the eviction
petition instead of passing an eviction order against the respondent-
tenant when on the face of it the eviction petition was not
maintainable.
15.    However, as noticed already, learned senior counsel for the
petitioners had submitted that despite the fact that the eviction petition
under Section 14(1)(e) was barred at the time when it was filed in
view of the bar under Section 14(6) of the Rent Act it could still not be
dismissed as under Section 25-C(1) of the Rent Act there is an
exception provided in favour of the landlord and that exception had
been invoked by the petitioners in the present case by pleading that
since they were carrying on their business in residential premises and
the Hon'ble Supreme Court had in M.C. Mehta‟s case (supra) directed
closure of commercial activities in residential premises the bar under
Section 14(6) was not attracted but this plea taken by the petitioners
had been totally ignored by the learned Controller while rejecting their
eviction petition. Therefore, learned senior counsel contended, the
matter deserved to be sent back to the Rent Controller to examine the
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                        Page 11 of 13

said plea of the petitioners and then to take any decision in respect of
the bar under Section 14(6) of the Rent Act.
16.    Though at first blush these submissions made by the learned
senior counsel appeared to be quite attractive but when I went through
the eviction petition minutely the same have become totally meritless
in view of the fact that the ingredients of Section 25-C(1) of the Rent
Act were totally missing from the eviction petition. I have already re-
produced Section 25-C(1) of the Rent Act. It is not the case of the
petitioners that they had been allotted any residential accommodation
by the Government and they had been required to vacate the same
which had necessitated seeking eviction of their own tenant from the
tenanted shop which undisputedly had been purchased by them within
a period of 5 years from the date of filing of the eviction petition. The
plea taken is that since the Hon'ble Supreme Court in M.C. Mehta‟s
case (supra) had directed shifting of all commercial activities from the
residential properties that direction of Hon'ble Supreme Court should
be treated at par with an order of the Government as contemplated
under Section 25-C(1) let that plea cannot be accepted. The language
of Section 25-C(1) is quite clear and unambiguous and this Court
cannot introduce into that section what the petitioners want to be
introduced therein. In case the Hon'ble Supreme Court had directed
the closure of commercial activities from residential premises and the
petitioners were going to be affected by that decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court then the only option available to them was to comply
with the direction of the Hon'ble Supreme Court and shift their
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                       Page 12 of 13

business activities somewhere else but the remedy of seeking eviction
of respondent-tenant was certainly not available to them on that
ground at least before the expiry of five years period from the date of
their acquiring the tenanted shop.
17.    This revision petition is, therefore, dismissed. Since I have
already observed that the learned Controller had treated the eviction
petition as one under Section 14(1)(e) only by directing issuance of
summons prescribed under Schedule III to the Rent Act it could not
have been thereafter treated as an eviction petition under other
grounds which were not even pressed into service even by the
petitioners after 01st June, 2009. Therefore, now the entire eviction
petition would also stand rejected but it is made clear that in case the
petitioners would still like to seek eviction of respondent-tenant on
other grounds which had been initially taken by them in their eviction
petition they would be at liberty to do so by filing fresh eviction
petition(s).
                                                       P.K. BHASIN,J
April 13, 2012
RC. REV. NO. 174/2011                                      Page 13 of 13


