                          ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
                                  O.J.C. NO.14304 OF 2001
      In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
      Constitution of India.
                                             --------
      Kelu Charan Samal                       ………                               Petitioner
                                              Versus
      State of Orissa & Others                ………                       Opposite
      Parties
                         For Petitioner - M/s S.K. Rath, R. Samal,
                                        S. Samal & P. Samal
                         For Opp.Parties -        Addl. Government Advocate
                                               --------
      PRESENT:-
                     THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE I.M. QUDDUSI
                                               AND
                  THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADIP MOHANTY
       -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Date of hearing & judgment : 09.03.2006
       ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
      -
I.M.QUDDUSI, J.            This writ petition has been filed against the
      judgment and order dated 21.08.2001 passed by the Orissa
      Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench, in O.A. No.1469(C) of 1994
      filed by the present petitioner. By the said order, while disposing of
      the O.A., the Tribunal has directed that if the review D.P.C. finds the
      petitioner suitable, he would be promoted and appropriate seniority
      would be assigned to him. But, as he has already retired from service
      with effect from 28.02.2001, he would be given notional promotion to
      the rank of Superintendent (Inspector-M) from the date of his

                               2
reversion, i.e., 30.05.1997 till the date of his retirement, i.e., upto
28.02.2001. But, as during this period he has not worked in the
promotional post, he would not get the differential back wages.
2.                The brief facts of the case are that when the
petitioner was working as Senior Assistant in the establishment of
opposite party no.4, a disciplinary proceeding was initiated against
him. In that proceeding, he was found guilty and the disciplinary
authority reduced his pay to the stage of Rs.532/- per month for a
period of two years vide order dated 07.12.1982. The departmental
appeal filed by the petitioner having failed, he filed O.A. No.963 of
1992 before the Orissa Administrative Tribunal. While the earlier
proceeding was pending, the authority initiated another proceeding
against the petitioner on the self-same charge. The petitioner filed
O.J.C. No.1612 of 1983 before this Court against initiation of second
proceeding for the self-same charge, but the same was dismissed. In
the second proceeding, the petitioner was dismissed from service.
However, in the appeal filed by him, it was directed to continue the
proceeding from the stage of second show-cause. After filing of the
second show-cause, a fresh order was passed on 03.05.1986
forfeiting one increment for a period of one year, which would carry
the value of two Black Marks in his Service Book. The said order
having been upheld in appeal, the petitioner filed another O.A., i.e.,
O.A. No.962(C) of 1992. Both the proceedings drawn up against the
petitioner and the orders of punishment were quashed by the
Tribunal vide its order dated 01.02.2000.
3.                In the meantime, the petitioner had been given ad
hoc promotion on the post of Superintendent (Inspector-M) on
02.01.1991. Thereafter, a D.P.C. was held for regular promotion on
25.04.1994. But, after perusing the records, the D.P.C. did not
consider the petitioner suitable for promotion and his junior was
given promotion. Consequently, he was reverted vide order dated

                                  3
30.05.1994. Against the order of reversion, the petitioner filed O.A.
No.1469(C) of 1994. While disposing of the same by the impugned
order, the Tribunal has observed that the record of the preceding five
years, i.e., 1989-90, 1990-91, 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 should
have been taken into consideration by the D.P.C.           However, the
D.P.C., instead of considering the same, took into consideration the
disciplinary proceedings initiated against the petitioner and the
punishments awarded to him, which had already been quashed by
the Tribunal, vide its order dated 01.02.2000. Therefore, the Tribunal
ordered for holding a review D.P.C. meeting to review the case of the
petitioner for promotion applying the same principle and criteria,
which were followed at the time of D.P.C. held on 25.04.1994, barring
the two proceedings initiated against him and the penalties inflicted
in the same. The Tribunal ultimately directed that if the petitioner is
found suitable, he would be given notional promotion, but would not
be entitled to get differential back wages.
4.                 Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that since
the Tribunal felt that        injustice has been done in case of the
petitioner, it directed to reconsider his case. Therefore, denial of
differential back wages was not proper. In support of his submission,
he   placed    reliance    upon    the  case  of  Union  of   India  –v-
K.V.Jankiraman, AIR 1991 SC 2010. In the said decision, the apex
Court has held as under:-
                        “ There is no doubt that when an employee
                   is completely exonerated and is not visited with
                   the penalty even of censure indicating thereby
                   that he was not blameworthy in the least, he
                   should not be deprived of any benefits
                   including the salary of the promotional post.
                       xxx             xxx                   xxx
                   The normal rule of ‘no work no pay’ is not
                   applicable to cases such as the present one
                   where the employee although he is willing to

              4
work is kept away from work by the authorities
for no fault of his. This is not a case where the
employee remains away from work for his own
reasons, although the work is offered to him. It
is for this reason that F.R. 17(1) will also be
inapplicable to such cases.
    We are, therefore, broadly in agreement
with the finding of the Tribunal that when an
employee is completely exonerated meaning
thereby that he is not found blameworthy in
the least and is not visited with the penalty
even of censure, he has to be given the benefit
of the salary of the higher post along with the
other benefits from the date on which he would
have normally been promoted but for the
disciplinary/criminal proceedings. However,
there may be cases where the proceedings,
whether disciplinary or criminal, are, for
example, delayed at the instance of the
employee or the clearance in the disciplinary
proceedings or acquittal in the criminal
proceedings is with benefit of doubt or on
account of non-availability of evidence due to
the acts attributable to the employee etc. In
such circumstances, the concerned authorities
must be vested with the power to decide
whether the employee at all deserves any
salary for the intervening period and if he does,
the extent to which he deserves it. Life being
complex, it is not possible to anticipate and
enumerate exhaustively all the circumstances
under which such consideration may become
necessary.     To     ignore,    however,   such
circumstance when they exist and lay down an
inflexible rule that in every case when an
employee is exonerated from disciplinary/
criminal proceedings he should be entitled to
all salary for the intervening period is to
undermine discipline in the administration and
jeopardize public interests. We are, therefore,
unable to agree with the Tribunal that to deny
the salary to an employee would in all
circumstances be illegal. While, therefore, we
do not approve of the said last sentence in the
first sub-paragraph after clause (iii) of

                                5
                  paragraph 3 of the said Memorandum, viz.,
                  ‘but no arrears of pay shall be payable to him
                  for the period of notional promotion preceding
                  the date of actual promotion’, we direct that in
                  place of the said sentence the following
                  sentence be read in the Memorandum:
                     However, whether the officer concerned will
                  be entitled to any arrears of pay for the period
                  of notional promotion preceding the date of
                  actual promotion, and if so to what extent will
                  be decided by the concerned authority by
                  taking into consideration all the facts and
                  circumstances of the disciplinary proceeding/
                  criminal prosecution. Where the authority
                  denies arrears of salary or part of it, it will
                  record its reasons for doing so.”
5.                In the instant case, the punishments imposed in the
departmental proceedings had been quashed by the Tribunal. As
such, the D.P.C. should not have considered the fact of initiation of
departmental    proceedings     against  the   petitioner. Undoubtedly,
depriving the petitioner of promotional benefits was not his fault.
However, other records are to be seen by the D.P.C. Therefore, we are
of the view that instead of directing not to pay the differential back
wages, the Tribunal should have directed the authorities concerned to
take into consideration of payment of differential back wages
considering all the facts and circumstances.
6.                In   view    of  the   above-mentioned     facts  and
circumstances, the impugned order of the Tribunal is modified to the
extent that instead of denial of differential back wages, it is directed
that the authorities shall decide the question of payment of arrears of
differential back wages to the petitioner on promotional post with
effect from the date of his notional promotion considering the facts
and circumstances of the case. However, if the authorities deny the
arrears of salary or part of the same, they shall record reasons for

                                   6
      doing so. The above exercise will be completed within a period of three
      months from the date of receipt of this order.
      7.              With the above modification, the writ petition stands
      disposed of.
                                                  …………………………
                                                   I.M.QUDDUSI,J.
PRADIP MOHANTY, J. I agree.
                                                  …………………………….
                                                  PRADIP MOHANTY, J.
      Orissa High Court, Cuttack
      March 9, 2006/Nayak


