                        ORISSA HIGH COURT
                                     CUTTACK
                              O. J. C. NO.7192 OF 1996
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
Sri Janmajaya Das & another                                 ………
Petitioners
                                       Versus
State of Orissa and others                                  ………                 Opp.
Parties
               For petitioners : M/s C.A. Rao, S.K. Behera
                                             and P.K. Sahoo.
               For opp. parties : Dr.        A.K. Rath (O.P. No.2)
                                     M/s S.C. Panda, D.P. Sarangi,
                                             R. Samal and S. Patnaik.
                                                 (for O.P. No.3)
PRESENT :
          THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE P. K. TRIPATHY
                                        AND
        THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE PRADIP MOHANTY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Date of hearing and judgment : 12.03.2008
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Heard further and the judgment is as follows.
2.             The order of the Addl. Assistant Commissioner of
Endowments, Sambalpur passed on 25.11.1995 in O.A. Case No.5 of
1994 under Section 68 of the Orissa Hindu Religious Endowments
Act, 1951 (in short “the Act”) is under challenge.

                                 2
3.           The fact noted in the impugned judgment indicates that
the property in dispute belongs to the deity Shri Jagannath
Mohaprabhu Bije at Mundadar under Belpara police station in the
district of Bolangir.     Trustees came into authority in view of
constitution of the trust board under Section 27 and initiated action
under Section 68 through one of them with the prayer to recover
possession of the disputed property from the possession of opposite
parties 1 and 2, who are the petitioners in this writ petition. Non-
hereditary trustee advanced the contention that the writ petitioners
have no right to possess the land after their removal from the
Sebaitship before the decision taken in O.A. No.5 of 1992, a
proceeding under Section 41 of the Act and, therefore, possession of
the disputed property should be recovered in favour of the deity. The
substance of the claim advanced by the writ petitioners was that from
the time of their grandfather, they are in possession of the property
as the Sebaits of the deity and there is no legal order enforceable to
remove them from Sebait, and under such circumstances their
possession over the property in lieu of Seva Puja cannot be disturbed.
4.           Learned   Addl.   Assistant    Endowment   Commissioner
taking note of the aforesaid contentions of the parties and the oral
and documentary evidence adduced by them, recorded the finding
that since the property belongs to the deity and the writ petitioners
have been disengaged from the Seva Puja and the institution being a
public religious institution declared in O.A. No.5 of 1992, therefore
the claim of the writ petitioners must fail and the prayer of the
trustee must succeed. Accordingly, order was passed for recovery of
possession in favour of the religious institution.
5.           While challenging the order, Mr. Rao, learned advocate
appearing for the petitioners with the wit and wisdom at his
command argues that notwithstanding the aforesaid finding of the
Assistant Commissioner, the provision in sub-section 1(c) of Section
68 makes it clear that the writ petitioners are not in unauthorized

                                               3
occupation being the Sebaits and, therefore, the impugned order
under Section 68 is wholly misconceived and liable to be set aside.
6.                      Dr. Rath, on the other hand, argues that petitioners’
claim of possession as Sebaits is improper and in any event when the
property belongs to the religious institution, it should be possessed
and managed by the trustees in furtherance of the improvement of
the religious institution and not by the writ petitioners. In addition to
that, he challenges the maintainability of the writ petition in view of
the alternative remedy provided to the petitioners as against the
impugned order as per the provisions in Section 9 of the Act.
7.                      Regard being had to the aforesaid fact and submissions,
we find that in fact the petitioners should have approached the
Commissioner of Endowments under Section 9 instead of directly
approaching                 this Court under       Articles 226 and 227     of the
Constitution of India. Be that as it may, the dispute being simple in
nature it is adjudicated within the scope of Section 68 and not by
interfering with the rights and interest of either of the parties
available to them under any other provision of law.                       When the
property belongs to the deity and the non-hereditary trustees want to
retain the possession, obviously for the purpose of improvement of
the religious institution, the writ petitioners cannot claim a right over
the same on the ground of rendering Seva Puja. Apart from that, the
reason assigned in the impugned order also sounds just and proper
in furtherance of the order of eviction. Therefore, in absence of any
illegality or perversity, we do not interfere with the order of eviction
inasmuch as the writ petitioners do not come within the category of
S][‘][‘’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’;[]’[][ebak to retain the possession but they come within
the meaning of any other person as employed in the aforesaid
provision of law, i.e., Clause (c) of sub-section (1) of Section 68.
                        Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
8.                      Before parting with the case, we observe that if the
property is managed by Debottar, the Sub-Collector, Patnagarh may

                                  4
look into the grievance of the petitioners, if they apply for redressal,
either for their continuance as Pujaks/Sebaits or otherwise.         Any
such representation made be considered by the said authority, if it
has the jurisdiction, strictly in accordance with law inasmuch as we
do not express any opinion in that respect. Apart from that, the Sub-
collector, Patnagarh may do well to see that there is improvement of
the religious institution, and quarterly report in that respect be
submitted to the Commissioner of Endowments. We further direct the
Commissioner      of  Endowments       to   supervise  the  progress  in
improvement      of  the   institution   either personally  or  through
subordinate officers. In that respect, if the Sub-Collector or any other
authority/officer of the State does not carry out the work for
improvement of the institution, then a report be submitted to this
Court, and in that event, Registry is directed to list the case for
suitable orders. The Commissioner of Endowments, his subordinate
officers and the Sub-Collector shall bear in mind that deity is a
perpetual minor and, therefore, they are the guardians to look to the
best interest of the religious institution.
             Free copy of the order be supplied to Dr. Rath, learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the Commissioner of Endowments.
                                               ………………………………
                                                 P.K. TRIPATHY,J.
                                               ………………………………
                                   PRADIP MOHANTY,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 12th March, 2008/GDS


