                       HIGH COURT OF ORISSA,
                                  CUTTACK
                 JAIL CRIMINAL APPEAL No.294 of 2000
    From the judgment dated 21.10.2000 passed by Sri N. Prusty,
    Addl. Sessions Judge, Parlakhemundi in S.C. No.16 of 1998/S.C.
    No.145 of 1998 (GDC).
                               ----------
    Ijak @ Kalia Mallik            …………                          Appellant
                                   versus
    State of Orissa                .…………                      Respondent
                 For Appellant     : Mr. Niranjan Singh
                 For Respondent    : Mr. P.K. Pattnaik,
                                     Addl. Govt. Advocate
    P R E S E N T:
             THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADIP MOHANTY
                                       &
                   THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE B.P.RAY
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
              Date of hearing & judgment : 19.03.2010
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
PRADIP MOHANTY, J.           This Jail Criminal Appeal is directed against
    the judgment and order dated 21.10.2000 passed by the learned
    Addl. Sessions Judge, Parlakhemundi in S.C. No.16 of 1998/S.C.
    No.145 of 1998 (GDC) convicting the appellant under Section
    302/307, IPC and sentencing him to undergo imprisonment for life
    and to pay a fine of Rs.10,000/- in default to undergo R.I. for a
    further period of two years for the offence under Section 302, IPC.
    No separate sentence has been imposed for the offence under

                                  2
Section 307, IPC, since the punishment imposed under Section
302, IPC will meet the ends of justice.
2.                The case of the prosecution in a nutshell is that
on 17.08.1997 at 2.00 P.M. the accused-appellant along with his
wife and baby son Sanju and daughter Franchiska were sitting on
the verandah of P.W.3-Sankia Naik of village Merama. At that time,
the accused-appellant started quarrelling with his wife and all of a
sudden stabbed his baby son on his chest/neck and also stabbed
his daughter on her back. His baby son succumbed to the injuries
at the spot, whereas the daughter sustained serious bleeding
injury.   One eye witness Dabid Bardhan reported the matter at
Nalaghat Outpost at 9.00 P.M. and thereafter the report was sent
to Adava Police Station. On the basis of the said report, the case
was registered, investigation taken up and after its closure, charge
sheet submitted against the accused-appellant under Sections
302/307, IPC.
3.                Plea of the accused is one of complete denial of
the allegation.
4.                In order to prove the charge the prosecution
examined as many as 10 witnesses including the I.O. and two
doctors and exhibited 14 documents. Defence examined one
witness, in support of its plea.
5.                The    learned Additional Sessions    Judge   after
conclusion of the trial convicted and sentenced the appellant as
already mentioned hereinbefore.
6.                Mr. Singh, learned counsel for the appellant
assails the impugned judgment on the following grounds:

                                   3
            (i)    No intention has been ascribed to the appellant
                   by the prosecution for commission of the crime;
            (ii)   P.Ws.1 & 2 are interested witnesses; as P.W.1 is
                   the mother of the deceased and P.W.2 had illicit
                   relationship with P.W.1.
            (iii)  There was a quarrel between the appellant and
                   his wife(P.W.1) due to the illicit relationship
                   between P.W.1 and P.W.2 and out of sudden
                   provocation the appellant dealt a blow to the
                   deceased as a result of which he died. In such
                   circumstance, the act of the appellant may come
                   within the ambit of Section 304 Part-I, I.P.C.
7.                 Mr. Pattanaik, learned Additional Government
Advocate vehemently contends that the evidence of P.Ws.1 & 2,
who are witnesses to the occurrence, is very clear and cogent that
the appellant is the assailant of the deceased. P.W.1 is not only the
mother of the deceased but also the wife of the appellant and,
therefore, it cannot be presumed that she will screen the real
offender and falsely implicate her husband. There is no material to
disbelieve the evidence of the eye witnesses, namely, P.Ws.1 and 2
as well as P.Ws.3 to 6 who are post occurrence witnesses. Failure
to prove motive is not fatal to the prosecution if eye witnesses
account appears to be truthful.       There is thus no illegality or
infirmity in the impugned order warranting interference by this
Court.
8.                 Perused the LCR.     P.W.1 is the mother of the
deceased and wife of the accused. She deposed that on the date of

                                   4
occurrence, she along with her husband (accused) and children had
been to the house of her brother Sankhia Naik (P.W.3). When they
arrived there, P.W.3 and his wife were absent and their house was
locked. They sat on the verandah of P.W.3. While they were sitting,
the accused fought with her and stabbed her son (deceased) by
means of a Kati on his right side chest. As a result, her son died on
the spot sustaining bleeding injury. Thereafter, the accused
assaulted her daughter on her back by means of the said Kati. In
cross-examination, a suggestion was given to P.W.1 and she
admitted that she had got illicit relationship with Dabida (P.W.2).
Except this, nothing has been elicited to demolish her evidence
with regard to the assault on the deceased and injured (daughter).
             P.W.2, the informant, is an ocular witness. He deposed
that on the date of occurrence he was sitting near the house of
Bacha Panda. He saw the accused along with his wife (P.W.1) and
two children coming to the house of P.W.3.         As his house was
locked, they sat on the verandah. At about 2.00 PM the accused
stabbed on the right side chest of his son Sanju by means of a
knife, as a result of which he sustained injury and died there. Then,
the accused again gave a stabbing blow on the back of his
daughter, for which she sustained bleeding injury. He further
deposed that he went to Nalaghat Outpost along with P.W.4 (Chian
Majhi) & P.W.3 (Sankhia Naika) and orally reported before the
Police. The A.S.I. of police scribed the report and read over and
explained the contents to him and thereafter he put his signature
on it. He proved the FIR marked Ext.1 and his signature thereon
marked Ext.1/1. He is also a witness to the seizure of the weapon
of offence (M.O.I). In cross-examination, he admitted that he had
been to Mandimara for tending cattle and when he came back to

                                   5
the village there was none. Nothing has been elicited in cross-
examination to discredit his testimony.
                   P.W.3 is the brother of P.W.1 and a post
occurrence witness. He stated that at about 5 P.M. in the evening,
he returned home and saw the injury on the chest of the deceased
who was lying dead. He also saw bleeding injury on the back of
Franchiska. P.W.1 narrated the occurrence to him. Then he called
the Ward Member and went to Nalaghat Outpost along with Dabida
(P.W.2) who orally reported before the Police. The police came to
their village and made inquest over the dead body of the deceased.
In cross-examination, he admitted that his sister (P.W.1) had
married the accused against their will. He also admitted that they
were not pulling on well with the accused.
                   P.W.4 is the Ward Member of the village and a
post-occurrence     witness.  He   deposed   that   on  the   date  of
occurrence at about 12 noon, P.Ws.2 & 3 came to him and
informed about the occurrence. Thereafter, he went to the spot and
saw the injured as well as the deceased, who was lying dead.
                   P.W.5 is also a post-occurrence witness. He
stated that hearing the occurrence he went and saw the deceased
lying with bleeding injury on his chest.     He also saw the injured
girl. He is a witness to the seizure of the knife (M.O.I) vide seizure
list (Ext.2).   He is also a witness to the seizure of materials
indicated in Clause-10 of Ext.3.     He proved Exts.2 and 3 and his
signature thereon marked as Exts.2/1 and 3/1. He also identified
the knife (M.O.I). Nothing has been elicited in cross-examination to
disbelieve his testimony.

                                   6
                   P.W.6 is another post-occurrence witness. She is
the wife of P.W.3.     She stated that on hearing the incident, she
came from the maiza Field to her house and saw the deceased
lying dead with injury on his chest. He also saw that Fransis had
sustained injury on her back side. She further stated that P.W.1
told her that the accused had assaulted the deceased and Fransis.
Nothing has been elicited from her in cross-examination.
                   P.W.7 is the A.S.I. of police then attached to
Nalaghat Outpost who reduced to writing the oral report, sent the
same to Advava police station for registration of the case and took
up investigation. He proved the F.I.R. marked Ext.1 and his
signature    thereon    marked   Ext.1/2.   During   the   course   of
investigation, he seized the knife (M.O.I) vide seizure list (Ext.2),
blood-stained earth, sample earth and bloodstained cloth vide
seizure list (Ext.3), and wearing apparels of the accused, such as, a
check shirt and a Dhoti vide seizure list (Ext.5). He sent the injured
to Medical Officer, Birikot P.H.C. for medical examination under
requisition (Ext.4). He also sent the dead body of the deceased for
postmortem examination vide dead body chalan (Ext.7), forwarded
the accused to the court and thereafter handed over the charge of
investigation to the OIC, Adava Police Station. (P.W.9). Nothing has
been elicited in cross-examination.
                   P.W.8 is the Doctor who treated the injured
(Franchiska Mallik) and found one lacerated wound on the back
side of pectoral region of size 2” x 1 ¼”. He opined that the injury
might have been caused by a sharp cutting weapon and that the
nature of the injury was simple. In cross-examination, he admitted

                                  7
that the injury is possible if one falls having his face upwards on
hard, sharp and protruding object.
                   P.W.9 is the then O.I.C. of Adava P.S. He took
charge of the investigation from P.W.7 during course of which he
sent the seized exhibits to R.F.S.L., Berhampur for chemical
examination and after receipt of the chemical examination report
(Ext.11) and closure of investigation submitted charge-sheet. In
cross-examination he admitted that the occurrence took place due
to infidelity of the wife of the accused and due to sudden
provocation the accused assaulted the deceased and the injured.
He denied to have any knowledge if the wife of the accused had
any extramarital relationship with Dabida Bardhan (P.W.2).
                   P.W.10 is the doctor, who conducted autopsy
over the dead body of the deceased and found a stab wound with
clean cut and irregular margin, the lower end of which is acute with
entry wound measuring 1 cm. x 0.25 cm. x internal jugular vein
deep situated little obliquely and vertical medial to sternal end of
right clavity in the supra sternal notch. He opined that the injury
described above was ante mortem in nature and could have been
caused by such weapon sent for examination. The cause of death
was due to haemorrhage and shock. The wound was fatal in
ordinary course of nature. Nothing has been elicited in cross-
examination.
                   Defence has examined one Satyaban Bebarta as
D.W.1, but he denied to have any knowledge about the occurrence.
9.                 On careful scrutiny of the entire evidence, this
Court finds that P.W.2 is an ocular witness. He saw the assault by

                                  8
the accused on the right side chest of the deceased (Sanju) and
back of the injured (Franchiska) by means of a knife. He proved
the FIR (Ext.1) lodged by him and identified the weapon of offence,
i.e., knife (M.O.I) in Court. His evidence gets corroboration from
the FIR. P.W.1, who is the wife of the accused and mother of the
deceased (Sanju) and the injured (Franchiska), is also an eye
witness. She supported the evidence of P.W.2 with regard to the
assault on the deceased and the injured.       There is nothing on
record to disbelieve the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2.     P.W.3 is the
brother of P.W.1 on whose ‘Danda’ (front-yard) the occurrence had
taken place.      At the time of occurrence, he was absent and
returned home at 5.00 pm.      He saw injuries on the chest of the
deceased (Sanju) and on the back of the injured (Franchiska). His
sister (P.W.1) and other villagers told him about the occurrence.
P.W.6 is the wife of P.W.3. On hearing the occurrence, she came
from the maize field to her house and saw the deceased (Sanju)
lying dead with injury on his chest. The injured (Franchiska) had
also sustained injury on her back. She corroborated the evidence
of P.W.3. P.W.4 is the Ward Member of the village who stated that
P.W.3 came and reported the matter to him. Thereafter, both of
them went to the spot. He saw the deceased and the injured lying
there. P.W.5 is another post-occurrence witness who went to the
spot hearing the occurrence.      He corroborated the evidence of
P.W.4. He is also a witness to the seizure of the knife (M.O.I) vide
Ext.2 as well as bloodstained earth and sample earth vide Ext.3.
P.W.7 is the I.O. who registered the case, investigated into the
matter, seized the knife (M.O.I) and the bloodstained earth, and
also sent the injured to the PHC, Birikote. He proved seizure of the
knife (M.O.I), bloodstained cloth (M.O.II), bloodstained earth

                                   9
(M.O.III), sample earth (M.O.IV), check shirt (M.O.V) and white
dhoti (M.O.VI). P.W.8, the Medical Officer who treated the inured
(Franchiska), corroborated the evidence of P.Ws.1 to 6. P.W.10 is
the doctor, who conducted autopsy over the dead body of the
deceased and found one stab wound of size 1 cm x 0.25 cm x
internal jugular vain deep situated vertically and little obliquely
medial to sternal end of right clavicle in the supra-sternal notch.
He categorically opined that the injury on the person of the
deceased Sanju was ante mortem in nature and could have been
caused by M.O.I. P.W.9, who took charge of the investigation from
P.W.7, sent the seized articles to R.F.S.L., Berhampur for chemical
examination and on completion of investigation submitted charge-
sheet. He proved the chemical examination report (Ext.11).
10.          There is no discrepancy in the evidence of the doctor
and the eye witnesses with regard to the injuries on the person of
the deceased and the injured.      The evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 is
clear with regard to assault on the chest of the deceased which is
corroborated by the postmortem doctor (P.W.9).            The minor
discrepancies appearing in the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 are bound
to occur in case of truthful witnesses due to efflux of time. P.W.1
cannot be said to be an interested witness because she is not only
the mother of the deceased and the injured but also the wife of the
accused. It is the natural conduct of a wife not to implicate or rope
her husband in any false allegation. That apart, evidence of P.W.1
is fully corroborated by P.W.2, who is an independent witness.
Even if no motive is ascribed against the accused, the accused is
not entitled to an acquittal on that ground alone. For the foregoing
reasons, this Court is of the opinion that the appellant was the

                                   10
assailant of the deceased (Sanju) and had caused injury to the
injured (Franchiska).
11.         Now, it is to be seen whether the act committed by the
appellant comes within the ambit of Section 304 Part-I, IPC. The
apex Court in K.M. Nanavati V. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1962
SC 605 has held as follows:-
            “…….The Indian law, relevant to the present
            enquiry, may be stated thus: (1) The test of
            “grave and sudden” provocation is whether a
            reasonable man, belonging to the same class
            of society as the accused, placed in the
            situation in which the accused was placed
            would be so provoked as to lose his self-
            control. (2) In India, words and gestures may
            also, under certain circumstances, cause
            grave and sudden provocation to an accused
            so as to bring his act within the first
            Exception to S. 300 of the Indian Penal Code.
            (3) The mental background created by the
            previous act of the victim may be taken into
            consideration in ascertaining whether the
            subsequent act caused grave and sudden
            provocation for committing the offence. (4)
            The fatal blow should be clearly traced to the
            influence of passion arising from that
            provocation and not after the passion had
            cooled down by lapse of time, or otherwise
            giving room and scope for premeditation and
            calculation.”
            This Court examined the matter in the light of the
above ratio.     It is true that P.W.1 admitted in her cross-
examination that she had illicit relationship with P.W.2, but there is
no evidence that P.W.1 provoked the accused or confessed before
him with regard to the paternity of the deceased and the injured
for which the accused had lost self-control and attacked the

                                            11
         deceased and the injured. It is for the accused to establish that the
         provocation was grave and sudden for which he had lost self-
         control and attacked the deceased and the injured. No suggestion
         has been given by the accused to that effect to any of the
         witnesses. Therefore, the case does not come under the purview
         of Section 304 Part-I, IPC. For the above reasons, this Court
         confirms the conviction of the appellant under Section 302, IPC.
         12.          So far as the conviction under Section 307, IPC is
         concerned, as per the evidence of P.W.7 the injury was simple in
         nature and not on the vital part of the body of the injured
         (Franchiska). Therefore, this Court converts the conviction of the
         appellant from Section 307, IPC to Section 324, IPC.
         13.          In the result, the appeal is dismissed. The conviction of
         the appellant under Section 302, IPC and the sentence thereof as
         imposed by the trial court is confirmed.      However, his conviction
         under Section 307, IPC is converted to Section 324, IPC, but no
         separate sentence is imposed.
                                              ………………………………
                                               PRADIP MOHANTY,J.
B.P. Ray, J.          I agree.
                                               …………………………
                                                     B.P. Ray,J.
         Orissa High Court, Cuttack
         The 19th March, 2010/Barik


