                                  ORISSA HIGH COURT
                                            CUTTACK
                            MISC. APPEAL NO.63 OF 1998
    From the award dated 16.07.1997/06.12.1997 passed by the Railway
    Claims Tribunal, Bhubaneswar Bench in O.A. No.40 of 1996.
    Dr. Guru Prasad Chhotaray                    ………                            Appellant
                                                Versus
    Union of India and another                   ………                        Respondents
                   For appellant :       M/s N.C. Pati, P.Mohanty,
                                                 S.Misra, P.K. Khuntia,
                                                 A.K. Mohapatra. A.K. Das
                                                 and S. Mohanty.
                   For respondent : M/s B. Pal, A.K. Mishra,
                                                 S.K. Ojha, J.Pal, P. Das
                                                 and A.Pal.
    PRESENT :
             THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE PRADIP MOHANTY
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                   Date of hearing and judgment : 23.07.2008
    --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRADIP MOHANTY,J.         This appeal under Section 23 of the Railway Claims
    Tribunal Act, 1987 is directed against the judgment and award dated
    16.06.1997/06.12.1997 passed by the Railway Claims Tribunal,
    Bhubaneswar in O.A. No.40 of 1996. Initially, the matter was heard by
    a Division Bench of the Tribunal consisting of the Member (Tenchncal)
    and Member (Judicial). The Member (Technical) assessed the liability of

                                   2
the railways at Rs.2,600/- with interest at the rate of 12% per annum
from the date of application, i.e., 23.08.1996, and cost of Rs.370/-. The
Member (Judicial), however, assessed the said liability at Rs.65,500/-
with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from 14.06.1996 along with
Rs.1857/- towards application fee and Rs.1521/- towards Advocate’s
fee. Since there was conflicting of opinion, the matter was referred to
the third Member, namely, Member (Judicial) Ghaziabad, who agreed
with the view taken by the Member (Technical). Thus, by majoring, the
Tribunal awarded an amount of Rs.2,600/- with interest at the rate of
12% per annum from the date of application, i.e., 23.08.1996 and cost
of Rs.370/-.
2.           Case of the appellant is that after his arrival at New Delhi
from Soudi Arabia, he boarded Rajdhani Express on 14.06.1996 for
Bhubaneswar and booked the luggages of eleven cartoons on payment
of necessary freightage as advised by the Railway authorities.          On
verification at Howrah station, he found that one out of the eleven
cartoons was missing and informed the fact to the concerned Railway
staff. Ten cartoons were delivered to him at Bhubaneswar. Thereafter,
complaint was lodged before the Railway authorities at Bhubaneswar
and on their failure to do anything, the matter was carried to the
Railway Tribunal where claim of Rs.65,500/- was laid.
3.           The Railway filed its reply stating therein that the appellant
did not declare the value of the consignment and percentage of charge
was not paid as per Section 103(2) of the Railways Act. Therefore, the
appellant is entitled to get compensation of Rs.100/- per Kg which
comes to Rs.2,600/- only.
4.           In order to prove its case, the appellant examined himself
and proved 21 exhibits. The Railway examined none but exhibited one
document.

                                  3
5.           Counsel for the appellant submits that the Tribunal has
wrongly adjudicated the case under Section 103 of the Railways Act.
The majority Members should have passed the award under Section 93
of the said Act. He further submits that for missing of the articles, a
G.R. case was registered, i.e., G.R. Case No.1859 of 1996, wherein the
appellant duly proved the same.       He further submits that both the
learned Members have delivered the judgment without application of
mind and without considering the evidence on record and have wrongly
adjudicated the case under Section 103 of the Railways Act without
considering the provisions of Section 93 of the Act.
6.           Mr. Pal, learned counsel for the Railways submits that the
majority Members of the Tribunal have rightly passed the award under
Section 103 of the Railways Act which works out to Rs.2,600/-. If an
individual wants the Railways to bear the risk for value in excess
prescribed under the Rules, he has to declare the value of the goods
and pay the percentage charges. If he does not do so, he himself bears
the risk for the excess value. Considering the same, the two Members
of the Tribunal have awarded Rs.2,600/-. Since there is compliance of
Section   103(2),  Railways    is   not liable  to   pay the  unlimited
compensation. According to him, the majority view of the Tribunal is
legal.
7.           Perused the awards passed by the three Members, the LCR
and the provisions of law. The crux of the case is whether there was
compliance of Section 103(2) of the Railways Act and whether the
appellant had booked his consignment under Section 110 of the
Railways Act.
8.           For ready reference, Sections 103 (1) and (2) are quoted
below :
             “103. Extent of monetary liability in respect of any
             consignment.- (1) Where any consignment is
             entrusted to a railway administration for carriage by

                                     4
               railway and the value of such consignment has not
               been declared as required under sub-section (2) by the
               consignor, the amount of liability of the railway
               administration for the loss, destruction, damage,
               deterioration or non-delivery of the consignment shall
               in no case exceed such amount calculated with
               reference to the weight of the consignment as may be
               prescribed, and where such consignment consists of
               an animal, the liability shall not exceed such amount
               as may be prescribed.
               (2)    Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
               section (1), where the consignor declares the value of
               any consignment at the time of its entrustment to a
               railway administration for carriage by railway, and
               pays such percentage charge as may be prescribed on
               so much of the value of such consignment as is in
               excess of the liability of the railway administration as
               calculated or specified as the case may be, under sub-
               section (1), the liability of the railway administration
               for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-
               delivery of such consignment shall not exceed the
               value so declared.
               The Railways relied on Ext.R/1, the forwarding note and
contended that their liability is limited to section 103(2) of the Railways
Act. The appellant, who was examined as P.W.1, stated that he gave a
list of articles in original to the Railway authorities at Delhi. It was not
suggested to him by the Railways that he was not ready to pay the
percentage charges. There was also no pleading that the appellant was
not ready to pay the percentage charges.              No witness has been
produced by the Railway to that effect. The Railway has also not stated
anything as to what happened to the missing cartoon during
transportation from Delhi to Bhubaneswar.            Further, they have not
examined any member of the staff who were guarding the luggage.
9.             For better appreciation, Section 100 of the Railways Act is
quoted hereunder:

                                    5
              “100. Responsibility as carrier of luggage.- A railway
              administration shall not be responsible for the loss,
              destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery of
              any luggage unless a railway servant has booked the
              luggage and given a receipt therefor and in the case of
              luggage which is carried by the passenger in his
              charge, unless it is also proved that the loss,
              destruction, damage or deterioration was due to the
              negligence or misconduct on its part or on the part of
              any of its servants.”
              From a bare reading of this section, it is crystal clear that
the Railway Administration has to take complete responsibility soon
after receipt of the luggage.     In the instant case, the luggages were
handed over to the Railway for safe custody, as there was no space to
keep the cartoons inside the passenger compartment.              Since the
appellant, at the end of his journey, received ten cartoons, obviously
there was missing of one cartoon. Therefore, Railway is legally liable for
the missing cartoon.       In other words, the Railway is liable to pay
compensation.
10.           The evidence shows that the appellant wanted to pay any
amount as required by the Railway for safe delivery of the goods at
Bhubaneswar, but the authorities of the Railways avoided to receive the
percentage charges saying that Rajdhani Express does not have such
facility. It appears that the value of the cartoons containing the goods
was taken by the Railway Staff. Therefore, the Railway cannot avoid to
pay the full compensation.
11.           In view of the above, this Court sets aside the majority view
and affirms the minority view of the Tribunal. The Railway is directed to
satisfy the award as per the minority view of the Tribunal.
12.           In the result, the Misc. Appeal is allowed.
                                             ………………………………
                                              PRADIP MOHANTY, J.

                           6
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
July 23, 2007/Samal


