                        ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                        JAIL CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.31 OF 2004
Arising out of Judgment and order of conviction dated 24.2.2004 passed by
Sri S.P. Panigrahi, Ad hoc Additional Sessions Judge (Fast Track Court),
Nayagarh in S.T. Case No.103/42 of 2002/2001.
                                           ---------------
Chandramani Pradhan                              ……                                    Appellant
                                              -versus-
State of Orissa                                  ……                                  Respondent
                For appellant           : Mr. Susanta Kumar Pradhan
                For respondent          : Mr. B.P. Pradhan
                                                         (Addl. Government Advocate)
                                          ---------------
                     Date of hearing & Judgment: 25.03.2014
                                         ---------------
P R E S E N T:
             THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE PRADIP MOHANTY
                                                AND
           THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE BISWAJIT MOHANTY
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        In the present Jail Criminal Appeal, the appellant has challenged the
judgment and order of conviction dated 24.2.2004 passed by the learned Ad
hoc Additional Sessions Judge (F.T.C), Nayagarh in S.T. Case No.103/42 of
2002/2001 under Section 302, IPC and consequent sentence to undergo
imprisonment for life.
        2.      The case of the prosecution is that the appellant and
informant (P.W.1) are two sons of the deceased (Birabar). On 22.6.2000
at about 10 A.M., the informant (P.W.1) came to the house of his father,
Birabar (deceased) to take his bullocks where he saw the appellant and

                                     2
the deceased have entered into an altercation and the appellant was
abusing his father concerning cultivation of some land. P.W.1 also saw
that the appellant entered into the house of his father (deceased) and
brought a Tangia (M.O.I) from his house. When the deceased asked him if
he would hack him, the appellant suddenly dealt repeated blows by the
said Tangia on the head of the deceased for which he sustained severe
bleeding injuries, fell down and succumbed to injury. When the appellant
saw the informant (P.W.1), he threatened to assault him and ran away
with the said Tangia. Thereafter, P.W.1 reported the matter at
Khandapara Police Station. The police registered the case and took up
investigation. After completion of investigation, the police submitted the
charge sheet against the present appellant under Sections 302/506, IPC.
The plea of the appellant was complete denial.
3.    In order to prove the case, the prosecution examined as many as
twelve witnesses including the doctor (P.W.6) and the Investigating
Officers and exhibited nine documents. On the other hand the defence
had examined none. On completion of trial, the learned Ad hoc Additional
Sessions Judge, Nayagarh convicted the present appellant under Section
302, IPC and sentenced him to undergo imprisonment for life basing upon
the evidence of P.W.1 and P.W.6 (doctor).
4.    Mr. Pradhan, learned counsel for the appellant submits that P.W.1
is an interested witness and inimically disposed towards the appellant
and he had not seen the occurrence. He was not in a position to see the
occurrence as he was at a distance. In the cross-examination, he has

                                      3
given different versions relating to his witnessing the occurrence.
Therefore, he is not a reliable witness. Further, there exists no
independent corroboration.     Alternatively, he argued that the case is
coming under the purview of Section 304, IPC since there was an
altercation between the deceased and appellant over cultivation of some
land. Therefore, conviction of the appellant may be altered to one under
Section 304, IPC.
5.     Mr. B.P. Pradhan, learned Additional Government Advocate for the
State submits that there is no material to discard the evidence of P.W.1
and both the appellant and P.W.1 (informant) are sons of the deceased.
His evidence is very clear with regard to assault. Mr. Pradhan further
submits that the doctor (P.W.6) corroborates the above evidence. There is
also no material before the court that the case is coming under the
purview of Section 304, IPC, since three successive blows were given by
the appellant to the head and neck of the deceased. Thus, the learned
Addl. Government Advocate submits that the impugned judgment is
legally correct and does not require any interference.
6.     Perused the L.C.R. and gone through the evidence on record
carefully.
       P.W.1 is the informant, brother of the appellant and son of the
deceased. In his examination in chief he deposed that on 22.6.2000 at
about 10 A.M. he was in his house. At that time he was coming to the
house where his father (deceased) was residing to take his bullocks
which were tied in front of the house of his father. When he reached the

                                     4
house of his father, he saw the appellant was holding a Tangia (M.O.I)
and his father and the appellant were shouting with each other. When
his father asked him to as to if he would hack him, then the appellant
dealt three successive blows by the Tangia on the left side head and neck
of his father as a result of which his father sustained bleeding injuries
and fell down. P.W.1 immediately tied the injured place by a Dhoti but
his father died at the spot. Thereafter, the appellant fled towards the
mango tope with the Tangia. P.W.1 then came to the police out post of
Koska. He got a report drafted on his instruction by a person, whose
name he did not remember. The said person read over the report to P.W.1
and after understanding the contents, P.W.1 signed and presented the
same before the police officer-in-charge of the said out post. He proved
the said report under Ext.1. In the cross-examination, P.W.1 admitted
that since 5 to 6 years of the occurrence they all were staying in separate
houses. His house may be half kilometer away from his father’s house.
The appellant resides in the house which is also half kilometer away from
the house of his father (deceased). As they did not pull on well with the
appellant, they decided to live separately and accordingly they were
separated. In the cross-examination he further admitted that while he
was half way to the house of his father, he saw the appellant was
running away with a Tangia. When he reached the house of his father, he
saw his father lying dead with injuries and many persons have already
gathered. While he was coming he saw the appellant dealing blows by the
Tangia to his father. The house was visible from a distance. He saw that

                                      5
around 15 to 20 persons have gathered and surrounded his father and
he saw it from a distance of 200 cubits.
      P.W.2 is a co-villager. He turned hostile and on being confronted
with previous statements, he denied to have made the same.
      P.W.3 is another co-villager, who turned hostile. He in examination-
in-chief stated that he did not know anything about the occurrence. In
the cross-examination, he admitted that he saw the appellant shouting
with his father and the appellant ran away with a Tangia from the house
of  Birabar   (deceased).   However,    when  confronted    with   previous
statements, he denied to have made the same.
      P.W.4 is a co-villager. He in his examination-in-chief stated that he
could not say who assaulted the deceased. He further stated that the
police came to the village held inquest over the dead body of the
deceased. In his presence, the police prepared the inquest report. He
proved the same under Ext.2. He turned hostile and when confronted
with the previous statements, he denied the same.
      P.W.5 is another co-villager. In his examination-in-chief he stated
that the occurrence took place about 3 years back one day around 10
A.M. in front of the house of Birabar (deceased). He was returning from
his Bari. When he reached the house of Birabar (deceased), he saw
Birabar lying dead with severe cut injuries on his head and neck. He did
not know who assaulted the deceased. Many persons had also gathered.
He turned hostile and when confronted with the previous statement, he
denied the same. In the cross-examination, he admitted that when he

                                         6
was working at his “Potal Bari”, he heard that Birabar (deceased) has
been killed. It would take about one hour to reach the village from my
Bari.
      P.W.6 is the doctor who conducted the autopsy and found the
following injuries;
             “1. One incised injury of size 6” x 1” width and 1½”
             depth on the left side of the neck just below the mandible
             with cutting of the underline muscle, blood vessels and
             bone, Bone pieces were seen outside.
             2. Incised wound 1” x ½” x ½” over the left temporal
             region ½’ above left ear pina.
             3. Incised wound 1” x ½” x ½” over the left side of the
             neck 2” below the first injury (Injury No.1).”
P.W.6 opined that all the injuries were ante mortem in nature. Death was
due to severe bleeding from the above injuries and due to the cutting of
the blood vessels of the neck. The injuries were possible by heavy sharp
cutting weapon like a Tangia. He proved the post mortem report under
Ext.3. In cross-examination, nothing adverse has been elicited.
      P.W.7 is a co-villager. In his examination-in-chief he stated that on
being asked by the police he singed on a paper vide Ext.2/2, Ext.5 and
Ext.7. He turned hostile and when confronted with the previous
statement, he denied to have made the same.
      P.W.8 is the uncle of the deceased. In his examination-in-chief
he stated that the deceased was murdered but he could not say who
killed the deceased. He had seen the dead body of the deceased but
had not seen any injury. In his presence, the police seized the blood
stained earth and prepared the seizure list under Ext.7. He further
stated that no tangia was ever seized in his presence. He was declared

                                   7
hostile and when confronted with the previous statement, he denied
the same.
      P.W.9 was the O.I.C. of Khandapara Police Station. He took
charge of the investigation and arrested the appellant. While in
custody, the appellant told P.W.9 regarding concealment of the Tangia
(M.O.I) on the roof of his thatched house (Attu) by him and led P.W.9
and witnesses to his house from where he produced the Tangia before
P.W.9. The Tangia was stained with blood. In presence of the
witnesses, P.W.9 seized the said Tangia and prepared the seizure list
under Ext.6/1. He produced the appellant before the Medical Officer,
Khandapara to collect nail clippings from him and also for his blood
grouping. He forwarded the seized Tangia, clothes and blood stained
earth for Chemical Examination to S.F.S.L., Bhubaneswar through
J.M.F.C., Khandapara. He proved the forwarding report under Ext.9
and Chemical Examination Report under Ext.10. On completion of
investigation, he submitted charge sheet. In the cross-examination,
P.W.9 admitted that he recorded the statements of the seizure
witnesses who were present during seizure of M.O.I and prepared
Ext.6/1 only after the Tangia was produced by the appellant. He did
not mention in Ext.6/1 that the Tangia was brought by the appellant
from the roof of the thatched house commonly known as Attu. He did
not ascertain as to who others were staying with the appellant in the
said house.

                                          8
      P.W.11 is a co-villager, who turned hostile. He was confronted
with his previous statements, but he denied the same.
      P.W.12 was the A.S.I. of Police of Koska Police Out-Post. In his
examination-in-chief he deposed that on the date of occurrence at
about 1 P.M. P.W.1 presented a written report before him. As it
revealed a cognizable case, he entered it in the Station Diary and
forwarded the same to the O.I.C., Khandapara Police Station (P.W.9)
for formal registration of a case. He took up preliminary investigation.
He examined the complainant. He visited the spot at 1.30 P.M. on the
same day. He saw that the deceased Birabar was lying dead on the
verandah of the house. During visit, he seized the sample of blood
stained earth and blood stained clothes. He further deposed in the
cross-examination that P.W.1 and appellant were brothers and they
were both living in separate houses away from house where deceased
was living.
      7.    There is no dispute that death of the deceased was
homicidal. In the case of Vadivelu v. The State of Madras reported in
AIR 1957 SC 614, the apex Court has held as under;
            “Generally speaking, oral testimony in this context may be
            classified into three categories, namely:
            (1) Wholly reliable.
            (2) Wholly unreliable.
            (3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
            12. In the first category of proof, the court should have no
            difficulty in coming to its conclusion either way - it may
            convict or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness,
            if it is found to be above reproach or suspicion of
            interestedness, incompetence or subornation. In the second
            category, the court equally has no difficulty in coming to its

                                        9
             conclusion. It is in the third category of cases, that the
             court has to be circumspect and has to look for
             corroboration in material particulars by reliable testimony,
             direct or circumstantial.”
8.     By applying the above ratio, this Court has to examine the
evidence. P.W.1, who is the informant and brother of the appellant, in
his examination-in-chief has stated that the appellant was holding a
Tangia and his father (deceased) and the appellant were shouting at
each other. The deceased asked him as to if he would hack him. Then,
the appellant dealt three successive blows by the said Tangia on the
left side head and neck of his father (deceased) as a result of which he
sustained bleeding injuries and fell down. In the cross-examination
P.W.1 admitted that while he was half way to the house of his father
(deceased), he saw the appellant running away with a Tangia. When
he reached the house of the father, he saw his father (deceased) was
lying dead with injuries and many persons have already gathered.
Thereafter, when the question was put to P.W.1 by the court, he
answered that while he was coming he saw the accused dealing blows
by the Tangia to his father (deceased). The house was visible from a
distance. In further cross-examination, he stated that he saw that
around 15 to 20 persons have gathered and surrounded his father
(deceased) and he saw it from a distance of 200 cubits. By applying
the aforesaid ratio decided in AIR 1957 SC 614 (supra), it is crystal
clear that P.W.1 changed his version from time to time. Therefore, he
is not at all a reliable witness. In such background, it can only be said

                                         10
      that P.W.1 had only seen the appellant running away with a Tangia
      and since 15 to 20 persons have surrounded the deceased, he had not
      seen the assault and had not heard any altercation between the
      deceased and the appellant.
      9.    By taking into the evidence in entirety, it appears that the trial
      court has gone wrong in convicting the appellant basing upon the
      evidence of P.W.1. Since he is not a reliable witness, we cannot deduce
      that the appellant was the author of the crime. In view of the above,
      this Court sets aside the judgment dated 24.2.2004 passed by the
      learned Ad hoc Additional Sessions Judge (FTC), Naygarh in S.T. Case
      No.103/42 of 2001 and directs that the bail bond of appellant be
      discharged forthwith.
            The Jail Criminal Appeal is accordingly allowed.
                                                     ………….….………….….
                                                         PRADIPA MOHANTY, J.
                                                       ………….….………….….
                                                         BISWAJIT MOHANTY, J.
High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Dated 25th of March, 2014/amit


