                                ORISSA HIGH COURT
                                          CUTTACK
                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.31 OF 1989
                                                AND
                            CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.43 OF 1989
      From the judgment and order dated 25.01.1989 passed by Sri S. K.
      Panda, Sessions Judge, Sambalpur in Sessions Trial No. 116 of 1987.
                                             --------
      Criminal Appeal No.31 of 1989
      Natwarlal Poddar & 2 others             ………                              Appellants
                                            -Versus-
      State of Orissa                          ………                           Respondent
                            For appellants : M/s A.K. Nanda, S. Mukharjee,
                                                        A.K. Sahoo, G.S. Rath
                                                        D.K. Mohapatra,
                                                        A.K. Mohapatra and
                                                        A.K.Das.
                          For Respondent : Addl. Government Advocate.
      Criminal Appeal No.43 of 1989
      Sitaram Poddar & another                ………
Appellants
                                             -Versus-
      State of Orissa                          ………                           Respondent
                           For Appellants : Mr. N.C. Pati.
                           For Respondent : Addl. Government Advocate.
      PRESENT :
               THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE PRADIP MOHANTY
      --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                              2
                              Date of judgment : 30. 01.2009
         --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PRADIP MOHANTY, J.          Both the Criminal Appeals are directed against the
         judgment and order dated 25.01.1989 passed by the Sessions Judge,
         Sambalpur in Sessions Trial No. 116 of 1987 convicting the
         appellants under Sections 304-B I.P.C. and sentencing them to
         undergo R.I. for seven years. Appellant-Sitaram Poddar has also been
         convicted under Section 4 of the D.P. Act and sentenced to undergo
         R.I. for one year; both the sentences imposed on him to run
         concurrently.
      2.            The case of the prosecution is that the marriage of accused
         Kamal Kishore Poddar, who is appellant No.2 in Criminal Appeal
         No.43 of 1989, with the deceased Prava Devi was solemnized in June,
         1985. From the day of marriage, the appellants began ill-treating her
         by demanding further dowry and caused mental agony to her. This
         fact was disclosed by the deceased in her parental house. In April
         1986, the appellant Kamal Kishore took the deceased to the house of
         P.W.19, left her there and came away without speaking anything. At
         that time, there were some injuries on the body of the deceased. The
         deceased told that she had been assaulted by the members of her
         husband’s family in connection with demand of further dowry. None
         from the family of appellants came to take her back till November,
         1986. However, the matter was settled and the deceased was brought
         to Sambalpur. But since she did not bring the dowry articles like Air
         Cooler, Freeze and gold ornaments, the appellants did not hesitate to
         inflict burn injuries on the deceased for which she was treated by a
         Doctor from 30th January 1987 to 8th February, 1998 and was almost
         cured. On 09.02.1987, the deceased vomited blood and breathed her
         last at 6.55 A.M. The dead body was taken to burial ground and
         without observing the caste customs, kerosene was poured over the
         body with a view to expedite burning the body and fire was set to the
         deceased. Hukum Chand Patwari (P.W.25), one of the relations of the

                                 3
   deceased, learnt about the death of the deceased and informed the
   town police over telephone. P.W.25 and the police officer reached the
   burial ground and asked the appellants to extinguish the fire, but as
   they did not comply with the direction of the police, P.W.25 with the
   help of others extinguished the fire and recovered only 25% of the
   body,   which   was   sent  for   post-mortem    examination.     During
   investigation, some bed-sheets, pillow covers, quilt covers and a
   bamboo lathi were seized from the room under the occupation of the
   deceased and appellant Kamal Kishore. All those articles were stained
   with human blood. After completion of investigation, the appellants
   were charge-sheeted and charge was framed under Sections 302/304-
   B/201 read with Section 34 I.P.C. and also Section 4 of the D.P. Act.
3.          In order to prove its case, prosecution examined 34
   witnesses and proved 45 exhibits. Defence examined none but proved
   two documents marked Exts.A and B. The learned Sessions Judge,
   who tried the case, vide his judgment dated 25.01.1989 convicted
   appellants Sitaram Poddar, Kamal Kishore Poddar, Natwarlal Poddar,
   Sawarmal Poddar and Sangita Poddar under Section 304-B I.P.C and
   sentenced them to undergo R.I. for seven years. He also convicted
   appellant Sitaram Poddar under Section 4 of the D.P. Act and
   sentenced him to undergo R.I. for one year with the direction that
   both the sentences are to run concurrently.
4.          Learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the trial
   court without appreciating the evidence on record in proper
   perspective and without keeping in view the settled legal position, has
   convicted the appellants. The trial court has held in Para 10 and 11 of
   its judgment that there was no demand of dowry and the alleged
   demand of dowry is doubtful. He further submitted that Section 113-
   B of the Evidence Act deals with presumption of dowry death. In order
   to bring a case within the ambit of Section 304-B I.P.C., it is the duty
   of the prosecution to prove that the death of the deceased occurred
   otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her

                                   4
   marriage and that she was subjected by the appellants to cruelty and
   harassment in connection with demand of dowry soon before her
   death. There should also be nexus between the death and dowry
   related harassment. But in the instant case, the trial court did not
   find the accused persons except appellant Sitaram Poddar guilty
   under Section 4 of the D.P. Act. Therefore, conviction under Section
   304-B I.P.C. is not sustainable. He further submitted that the
   statement of P.Ws. 19, 21, 22, 25, 30 and 33 would show that there
   was absolutely no demand of dowry. Ext.15 written by the deceased
   and received by P.W.22 does not bear any date and there is absolutely
   nothing about the ill-treatment, torture, assault or demand of dowry.
   It only appears that the in-laws were not happy over the preparation
   of breads (Roties) by the deceased.
5.           Mr. Pattnaik, learned Additional Government Advocate
   submitted that the evidence of witnesses clearly establishes the
   contents of the F.I.R. He submitted that the evidence of P.Ws. 16, 17,
   19, 21, 22 and 25 clearly establishes physical and mental torture
   meted out to the bride. Such evidence stands rock solid and nothing
   has been elicited from the cross-examination of these witnesses to
   sake the same. There is also positive evidence relating to cruelty
   shown to the bride in connection with the dowry demand. He further
   submitted that the occurrence (unnatural death of bride) having
   taken place within seven years of the marriage, the presumption
   under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act applies to this case.
   Therefore, it is the duty of the defence to prove otherwise. In the
   instant case, the defence has failed to discharge its onus. In view of
   all these, he submitted that no illegality has been committed by the
   trial court in convicting the appellants under Section 304-B I.P.C. and
   awarding the sentence.
   6.               Counsel for both the parties, in support of their
   respective case, relied upon the decisions in Alamgir Sani Vrs. State
   of Assam, AIR 2003 SC 2108, Ramesh Kumar Vrs. State

                                  5
   Chhatishgarh 2001 Crl. L.J. 4724 (SC ), K. Purna S. Rao Vrs. Y.
   Srinivas Rao 2003 Crl.L.J. 69 (SC ), Gananath Pattnaik Vrs. State
   of Orissa, 2002 SCC (Crl) 461,      and S.M. Multani Vrs. State of
   Karnataka AIR 2001 SC 921.
7.          This Court examined the case laws cited by the parties. In
   those case, it has been decided that in order to prove a case under
   Section 304-B IPC, prosecution should establish the following
   ingredients :
            (i)   that the death of a woman was cuased by
                  burns or bodily injury or occurred otherwise
                  than under normal circumstances;
            (ii)  that such death occurred within seven years
                  of her marriage;
            (iii) that the deceased was subjected to cruelty or
                  harassement by her husband or by any
                  relation of her husband;
            (iv)         that such cruelty or harassment was
                  for or in connection with demand of dowry;
                  and
            (v)          that the deceased was subjected to
                  such cruelty or harassment soon before her
                  death.
   P.W.27, the Assistant Professor, Forensic Medicine, V.S.S. Medical
   College, Burla, had conducted autopsy over the dead body of the
   deceased. He specifically stated that smell of kerosene was coming
   out from the body.     Since the major portion of the body had been
   burnt, he could not notice any antemortem external injury. He also
   opined that the fracture of the tracheal ring can be possible by giving
   pressure on the front part of the neck by means of a lathi. He further
   opined that if sufficient pressure is applied on the chest by lathi it
   may lead to asphyxia and bleeding from mouth and nostril. P.W.29 is
   another doctor, who treated the deceased on being called by the
   appellants, and found the deceased on 09.02.1987 as dead and there
   was dark coloured blood on the bed of the deceased.          From the

                               6
evidence of the above witness there is no dispute that death of the
deceased had occurred otherwise than under normal circumstance.
8.              P.W.19, is the elder brother of the deceased’s father.
He was the immediate guardian of the deceased. He stated that the
deceased was given in marriage to appellant Kamala Kishore Poddar
on 22.06.1985. The factum of such marriage has been proved through
P.Ws.1, 6, 12, 13 and 15. Dead body challan, FIR and the evidence of
P.Ws.19 and 29 clearly prove that the date of death was 09.02.1987.
That means, death of the deceased occurred within seven years of her
marriage.
9.              P.W.19 has also stated that the deceased complained
before him that all the appellants ill-treated, assaulted, tortured and
neglected her and did not give her proper food and clothing during her
stay in the house of appellant Sitaram Poddar. He specifically stated
in his deposition that when he enquired from the deceased as to why
she was assaulted and tortured, she narrated before him that the
appellants demanded more dowry and they were not satisfied with the
dowry that was given. P.W.21 also stated that the deceased told him
that she was not given food and was being assaulted by the members
of her husband’s family. P.W.22, the brother of the deceased, also
stated about the assault by the deceased’s husband and her in-laws.
To the same effect is the evidence of P.Ws.25 and 32. These P.Ws.22,
25 and 32 have not stated anything about the demand of dowry.
Exts.15 and 20 and Exts.A and B have been proved by the
prosecution and the defence respectively in evidence.      But there is
nothing about the demand of dowry in the said letters. Ext.20 was
written by the informant addressing to the deceased and her
husband.    But in that Ext.20 nothing has been written about the
dowry and about any dowry torture. P.Ws.16 and 17, the independent
witnesses, stated that a month prior to the incident, when they were
returning home at 9.00 P.M., they heard near the house of the
appellants the shouts of a woman. P.W.29, the doctor who treated

                               7
the deceased specifically stated that on 30.01.1987, she had been to
the house of the appellants to treat the deceased on being called by
appellant Sawarmal. On reaching there, she found the deceased lying
on a bed covering her by a quilt. Appellants Kamal Kishore and
Sangita were there by the side of the deceased. She noticed burn
injuries over 30% of the deceased and advised to shift the patient to
hospital, but they preferred to treat the patient at home. She treated
the burn injury. The deceased was running temperature at that time.
She treated the deceased till 08.02.1987 and by that date the
deceased was almost cured.      From the above evidence, it is crystal
clear that the deceased was subjected to cruelty, but there is no
evidence that such cruelty or harassment was in connection with
demand of dowry soon before her death. Therefore, the prosecution
has not been able to prove the ingredients of section 304-B IPC
against the appellants and so this Court sets aside their conviction
and sentence passed under that section.
10.              There are materials against appellants Sitaram Poddar
and Kamal Kishore Poddar that they subjected the deceased to
cruelty. Such evidence is, however lacking so far as appellants
Natwarlal     Poddar,  Sawarmal   Poddar    and   Sangita   Poddar   are
concerned. Therefore, this Court convicts each of the appellants
Sitaram Poddar and Kamal Kishore Poddar under section 498-A IPC
and sentences them to undergo R.I. for two years and pay fine of
Rs.50,000/- (Fifty thousand), in default undergo R.I. for nine months.
11.              The evidence with regard to Section 4 of the D.P. Act is
very clear. There was an agreement for payment of Rs.50,000/- as
dowry between appellant Sitaram and the elder brother of deceased’s
father, i.e., P.W.19 during Tilak ceremony. Therefore, the trial court
has rightly convicted appellant Sitaram under Section 4 of the D.P.
Act, and this Court confirms the same.
12.              To sum up, this court sets aside the order of
conviction and sentence of all the appellants under Section 304-B IPC

                               8
and acquits them of the said charge. However, this Court convicts
appellants Sitaram Poddar and Kamal Kishore Poddar under section
498-A IPC and sentences each of them to undergo R.I. for two years
and to pay a fine of Rs.50,000/- (Fifty thousand), in default to
undergo R.I. for nine months. The conviction and sentence of
appellant Sitaram Poddar under section 4 of the D.P. Act are
confirmed and it is directed that the substantive sentences awarded
to him shall run concurrently.
13.            In the result, Criminal Appeal No.31 of 1989 is allowed
and Criminal Appeal No.43 of 1989 is allowed in part as indicated
above.
                                        ……….………………………
                                         PRADIP MOHANTY, J.
 Orissa High Court, Cuttack
   January 30, 2009/Alok


