                            ORISSA HIGH COURT
                                      CUTTACK
                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 12 OF 2001
                                        AND
                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 27 OF 2001
From the judgment dated 08.12.2000 passed by Md. Abdul Majid, Addl.
Sessions Judge, Sonepur in Sessions Case No.30/26 of 1999 and Sessions
Case No.54/39 of 1999.
IN CRL. APPEAL NO. 12 OF 2001
Pravatu @ Prativu Dalai
and two others                               ………                                 Appellants
                                             Versus
State of Orissa                              ………                               Respondent
IN CRL. APPEAL NO. 27 OF 2001
Goura Majhi and Another                      ………                                 Appellants
                                             Versus
State of Orissa                              ………                               Respondent
               For appellants : M/s          D.P. Dhal, S.K. Tripathy,
                                             P.K. Rautray, D.K. Pattanaik,
                                             D.K. Das and K. Ratha.
               For respondent : Mr. P.K. Mishra,
                                     Standing Counsel.
PRESENT :
               THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE P.K. TRIPATHY
                                             AND
            THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE PRADIP MOHANTY
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                               Date of judgment :        30.10.2008
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Nine accused persons faced trial in the court of the Addl.
Sessions Judge, Sonepur for the charge under Sections 302/201/34 IPC

                                   2
vide Sessions Case Nos.30/26 of 1999 and 54/39 of 1999. The aforesaid
two sessions cases were registered because of commitment of the cases
relating to respective accused persons in two phases. Out of the said nine
accused persons, five were found guilty of the offence under Sections 302
and 201 IPC by sharing the common intention and each of them was
sentenced to imprisonment for life and imprisonment for three years
respectively, which were to run concurrently.       The convicted accused
persons have preferred the above noted two criminal appeals.
2.                 According to the case of the prosecution, in the night of
21.02.1998, deceased Ramachandra Rout was detained in the house of
accused Goura Majhi. He was subjected to torture after being tied on a pole
inside the house and was forced to eat faeces. He was also subjected to
physical violence. On the following morning, his face was blackened and in
that condition he was made to move through the village being guarded by
the accused persons and was left at his house with a caution to his sister
Chandrabati (P.W.1) and brother Satyabadi (P.W.2) to see to it that the
deceased adopts a decent life style and not to venture into their (accused
persons’) house any further.     It is alleged by the prosecution that the
aforesaid act was undertaken by the accused persons with a view to
humiliate and harass the deceased.      The reason for such humiliation is
nowhere on record, even not in the case diary. It is further alleged by the
prosecution that on 24.02.1998, two of the accused persons came and
cautioned P.Ws.1 and 2 on the conduct/movements of the deceased
notwithstanding the fact that the deceased remained confined to his house
for those two days. On 24.02.1998, after taking his night meal (supper) at
about 9 P.M., the deceased went for strolling and did not return to the
house.    On 25.02.1998 and onwards, P.Ws.1 and 2 together with some
villagers searched for the whereabouts of the deceased but could not trace
him. On 26.02.1998, P.W.1 lodged a missing report with the police and on
27.02.1998 she was informed by co-villager Jhasketan Dalai and another
(both not examined) that dead body of the deceased was lying in Surubali

                                     3
Jore (rivulet). On getting that information, P.Ws.1 and 2 together with some
villagers went to that Jore (rivulet) and found the dead body of the deceased
lying there. They also noticed that flesh from his legs, intestine, etc., had
been eaten away by animals. P.W.1 again went and reported the matter to
the police. At the stage of inquest, it was noticed by the Investigating Officer
(P.W.11) so also by the witnesses to the inquest that deceased had suffered
death due to pressing on neck and some other injuries on the body.
Accordingly, the inquest report (Ext.4) was prepared and the dead body was
sent for post-mortem examination. Dr. P.K. Mohapatra (P.W.4), who
conducted post-mortem, opined that the deceased suffered death due to
pressing on the neck causing suffocation and that due to that pressing the
hyod bone had been broken and the tongue bitten. Thus, P.W.4 submitted
the post-mortem report (Ext.1) with the opinion of homicidal death of the
deceased.      In course of investigation, P.W.11 as well as the other
Investigating Officer (P.W.12) found certain articles at the rivulet where the
dead body was lying, and that includes a cot and some clothings marked
M.Os. I to III, besides M.Os.VI to IX.       Such articles were seized under
seizure lists (Exts.2, 5 and 6). The Investigating Officer also found a pair of
Hawai Slipper of the deceased lying in the field of the accused Pravatu Dalai
and seized under seizure list, Ext.9. In course of the investigation, besides
attending to other routine investigation, the Investigating Officers examined
the witnesses and ultimately submitted charge-sheet.
3.                  While denying to the charge framed under Sections
302/201/34 IPC, accused persons also took an alternative plea that it is
P.Ws.1, 2 and 10 who committed murder of the deceased.               When the
prosecution examined 12 witnesses in support of its case, the accused
persons examined 4 witnesses in support of their defence. On analysis of
such evidence on record, learned Addl. Sessions Judge held that
prosecution has proved that the deceased suffered homicidal death and the
evidence of P.Ws.3 and 4 read with the evidence of P.Ws.7 and, 8 and 10 are
sufficient to corroborate the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 not only relating to

                                    4
the motive of the appellants to commit the crime but also the factum of
committing the crime by the said appellants. Accordingly, he recorded the
conviction in the manner already indicated.
4.                 While assailing the aforesaid order of conviction, learned
counsel for the appellants does not dispute to the finding of the trial court
on homicidal death of the deceased. On perusal of evidence also we find
that there is nothing to dispute on the finding that the deceased suffered
homicidal death.
5.         Learned counsel for the appellants argues that P.W.3-Ganesh
Padhan and P.W.5-Achuta Sethi are the two             star witnesses for the
prosecution and if their evidence is eliminated then prosecution has no
evidence to directly or circumstantially prove the charge against the
appellants beyond all reasonable doubt.     He further submits that P.Ws.3
and 5 though projected as the eye witnesses to the occurrence, i.e., having
seen the crime being committed in the night of 24.02.1998, but those two
witnesses did not reveal that fact to anybody till 28.02.1998 when they were
examined by the police. In that respect, the explanation of P.Ws.3 and 5
that they did not reveal that fact for so many days due to fear of the
appellants is an afterthought explanation which has been falsified by the
evidence of P.W.2, who has stated that on 25th and 26th P.Ws.3 and 5 were
amongst the villagers who were helping them in the search for the deceased.
In the above context, submission of learned Standing Counsel is that non-
disclosure of the fact by P.Ws.3 and 5 to P.Ws.1 and 2 or to anybody else till
27.02.1998 is because of fear for the accused persons and that is proved
from the circumstance that on seeing the police they narrated the incident
on 28.02.1998.     Indeed, learned Addl. Sessions Judge has favoured the
reasons assigned by the prosecution so as to accept the veracity of these
two witnesses as the eye witnesses to the occurrence. But on a conjoint
reading of the evidence of P.Ws.1, 2, 3 and 5 we find that P.Ws.3 and 5 are
the got up witnesses to figure as eye witnesses to the occurrence. Atleast,
the circumstances on record suggest to such an inference. According to the

                                     5
evidence of P.Ws.3 and 5, both of them saw the accused persons committing
the crime in the dead of the night, i.e., mid night of 24.02.1998. Yet they
did not disclose that fact to anybody either in that night or in the following
day. Undoubtedly, the dead body was not lying in the field of the accused
persons.    Therefore, after the occurrence in the night of 24.01.1998 the
dead body was shifted to some other place. These persons did not show
their anxiety or anxiousness to find out if the dead body was lying there.
That is an improbable human conduct. Even if a person is scared of the
accused persons, that could not have resisted his inquisitiveness to see if
the dead body was lying there at the spot. Be that as it may, according to
the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 and also P.Ws.5, 7 and 8, the police came to
the village on 27.02.1998. There is no reasonable answer from the side of
the aforesaid witnesses as to why they did not disclose about the incident to
the police on that day.        They also do not state as to under what
circumstance the fear complexion was removed.            In other words, the
explanation offered by P.Ws.3 and 5 for not disclosing the occurrence till
28.02.1998 appears to be an afterthought and a flimsy explanation so as to
favour the prosecution. For the aforesaid reasons, we find that P.Ws.3 and
5 are not to be relied on in respect of the occurrence of actual assault.
6.                   Though P.Ws.3 and 5 stated that the ‘Isha’ (the long bar
attached to a plough) was used to press the neck, but no explanation is
forthcoming from P.Ws.11 and 12 or any of the witnesses regarding the non-
availability of that weapon. Even the Investigating Officers have not stated
that they made attempt but could not trace out that weapon.
7.                  Above apart, evidence of P.Ws.7, 8 and 10 has been
adduced with a view to supplement the evidence of P.Ws.3 and 5. When
P.Ws.3 and 5, as per the aforesaid analysis, are not found credible, the
other evidence on record is not helpful to the prosecution to complete the
chain of circumstances to prove the case circumstantially as against the
appellants.    The seizure of different articles though has been proved but
their nexus with the accused persons has not been proved through clear

                                    6
and clinching evidence. Learned Standing Counsel though rightly argues
that the evidence of D.Ws.1 to 4 should be rejected as they are blatant liars,
but even accepting that argument and finding D.Ws.1 to 4 as such, the
prosecution cannot succeed because the chain of circumstances has not
been complete to prove the guilt against the accused persons. Indeed, the
incident dated 22.02.1998 proves a strong motive on the part of the accused
persons, but that circumstance alone is not sufficient to prove the charge of
homicide against the accused persons.
8.                   Above all, if the deceased was killed in the night of
24.02.1998, there is no whisper from the prosecution as to at what place
that dead body could be kept by the assailants till the night of 26.02.1998,
because the corpse must have emitted foul smell after the lapse of about 8
to 10 hours from the time of death. There is no evidence on record that the
dead body had been buried and it was unearthed to be dispersed at the
rivulet. Under such circumstances, we find that the improper investigation
by the investigating agency has resulted in failure of the prosecution to
prove the charge against the accused persons and to catch hold of the real
culprits. We accordingly hold that the order of conviction and sentence is
not sustainable as against the appellants. We grant the benefit of doubt to
the appellants and acquit them from the charge under Section 302/201
IPC.
9.                 The Criminal Appeals are accordingly allowed. Thus, we
direct that the bail bonds are discharged of the accused/appellants on bail
and the other accused/appellant in jail custody be released if his detention
is not required in any other criminal case.
                                            ………………………………
                                             P.K. TRIPATHY, J.
                                            ………………………………
                                            PRADIP MOHANTY, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack

                           7
October 30, 2008/G.D.Samal


