$~
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                             Reserved on: 20th December, 2018
                                              Date of decision:6th March, 2019
+               CS(OS) 349/2018, I.As. 9394/2018 & 12795/2018
        AMONCHIT SURIYA KIRAN & ANR.                         ..... Plaintiffs
                             Through: Ms. Vibha Mahajan Seth and Ms.
                                        Ritu, Advocates. (M:9810702410)
                             versus
        NATIONAL RESTAURANT & ORS.                           ..... Defendants
                             Through: Mr. Vivek Tandon and Mr. Ajay
                                        Fatyal, Advocates. (M:9212193958)
        CORAM:
        JUSTICE PRATHIBA M. SINGH
                             JUDGMENT
Prathiba M. Singh, J.
1.      The Plaintiffs, Shri Amonchit Suryakiran and Smt. Suraj Mohini
Suriyakiran have filed the present suit for possession, mesne profits and
damages against the Defendant - Shri Baldev Behl - the sole surviving
partner of the firm M/s National Restaurant.
2.      The case of the Plaintiffs is that property bearing no.10184, Arya
Samaj Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi (hereinafter, „suit property‟) was
owned by Shri. Amar Singh who had three sons, namely, Shri Tarjit Singh,
Shri Harsaran Pal Singh and Shri Pritpal Singh.
3.      Shri Amar Singh had a registered lease deed in his favour from the
DDA dated 17th August 1966. A civil suit no.534/1996 for declaration of
title in respect of the suit property was filed by Shri Tarjit Singh against his
father – Shri Amar Singh, which was finally decreed vide order dated 25th
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                           Page 1 of 19

April, 1967. The said decree was thereafter challenged in suit no.714/1976
by the other sons of Shri Amar Singh which was finally withdrawn on 20th
December, 1976. Thus, the sole and absolute ownership of the suit property
vested in Shri Tarjit Singh.
4.      Shri Tarjit Singh passed away on 22nd April, 1998 and was survived
by his wife, two sons and one daughter. The Plaintiffs are the wife and son
of Late Shri Tarjit Singh. The daughter – Smt. Natasha Chona and the other
son - Shri Suchit Suriyakiran, have relinquished their shares in the suit
property in favour of the Plaintiffs, vide relinquishment deed dated 28th
April, 2016.
5.      During the lifetime of Shri Tarjit Singh, he had leased out the front
portion of the basement of the suit property to M/s National Restaurant
which was a partnership firm comprising of two partners, namely, Shri
Baldev Behl and Shri M.L. Behl on 1st April, 1970. The partnership firm
was running a restaurant by the said name – `National Restaurant’, since
inception. As the said restaurant was running without a licence, in
proceedings filed by the State, it was directed to be closed. This order passed
by the Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate dated 6th March, 1998 was confirmed in
the review petition vide order dated 28th March, 1998 passed by the
Additional Sessions Judge, Delhi. After the said order, the restaurant
remained closed and even the payment of rent was stopped. However, a tea
and coffee stall was set up by the Defendant.
6.      Vide legal notice dated 22nd October, 1981, Shri Tarjit Singh issued a
notice of termination of lease and since the lease amount was Rs.500/- per
month, the tenancy was governed by the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958
(hereinafter, „Delhi Rent Control Act‟). After the restaurant was closed, no
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                       Page 2 of 19

rent was paid by the tenant and the tea/coffee stall was operated from the
premises. After the demise of Shri Tarjit Singh, one of his sons – Shri Suchit
Suriyakiran, filed an eviction petition being Eviction Petition no. E-07/2013
seeking eviction. The said petition was dismissed in default due to the fact
that the said son had relinquished his share in favour of the Plaintiffs herein.
Thereafter, the Plaintiffs filed an eviction petition before the Ld. Additional
Rent Controller. The eviction petition was, however, dismissed. At that
stage, the Plaintiffs acquired knowledge of the fact that the Defendant had,
in the earlier eviction petition denied the landlord-tenant relationship and
had also taken up the plea of adverse possession.
7.      Thereafter, on 4th July, 2018, the Plaintiffs acquired knowledge of the
demise of one of the partners, Shri M.L. Behl, sometime in November,
2017. Thus, out of the two partners, one partner has passed away. Only the
Defendant – Shri Baldev Behl is in possession of the premises.
8.      Accordingly, the decree for possession of the front basement and
mesne profits is sought in the following terms:
            “(i) decree of Possession in favour of the Plaintiffs and
            against the Defendant in respect to the Front Basement
            admeasuring 41.3 ft. X 34 feet along with its entrance
            at the Ground Floor of the premises bearing No.
            10184, Arya Samaj Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi,
            more specifically marked in "Red" in the Site Plans of
            the said property attached along with the present Suit;
            (ii) decree of Mesne Profits and Damages for the sum
            of 54,00,000/- in favour of the Plaintiffs and against
            the Defendant;
            (iii) decree of Mesne Profits and Damages in favour of
            the Plaintiffs and against the Defendant at the rate of
            Rs.1,50,000/- per month with effect from filing of the
            present Suit till the date of handing over the actual
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                       Page 3 of 19

             physical possession of the Suit property;
             (iv) decree of payment of Rs.1,98,151/- towards the
             electricity dues in respect to the Suit property;
             (v) decree for costs be also awarded in favour of the
             Plaintiffs and against the Defendants;
             (vi) any other or further order(s) that this Hon'ble
             Court may deem fit in the facts &circumstances of the
             present case.”
9.      In the written statement, the following facts have been pleaded:
        i)      that the suit property was owned by Shri Amar Singh;
        ii)     that the property was let out by Shri Tarjit Singh to the
        Defendant’s firm– M/s National Restaurant;
        iii)    that the Plaintiffs are not the sole surviving legal heirs of Shri
        Tarjit Singh and that there are other legal heirs;
        iv)     that the eviction petition under Section 14(1)(a), Section
        14(1)(j) & Section 14(1)(k) of the Delhi Rent Control Act was
        dismissed on 20th March 1995. Even the appeal against the said order
        was dismissed;
        v)      that the Plaintiffs are foreigners and hence cannot maintain the
        present suit;
        vi)     that the Plaintiffs are not the owners of the property;
        vii)    that since the past 20 years no one had demanded rent from the
        Defendant and hence there is no landlord-tenant relationship between
        the parties;
        viii) that since both the execution petitions had been dismissed, the
        Plaintiffs have no right;
        ix)     that the share of Shri M.L. Behl in the partnership firm
        devolves on his two sons, namely, Shri Yogesh Behl and Shri Arun
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                          Page 4 of 19

        Behl;
        x)      that the suit is barred under Section 50 of the Delhi Rent
        Control Act, and under Order VII Rule 11 of CPC;
        xi)     that the suit property is a multi-storied building consisting of a
        basement which is partially under the tenancy of the Union Bank of
        India. From the first floor and second floor Landmark Inn is running.
        The third floor is under the tenancy of two other companies i.e. M/s
        Oriental Insurance Corporation and M/s Vexil Business Process
        Services Private Limited. The fourth floor is occupied by a company
        which is promoted by the Plaintiff No.1;
        xii)    that the suit is barred by non-joinder of parties, as the sons of
        Shri M.L. Behl have not been impleaded;
        xiii) that the Defendant was not inducted as a tenant by the Plaintiffs
        and hence cannot seek possession;
        xiv) that the Defendant has paid the house tax and property tax of
        Rs.1.97 lakhs and Rs.6,534/- for the year 2018-19;
        xv)     that the Defendant had taken steps to replace the electricity
        meters.
10.     Ld. Counsel for the Plaintiffs submits that this is a case where the suit
is liable to be decreed under Order XII Rule 6 CPC as the Defendant has
admitted the legal notice terminating the tenancy dated 4th February, 1997,
as also the leave to defend application dated 29th July, 2013 and the order
dated 20th March, 1995 passed in E-07/2013 and E-46/1977 respectively. It
is the submission of Ms. Vibha Mahajan Seth Ld. Counsel, that the
Defendant has denied the relationship of landlord and tenant and hence is
not entitled to the benefit of Section 50 of the Delhi Rent Control Act. Since
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                          Page 5 of 19

there is no landlord-tenant relationship, the Defendant is merely an
unauthorized occupant and in illegal possession of the property. She further
submits that partnership cannot be inherited and upon the death of Shri M.L.
Behl, on 18th November, 2017, the partnership automatically came to an end.
The subsequent partnership deed, which is pleaded by the Defendant
between Shri Baldev Behl, Shri Yogesh Behl, Shri Arun Behl and Shri
Ankit Behl is a new partnership by the same name, but has come into effect
only on 18th November, 2017. Thus, this is not the same partnership firm
which was given the premises by Shri Tarjit Singh, under an oral tenancy.
She further submits that the present suit is only maintainable against Shri
Baldev Behl who has possession of the property. Since the ownership of
Shri Tarjit Singh stands settled in case no. E-46/1977, the Plaintiffs are
entitled to file the present suit.
11.     On the other hand, it is submitted by Mr. Vivek Kumar Tandon, Ld.
Counsel for the Defendant that after the death of the second partner, the
partnership has been reconstituted and hence the tenancy continues. The
DDA records do not show ownership in the name of the Plaintiffs. Since the
Plaintiffs never demanded any amounts, they are not entitled to maintain the
suit for possession. It is further submitted that the Defendant had paid the
house tax and electricity bills and has a vested interest in the property.
12.     The Court has heard the counsels for the parties. Initially, when the
present suit for possession was filed, an ad-interim order dated 20th July
2018 was granted which reads as under:
            “The Plaintiffs are the owners of the Front Basement
            admeasuring 41.3 ft. x 34 feet along with its entrance
            at the Ground Floor of the premises bearing no.10184,
            Arya Samaj Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi („suit
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                         Page 6 of 19

            property‟). The suit property was rented to one M/s.
            National Restaurant, which was a partnership firm.
            The partnership has, according to the Plaintiff, been
            dissolved as there is only one surviving partner. The
            tenancy is also disputed by the Defendants as they have
            now set up a case of adverse possession. In view
            thereof, prima facie, the present suit for possession is
            maintainable. Till the next date of hearing, the
            Defendants are restrained from parting with
            possession or creating any third party interest in the
            suit property.”
13.     An application came to be filed by the Defendant under Order VII
Rule 11 CPC being I.A. No.12795/2018 that the suit is barred under the
Delhi Rent Control Act. Owing to the contradictory statements made by the
Defendant in the application under Order VII Rule 11, the statement of Shri
Baldev Behl was recorded on 1st November, 2018. The statement reads as
under:
              “Statement of Mr. Baldev Behl aged about 73 years
              S/o late Shri Sita Ram, R/o J-8, Kirti Nagar, New
              Delhi
              On SA
                  The National Restaurant partnership was
              constituted in 1970. This was a registered partnership
              firm. Mr. M.L. Behl, Mr. Baldev Behl and Mr.
              Prakash Chander Behl were the original partners. We
              used to run a restaurant from the suit property. In the
              year 1998, the restaurant was closed. Mr. Prakash
              Chander Behl had exited the partnership. The other
              partner had passed away in November, 2017. The old
              partnership firm came to an end. Presently, we are
              running a small coffee stall in the premises. We have
              not paid the rent from the year 2000. We have not
              paid any rent, however, I have paid the property tax
              for this premises to the tune of approx Rs.2.03 lakhs.
              The property is admeasuring 1800 sq.ft. The
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                       Page 7 of 19

              remaining property has six floors only the basement
              and some small portion of the entrance of the
              property are under my possession and a small coffee
              stall is running on this portion. I do not know to
              whom the rent is being paid by other tenants. I do not
              know what is the prevalent market rate for rent of a
              basement. At the time when we had taken the
              premises on rent, we had given a pagdi amount.”
Thus, the Defendant admits that the old partnership firm has come to an end.
He also admits that no rent has been paid by him since the year 2000.
14.     Thereafter, arguments were heard on all the pending applications.
There are two applications which are pending being I.A. 9394/2018 (under
Order XXXIX Rule 1 and 2 CPC) and I.A. 12795/2018 (under Order VII
Rule 11 CPC). In addition, the Plaintiffs have prayed for a decree being
passed under Order XII Rule 6 CPC, which is opposed by the Defendant.
15.     From the pleadings and documents it is clear that M/s National
Restaurant was being run from the suit premises. The Defendant has
admitted in the written statement that Shri Amar Singh was the owner of the
property. The extract from paragraph 2 of the reply on merits reads as under:
            “2. ….Admittedly, the property bearing no. Amra
            Palace, Municipal No. XVI/10184, Arya Samaj Road,
            Karol Bagh, New Delhi - 110005 was absolute owned
            by Shri Amar Singh S/o Late S. Nihal Singh then
            Resident of 12A/12, W.E.A., Karol Bagh, New Delhi -
            110005 as perpetual lease deed was/is in his name.”
16.     The Defendant also admits in the written statement that National
Restaurant, a partnership firm had taken the premises on rent from Shri
Tarjit Singh. The relevant extract of the written statement reads as under:
            “….
            1. (ii) That M/s National Restaurant, a Partnership
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                       Page 8 of 19

             Firm through its partners was let out the premises in
             question by Mr. Tarjit Singh on 01.04.1970, subject to
             payment of Rs 500/- towards monthly rent excluding
             electricity and water consumption charges, for running
             a restaurant for serving meals to the public at large
             and the rent receipts were issued in favour of
             partnership firm M/s National Restaurant.”
17.     It is further the admitted position that M/s National Restaurant was a
partnership firm consisting of Shri Baldev Behl and Shri M.L. Behl and that
Shri M.L. Behl passed away on 18th November, 2017. One of the admitted
documents is the leave to defend application filed by the Defendant in the
eviction proceedings, wherein the Defendant pleads as under:
             “…
             4. (x) Admittedly, for the last 15 years, neither Tarjeet
             Singh or any other person had demanded rent from the
             answering Respondents. There is no landlord-tenant
             relationship between the parties hereto. That the
             answering Respondents are in adverse possession of
             the property in dispute with respect to Petitioner who
             has no right, title, interest or lien over the property in
             question.”
18.     In Case No. E-46/1977, as recorded in order dated 20th March, 1995,
the landlord-tenant relationship between M/s National Restaurant and Shri
Tarjit Singh was denied. The relevant part of order dated 20th March, 1995,
where the Defendant took the stand that there is no relationship of landlord-
tenant reads as under:
             “2) The respondent has contested the case by filing a
             WS. It has raised preliminary objections that there is
             no relationship of landlord and tenant between the
             parties. It has received notices from Amar Singh-
             father of the petitioner and Harcharan Pal Singh and
             Prithi Pal Singh - brothers of the petitioner to the effect
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                          Page 9 of 19

            that petitioner is not the owner. The petitioner is
            estopped from filing this case as earlier he filed a
            similar suit which was dismissed. The premises have
            been declared in a commercial area and have been
            regularised and the petitioner, his father, brothers
            have rented out other portions to bank and other
            commercial establishments. On merits it has stated that
            petitioner allowed it to make additions and alterations
            in accordance with need for running a restaurant. It
            has not caused any damage.”
19.     From the documents which have been admitted and the pleadings, it is
clear that the firm M/s National Restaurant no longer exists. On the death of
Shri M.L. Behl, only Shri Baldev Behl survives and due to the operation of
Section 42 of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 upon the death of one of the
partners in a partnership firm comprising of only two partners, the
partnership firm automatically dissolves. This is the settled position as held
in Commissioner of Income Tax v. Seth Govindram Sugar Mills (1965) 3
SCR 488. The Supreme Court in the above judgment clearly holds that the
heirs of a partner cannot be jettisoned into the position of partners
immediately upon the death of a partner. The relevant portion of the
Supreme Court judgment reads as under:
            “7.       There is a fallacy in this argument.
            Partnership, under Section 4 of the Partnership Act, is
            the relation between persons who have agreed to share
            the profits of a business carried on by all or any of
            them acting for all. Section 5 of the said Act says that
            the relation of partnership arises from contract and not
            from status. The fundamental principle of partnership,
            therefore, is that the relation of partnership arises out
            of contract and not out of status. To accept the
            argument of the learned counsel is to negative the
            basic principle of law of partnership. Section 42 can be
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                       Page 10 of 19

            interpreted without doing violence either to the
            language used or to the said basic principle. Section
            42(c) of the Partnership Act can appropriately be
            applied to a partnership where there are more than
            two partners. If one of them dies, the firm is dissolved;
            but if there is a contract to the contrary, the surviving
            partners will continue the firm. On the other hand, if
            one of the two partners of a firm dies, the firm
            automatically comes to an end and, thereafter, there is
            no partnership for a third party to be introduced
            therein and, therefore, there is no scope for applying
            cl. (c) of Section 42 to such a situation. It may be that
            pursuant to the wishes of the directions of the deceased
            partner the surviving partner may enter into a new
            partnership with the heir of the deceased partner, but
            that would constitute a new partnership. In this light
            Section 31 of the Partnership Act falls in line with
            Section 42 thereof. That section only recognizes the
            validity of a contract between the partners to introduce
            a third party without the consent of all the existing
            partners: it presupposes the subsistence of a
            partnership: it does not apply to a partnership of two
            partners which is dissolved by the death of one of them,
            for in that event there is no partnership at all for any
            new partner to be inducted into it without the consent
            of others.
            8. There is conflict of judicial decisions in this
            question. The decision of the Allahabad High Court in
            Lal Ram Kumar v. Kishori Lal is not of any practical
            help to decide the present case. There, from the
            conduct of the surviving partner and the heirs of the
            deceased partner after the death of the said partner,
            the contract between the original partners that the
            partnership should not be dissolved on the death of any
            of them was inferred. Though the partnership there
            was only between two partners, the question of the
            inapplicability of section 42(c) of the Partnership Act
            to such a partnership was neither raised nor decided
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                       Page 11 of 19

            therein. The same criticism applies to the decision of
            the Nagpur High Court in Chinkaram Sidhakaram
            Oswal v. Radhakishan Vishwanath Dixit. This question
            was directly raised and clearly answered by a Division
            Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Mt. Sughra v.
            Babu against the legality of such a term of contract of
            partnership consisting of only two partners. Agarwala
            J. neatly stated the principle thus:
                 "In the case of a partnership consisting of
                 only two partners, no partnership remains on
                 the death of one of them and, therefore, it is
                 a contradiction in terms to say that there can
                 be a contract between two partners to the
                 effect that on the death of one of them the
                 partnership will not be dissolved but will
                 continue... Partnership is not a matter of
                 status, it is a matter of contract. No heir can
                 be said to become a partner with another
                 person without his own consent, express or
                 implied."
            This view accords with that expressed by us earlier. In
            Narayanan v. Umayal, Ramachandra Iyer J., as he
            then was, said much to the same effect when he
            observed thus:
                 "... If one of the partners died, there will not
                 be any partnership existing to which the
                 legal representatives of the deceased partner
                 could be taken in. In such a case the
                 partnership would come to an end by the
                 death of one of the two partners, and if the
                 legal representatives of the deceased partner
                 joins in the business later, it should be
                 referable to a new partnership between
                 them."
            But Chatterjee J. in Hansraj Monot v. Gorak Nath
            Pandey struck a different note. His reasons for the
            contrary view are expressed thus:
                 “Here the contract that has been referred to
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                     Page 12 of 19

                  is the contract between the two partners
                  Gorak Nath and Chanpala... Therefore, it
                  cannot be said that the contract ceased to
                  have effect because a partner died. The
                  contract was there. There was no new
                  contract with the heirs and there was no
                  question of a new contract with the heirs
                  because of the original contract, and by
                  virtue of the original contract the heirs
                  become partners as soon as one of the
                  partners died... As soon as there is the death,
                  the heirs become the partners automatically
                  without any agreement between the original
                  partners by virtue of the original agreement
                  between the partners while they were
                  surviving. There is no question of
                  interregnum. As soon as the death occurs the
                  right of somebody else occurs. The question
                  of interregnum does not arise. The heirs
                  become partners not because of a contract
                  between the heirs on the one hand and the
                  other partners on the other by because of the
                  contract between the original partners of
                  firm."
            With great respect to the learned judge, we find it
            difficult to: appreciate the said reasons. The learned
            judge seems to suggest that by reason of the contract
            between the original partners, the heirs of the deceased
            partner enter the field simultaneously with the removal
            by death of the other partners from the partnership.
            This implies that personality of the deceased partner
            projects into that of his heirs, with the result that there
            is a continuity of the partnership without any
            interregnum. There is no support either on authority or
            on principle for such a legal position. In law and in
            fact there is an interregnum between the death of one
            and the succession to him. We accept the view of the
            Allahabad and Madras High Courts and reject the
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                         Page 13 of 19

            view expressed by the Nagpur and Calcutta High
            Courts.
            9. The result of the discussion is that the partnership
            between Nandlal and Bachhulal came to an end on the
            death of Nandlal on December 9, 1945.”
The Supreme Court upheld the view of the Allahabad and Madras High
Courts to the effect that in the case of a firm consisting of two partners, upon
the death of a partner, the partnership firm comes to an end. Thus, the firm –
M/s National Restaurant stood dissolved upon the death of Shri M.L. Behl.
20.     The Defendant has repeatedly, in the leave to defend application filed
in the eviction proceedings and also before this Court denied the relationship
of landlord and tenant. One such pleading in the written statement reads as
under:
            “(xiii)Admittedly, for the last 20 years, neither Tarjit
            Singh nor any other person had demanded any rent
            from partnership firm M/s National Restaurant and/or
            its partner including the answering Defendant. There
            is no landlord-tenant relationship between the parties
            hereto, considering the debar notice dated 19.08.1976
            issued by the Lessee of the property in question as well
            as verdict dated 20.03.1995 pronounced by the Hon'ble
            O.P. Chopra, Addl. Rent Controller, Tis Hazari
            Courts, Delhi.”
21.     In the absence of the relationship of landlord and tenant, protection
under the Delhi Rent Control Act cannot be extended to the Defendant. This
is settled by the Division Bench judgment of this Court in Naeem Ahmed v.
Yashpal Malhotra 188 (2012) DLT 579 (DB). The Court in this case
observed as under:
            “11. From the above, it is observed that the decision in
            V. Dhanapal Chettiar case(supra) is not an authority
            for the proposition that even if a tenant denies the title
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                        Page 14 of 19

            of the landlord and claims himself to be owner, he
            continues to be a tenant in the eyes of law and the
            protection of the Delhi Rent Control Act is still
            available to him.
            12. As aforesaid, in Kurella's case (supra) and Abdulla
            Bin Ali's case (supra) when the tenants deny the title of
            the landlord and the tenancy, the suit filed for recovery
            of possession is not on the basis of the relationship of
            landlord and tenant between the parties, and would lie
            only in the civil suit and not otherwise. In the present
            case also it is observed that in response to the legal
            notice, the respondent no.1 denied the relationship of
            landlord and tenant and denied that the appellant had
            let out the premises in suit to the respondent No.1.
            Consequently, the respondent No.1 had repudiated and
            renounced the relationship of landlord and tenant and
            set up his own title in the property. Therefore, the
            appellant had filed the suit for recovery of possession
            in the civil Court since the occupation of the
            respondent no.1 had become unauthorized and that of
            a trespasser.
            13. In view of the above we hold that the ratio of the
            decision in S. Makhan Singh case (supra) does not
            warrant reconsideration. We are, therefore, of the
            considered opinion that in the facts and circumstances
            of the case the suit was cognizable by the civil Court
            and the impugned order was erroneous, inasmuch as it
            held that the same was barred by provisions of Section
            50(4) of the Delhi Rent Control Act. The appeal is
            allowed accordingly.”
Thus, the Defendant is not entitled to protection under the provisions of the
Delhi Rent Control Act.
22.     In the judgment passed in the eviction proceeding on 20th March,
1995, which is a document admitted between the parties, the ownership of
Shri Tarjit Singh is admitted. Further, this question stands settled as per
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                       Page 15 of 19

decree dated 25th April 1967 passed in Case no. 534/1966. This is clear from
an extract of order dated 25th April, 1967:
            “The suit coming on this day for final disposal before
            me in the presence of Sh. H.S Sethi Advocate for the
            with plaintiff and Sh. Amar Singh deft. Self for the
            defendant, it is ordered that the per statement of the
            parties the suit is decreed for declaration that the
            plaintiff is the sole owner of the property bearing
            municipal house no. XVI 10184, situated on Arya
            Samaj Road, Karol Bagh, Delhi. Parties shall bear
            their own costs.”
23.     Moreover, the Defendant has also repeatedly pleaded adverse
possession and is therefore attempting to set up a conflicting title with the
Plaintiffs. The law on adverse possession is settled. Recently, the Supreme
Court in Ram Nagina Rai & Anr. Vs. Deo Kumar Rai (Deceased) by LRs.
& Anr. 2018 (10) Scale 630 observed as under:
            “6.………Adverse possession means a hostile
            assertions, i.e., a possession which is expressly or
            impliedly in denial of the title of the true owner. The
            person who bases his title on adverse possession must
            show, by clear and unequivocal evidence, that the
            possession was hostile the real owner and it amounted
            to the denial of his title to the property claimed. In
            deciding whether the acts alleged by the person
            constitute adverse possession, regard must be given to
            the animus of the person doing such acts, which must
            be ascertained from the facts and circumstances of
            each case. It is needless to observe that where the
            possession can be referred to a lawful title, it would
            not be considered to be adverse, the reason being that
            the person whose possession can be drawn to a lawful
            title, will not be permitted to show that his possession
            was hostile to another‟s title. Simply put, one who
            holds possession on behalf of another, does not by
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                      Page 16 of 19

            mere denial of the other‟s title, make his possession
            adverse so as to give himself the benefit of the statute
            of limitation.
            ……………………
            9. Until the Defendants‟ possession becomes adverse to
            that of the real owner, the Defendants continue in
            permissive possession of the property. Only if the
            Defendants‟ possession becomes adverse to the interest
            of the real owner and the real owner fails to file the
            suit for possession within 12 years, as prescribed
            Under Article 65 of the Limitation Act, from the point
            of time the possession by the Defendants becomes
            adverse to the Plaintiffs, the real owner loses his title
            over the property.”
24.     The Defendant has taken contradictory pleas all along. First, he
admits that Shri Tarjit Singh gave the possession on an oral tenancy and the
rent was Rs. 500/-. He then denies the relationship of landlord-tenant on the
ground that rent has not been paid for more than 20 years. Curiously, he then
pleads that he is protected under the provisions of the Delhi Rent Control
Act. To obfuscate matters further, he pleads adverse possession. When
admittedly, various eviction petitions have been filed by the owner and his
son, the plea of adverse possession is untenable as the possession is not
hostile. There being no tenancy in favour of the Defendant, the rent having
not been paid for more than 20 years and the Plaintiffs having always
asserted ownership against the Defendant, both pleas i.e., the protection
under the Delhi Rent Control Act and the plea of adverse possession fail.
25.     A feeble attempt is made by the Defendant to challenge the ownership
of the Plaintiffs. The ownership of Shri Tarjit Singh is admitted. His wife
and son are the Plaintiffs in the present suit. The Defendant is estopped from
challenging their title inasmuch as they have established on record, that they
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                       Page 17 of 19

are the legal heirs of Shri Tarjit Singh. None of the legal heirs have come
forward challenging the rights of the Plaintiffs.
26.     The death of one of the partners – Shri M.L. Behl in November, 2017
results in automatic dissolution of the partnership firm – M/s National
Restaurant. Upon the dissolution of the firm, the possession of the suit
property is with Shri Baldev Behl, who is nothing but an unauthorized
occupant. The ground taken by the Defendant in the application under Order
VII Rule 11 CPC, that the suit is barred under Section 50 of the Delhi Rent
Control Act fails. Under Order XII Rule 6 CPC, admissions could be in any
form, pleadings, documents or otherwise. The pleadings filed in the eviction
proceedings are admitted. The orders passed therein are admitted.
Ownership of Shri Tarjit Singh is admitted. Factum of Shri Tarjit Singh
having permitted M/s National Restaurant to occupy the premises is
admitted. Death of one of the partners, i.e., Shri M. L. Behl is admitted.
Absence of landlord-tenant relationship is admitted. Filing of the eviction
proceedings by Shri Tarjit Singh and his son stands admitted. Thus, there is
no possession which is hostile to the owners. The Defendant has been in
occupation of a very valuable commercial premises without any valid and
legally tenable ground. The Defendant is nothing but an unauthorised
occupant. Since the Defendant has denied the relationship of landlord and
tenant, there is no valid defense available to the Defendant in law. No
protection can be extended under the Delhi Rent Control Act to the
Defendant. In the absence of any protection and any valid title in favour of
the Defendant, in respect of the suit property, the decree for possession is
liable to be granted in favour of the Plaintiffs.
27.     Accordingly, the suit is decreed in favour of the Plaintiffs in the
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                    Page 18 of 19

following terms:
            “decree of Possession in favour of the Plaintiffs and
            against the Defendant in respect to the Front Basement
            admeasuring 41.3 ft. X 34 feet along with its entrance
            at the Ground Floor of the premises bearing No.10184
            Arya Samaj Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi, more
            specifically marked in “Red” in the Site Plan of the
            said property attached along with the present suit.”
28.     The Defendant is directed to hand over possession of the suit property
to the Plaintiff within a period of four weeks. Until possession is handed
over, the interim order passed on 20th July, 2018 shall continue. The
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC is dismissed. I.A. 9394/2018 is
also disposed of, in the above terms.
29.     The suit would proceed to trial in respect of the relief of mesne profits
and other reliefs. List for framing of issues on 15th April, 2019.
                                                       PRATHIBA M. SINGH
                                                                JUDGE
MARCH 06, 2019
Rahul
CS(OS) 349/2018                                                        Page 19 of 19


