$~47
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                        Date of decision: 7th November, 2019
+                   CM (M) 1491/2019 & CM APPL. 45483/2019
       SURENDER KUMAR                                      ..... Petitioner
                           Through:     Mr. Pradeep Kumar Arya, Mr. Raj
                                        Karan Sharma, Mr. Priyanshu Malik,
                                        Mr. Prateek Singh, Ms. Sanya Arora
                                        and     Mr.     Gaurav        Chaudhry,
                                        Advocates.     (M:9810359511             &
                                        9871454546)
                           versus
       M/S KHANDELWAL JAIN SOCIETY & ANR. .... Respondents
                           Through: None.
       CORAM:
       JUSTICE PRATHIBA M. SINGH
Prathiba M. Singh, J.(oral)
1.     The present petition has been filed challenging the impugned order
dated 28th September, 2019 passed by the ld. Rent Control Tribunal
(hereinafter, “RCT”) by which the appeal filed by the Petitioner/Tenant
(hereinafter, “Tenant”) has been dismissed. The appeal was preferred by the
Tenant challenging the eviction decree dated 15th October, 2013, by which
the ld. Rent Controller (hereinafter, “RC”) had allowed the petition for
eviction on the ground that the Tenant had sub-let the property. The
operative portion of the eviction decree reads as under:
            “18. From a reading of affidavit of PW1 Mr. Prabodh
            Chand Jain it appears that no evidence has been led by
            him to prove the nature and extent of the damage
            caused by the respondents to the premises.
            Furthermore, the site plan which has been referred to
CM (M) 1491/2019                                                         Page 1 of 8

            by him does not exist in the file and has not been
            tendered by him. In the absence of cogent evidence led
            by the applicant to prove that the respondents have
            caused substantial damage to the premises it cannot be
            held that the ground of eviction mentioned in clause (j)
            of proviso to sub-section (1) of 14 of Act 59 of 1958
            has been proved.
             19. In view of my above discussions, the application
            for eviction made by the applicant is allowed to the
            extent that the applicant is found entitled to recover
            possession of premises bearing quarter no. 2-A, Jain
            Mandir Compound, Jaisinghpura, Jain Mandir Road,
            Raja Bazaar, New Delhi as shown in colour red in site
            plan Ex. PW1/3 on ground mentioned in clause (b) of
            proviso to sub-section (1) of 14 of Act 59 of 1958. In
            so far as the other grounds for eviction mentioned in
            clause (j) of proviso to sub-section (1) of 14 of Act 59
            of 1958 is concerned, the application fails. It is
            ordered accordingly. There shall be no order as to
            costs. File be consigned to record room,”
2.     The ld. RCT has primarily proceeded on the basis that the Tenant and
alleged sub-tenants, who were impleaded as Respondent Nos.1 & 2 in the
eviction petition, had chosen not to appear before the ld. RC. Further, no
evidence was led and even the Landlord’s witness was not cross-examined.
The ld. RCT observed that even during the time when the petition was
pending, an application was filed under Order XVIII Rule 17 CPC, which
was dismissed by the ld. RC. There being no evidence or cross-examination
of the Landlord’s witness by the Tenant or alleged sub-tenants, the
testimony of the Landlord’s witness remained unrebutted. Accordingly, the
appeal was dismissed with the following observations:
            “10. On 27.07,2013, an application u/o 18 Rule 17
            r/w/s 151 CPC for examining the petitioner witness
            therein was filed by the counsel for the respondent-
CM (M) 1491/2019                                                     Page 2 of 8

            therein / appellant-herein, which was fixed for reply
            and arguments for 16.08.2013. Reply was filed to the
            said application on 16.08.2013 and thereafter the
            matter was fixed for arguments on the said application
            for 27.08.2013. Arguments were heard qua the said
            application and it was observed by the Ld. Trial Court
            that the said application was highly belated and the
            defence of the applicant -therein was struck of and the
            respondent therein / appellant-herein was proceeded
            ex parte. It was further observed and held that no
            explanation had been furnished by the applicant -
            therein for not filing the application at relevant stage
            and that the said application was filed merely to delay
            the proceedings. The Ld. Trial Court further held that
            more than ample opportunities had already been
            granted to the applicant-therein / appellant-herein to
            prosecute the matter but of no avail and the applicant
            was very casual in prosecuting the case. The Ld. Trial
            Court also held that the provisions u/o 18 rule 17 does
            not apply in the facts and circumstances of this case.
            Therefore, the said application was dismissed and the
            matter was fixed for final arguments for 05.10.2013.
            On 05.10.2013, final arguments were heard on behalf
            of the petitioner-therein but no one was present on
            behalf of the respondent-therein / appellant-herein at
            that time for arguments and the matter was kept for
            consideration / orders on 15.10.2013. Thus, the Ld. RC
            passed the impugned order dated 15.10.2013.
            11. Despite several opportunities, the appellant herein
            failed to file the written statement or the appropriate
            application seeking recall of the order dated
            21.03.2013 vide which his defence was struck of.
            Meaning thereby, the appellant-herein was sleeping for
            availing his right to move appropriate application
            against the said order dt.21.03.2013 as per procedure
            and law and waited till the application under Order 18
            Rule 17 r/w/s 151 CPC was filed on 27.07.2013. If
            again and again opportunities are given to the
CM (M) 1491/2019                                                     Page 3 of 8

            appellant herein, it would be endless process for the
            proceedings and trial of the said petition, which was
            filed in the year 2010. The aforesaid judgments relied
            upon by the Ld. Counsel for the appellant-herein are
            distinguishable from the facts and circumstances of the
            present case. Thus, in view of the above discussions
            and facts and circumstances of the case, this appeal is
            devoid of any merits and the same is dismissed. Trial
            Court record along with copy of this Judgment be sent
            back. File of appeal be consigned to Record Room.”
3.      Ld. counsel for the Tenant vehemently urges before this Court that the
Landlord failed to discharge even the initial burden cast upon him to prove
that there had been sub-letting.
4.      Ld. counsel took the Court through PW-1’s evidence by way of
affidavit where, according to ld. counsel, only a bald statement was made
that the property was sublet. Ld. RC ought to have examined the question as
to whether the onus of the Landlord had been discharged or not, and if the
initial burden is not discharged, sub-letting cannot be presumed. Reliance is
placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Rangammal v.
Kuppuswami and Anr., (2011) 12 SCC 220 to argue that once the onus is on
the Plaintiff, the onus has to be discharged, with positive evidence being led
by the Plaintiff.
5.      This Court has perused the testimony of PW-1, the initial eviction
order passed by the ld. RC as also the ld. RCT’s order. The testimony of
PW-1 clearly states as under:
            “2. I say that the petitioner is landlord/owner of
            Quarter No. 2-A, Jain Mandir Compound,
            Jaisinghpura, Jain Mandir Road, Raja Bazar, New
            Delhi-110 001.       The tenanted portion is more
            particular shown in RED in the site plan annexed with
CM (M) 1491/2019                                                      Page 4 of 8

            the present petition, the copy of the same is exhibited
            as Ex-Pw-1/3. My signature is appearing at point “a”
            of Ex-Pw-1/3. I further say that The respondent no.1 is
            one of the legal heirs of late Shri Kanshi Ram, who
            was tenant in the said Quarter No.2-A, Jain Mandir
            Compound, Jaisinghpura, Jain Mandir Road, Raja
            Bazar, New Delhi-1.
            3. That I say that The Respondent no.1 remained in
            exclusive possession of the tenanted portion i.e.
            Quarter       No.2-A,    Jain      Mandir      Compound,
            Jaisinghpura, Jain Mandir Road, Raja Bazar, New
            Delhi-110 001 after death of his father. The
            Respondent no.1 has left to unknown place after
            parting with/sub-letting the tenanted portion i.e.
            Quarter No. 2-A, Jain Mandir Compound,
            Jaisinghpura, Jain Mandir Road, Raja Bazar, New
            Delhi-110 001 to the respondent no.2 without
            knowledge and written consent of the petitioner of the
            petitioner society. I further say that the respondent
            no.2 is unauthorized occupant in the tenanted portion
            and has been residing there alongwith his family
            member which includes his wife and child. I further say
            that since the respondent no.1’s address is not
            traceable, the tenanted portion address had been
            shown/written in the title of the petition but as a matter
            of fact, the respondent no.1 has not been residing in the
            tenanted portion and the same is in exclusively
            possession of the respondent no.2, the unauthorized
            occupant. ”
6.     A perusal of the above testimony shows that according to PW-1, the
father of the Tenant was a tenant in Quarter No.2-A in the compound where
the temple is located. In fact, the Tenant himself has left to an unknown
place after subletting the said quarter to Respondent No.2. PW-1
categorically asserts that Respondent No.2 has been residing in this quarter
along with his family members, which include his wife and child. Both the
CM (M) 1491/2019                                                       Page 5 of 8

Tenant and alleged sub-tenant chose not to appear before the ld. RC. In
view of this testimony, the ld. RC concluded that there exists a relationship
of Landlord and Tenant, and that it has been proved that the premises had
been sub-let. The finding of the ld. RC is as under:
            “16. From the testimony of PW1 Mr. Prabodh Chand
            Jain it has been proved that there exists relationship of
            landlord and tenant between the applicant and
            respondent no.1 in respect of premises bearing quarter
            no. 2-A, Jain Mandir Compound, Jaisinghpura, Jain
            Mandir Road, Raja Bazaar, New Delhi, which was let
            out to late Kanshi Ram and after his death tenancy was
            inherited by the respondent no.1. From the testimony
            of PW1 Mr. Prabodh Chand Jain it has also been
            proved that the said premises has been sub-let by the
            respondent no.1 in favour of the respondent no.2
            without obtaining the written permission of the
            applicant. Thus, the ground of eviction prescribed in
            clause (b) of proviso to sub-section (1) of section 14 of
            Act 59 of 1958 has been proved in respect of the
            premises shown in colour red in Ex. PW1/3.”
7.     The appeal, which was filed by the Tenant, has also been dismissed
on the ground that the entire evidence of PW-1 has been unrebutted. The ld.
RCT also notes the Landlord’s submission that the premises is a temple, and
hence the Respondents, having themselves chosen not to lead any evidence,
cannot be said to have any grievance against the ld. RC’s order. It is the
well-established position that subletting always takes place behind the back
of the Landlord, and on almost all the occasions, documentary evidence is
not available. In Bharat Sales v LIC of India, (1998) 3 SCC 1, the Supreme
Court has held as under:
           “4. Sub-tenancy or subletting comes into existence
           when the tenant gives up possession of the tenanted
CM (M) 1491/2019                                                      Page 6 of 8

           accommodation, wholly or in part, and puts another
           person in exclusive possession thereof. This
           arrangement comes about obviously under a mutual
           agreement of understanding between the tenant and
           the person to whom the possession is so delivered. In
           this process, the landlord is kept out of the scene.
           Rather, the scene is enacted behind the back of the
           landlord, concealing the overacts and transferring
           possession clandestinely to a person who is an utter
           stranger to the landlord, in the sense that the landlord
           had not let out the premises to that person nor had he
           allowed or consented to his entering into possession
           over the demised property. It is the actual, physical
           and exclusive possession of that person, instead of the
           tenant, which ultimately reveals to the landlord that
           the tenant to whom the property was let out has put
           some other person into possession of that property. In
           such a situation, it would be difficult for the landlord
           to prove, by direct evidence, the contract or agreement
           or understanding between the tenant and the sub-
           tenant. It would also be difficult for the landlord to
           prove, by direct evidence, that the person to whom the
           property had been sublet had paid monetary
           consideration to the tenant. Payment of rent,
           undoubtedly, is an essential element of lease or sub-
           lease. It may be paid in cash or in kind or may have
           been paid or promised to be paid. It may have been
           paid in lump-sum in advance covering the period for
           which the premises is let out or sublet or it may have
           been paid or promised to be paid periodically. Since
           payment of rent or monetary consideration may have
           been made secretly, the law does not require such
           payment to be proved by affirmative evidence and the
           court is permitted to draw its own inference upon the
           facts of the case proved at the trial, including the
           delivery of exclusive possession to infer that the
           premises were sublet.”
8.     Thus, sub-letting is clearly proved by the testimony of PW-1, who has
CM (M) 1491/2019                                                     Page 7 of 8

stated specifically that Respondent No.2 is living in the premises along with
his wife and son. This testimony has gone unrebutted, as both the Tenant
and the alleged sub-tenant chose not to appear before the ld. RC or to lead
any evidence. The unrebutted testimony of PW-1 ought not to be called into
question. The Court has put a specific query as to since when the said
quarter has been in possession of the Tenant. Ld. counsel for the Tenant
fairly states before the Court that the quarter has been in the possession of
the Tenant’s father for more than 40 years, on a monthly rent of only
Rs.100/-.
9.     Ld. counsel for the Tenant states that the Tenant can be put to terms
and an opportunity may be given only to cross-examine PW-1. This Court is
of the opinion that setting back the clock would be unfair and prejudicial to
the Landlord at this stage, inasmuch as a long period has elapsed since the
passing of the eviction decree. Accordingly, this prayer is rejected.
10.    Considering the overall facts and circumstances, the Landlord at some
point of time ought to be entitled to get vacant and peaceful possession of
his property. The eviction decree was itself passed in 2013 and thereafter,
the appeal has come to be decided almost 6 years later. Under these
circumstances, this Court deems it appropriate not to interfere with the
impugned order under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
11.    The eviction decree is, accordingly, upheld. The petition and all
pending applications are disposed of in the above terms.
                                                    PRATHIBA M. SINGH
                                                              JUDGE
NOVEMBER 07, 2019/dk
CM (M) 1491/2019                                                      Page 8 of 8


