$~20
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                              Date of decision: 19th July, 2019.
+      TEST.CAS. 104/2014 & I.A.1551/2015 (u/o VII Rule 11 CPC)
       PRADEEP KHULLAR                                           ..... Petitioner
                            Through:     Mr. A. K. Tewari, Ms. Nistha Gupta
                                         and     Mr.      Mayank          Wadhwa,
                                         Advocates. (M:9415152494)
                            versus
       THE STATE & ORS.                                      ..... Respondents
                            Through:     Ms. Yashmeet Kaur, Advocate for R-
                                         2. (M:9810788943)
       CORAM:
       JUSTICE PRATHIBA M. SINGH
Prathiba M. Singh, J. (Oral)
1.     None appears for Respondent No.3 for the last several hearings.
2.     The Present Test. Case has been filed seeking probate of Will dated
4th May, 1986 and Codicil dated 5th May, 1986 executed by Late Shri
Krishan Lal Khullar.       The petition has been preferred by Shri Pradeep
Khullar, one of the sons of Late Shri Krishan Lal Khullar against his brother
- Shri Virendra Khullar (Respondent No.2) and sister - Smt. Neelam Khanna
(Respondent No.3). The reliefs sought in the petition are as under:
            “(i) Grant a Probate of the Will dated 04.05.1986 and
            Codicil dated 05.05.1986 of late Krishan Lal Khullar,
            in favour of the Petitioner in respect of the immovable
            properties and assets stated in Annexure P3 annexed
            hereto and also as stated in the Will dated 04.05.1986
            and Codicil dated 05.05.1986 of late Krishan Lal
            Khullar and to deal with them without any restriction;
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                         Page 1 of 11

            (ii) Declare that the purported Will dated 07.02.2014
            of late Smt. Padmawati Khullar bequeathing the
            immovable estate in favour of the Respondents No.2 &
            3 as mentioned in Annexure P3 is illegal, void, non-est
            and is liable to be declared void and illegal being in
            violation and contravention of the Will dated
            04.05.1986 and Codicil dated 05.05.1986 of late Shri.
            Krishan Lal Khullar and provisions of Section 14 of
            the Hindu Succession Act since late Smt. Padmawati
            Khullar who was not the owner but only had right of
            life time enjoyment of the immovable estate as stated in
            Annexure P3 in terms of the Will dated 04.05.1986 of
            late Krishan Lal Khullar and could not bequeath away
            the same to the Respondent No.2 & 3 to the exclusion
            of the Petitioner;
            (iii) That the Petitioner be exempted from furnishing
            any security on the aforesaid account;”
3.     Insofar as the Will dated 4th May, 1986 is concerned, ld. counsel for
Respondent No.2 submits that neither of the Respondents have challenged
the said Will and they agree to a probate being granted in respect of Will
dated 4th May, 1986. However, the Respondents do not admit the Codicil
dated 5th May, 1986. Further, ld. counsel for Respondent No.2 has placed on
record the final judgment of the Ld. Additional District Judge in CS
No.392/2018 between Shri Pradeep Kullar and his mother and brother
namely Smt. Padmavati Khullar and Shri Virendra Khullar respectively. In
the said suit, one of the issues which was framed was as under:
            “1. Whether the alleged codicil dated 5.5.1986 was
            executed by late Shri Krishan Lal Khullar? OPP”
4.     In respect of the said issue, the final judgment of the ld. ADJ is that
the issue is decided against the Plaintiff therein, who is also the Petitioner in
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                     Page 2 of 11

the present case. The findings of the court in the said suit are as under:
                  “Issue No. 1. Whether the alleged codicil
                  dated 5.5.1986 was executed by late Shri
                  Krishan Lal Khullar? OPP
                  8. It is the case of the plaintiff that his father
                  executed a Will on 04.05.1986 and on the next
                  day of its execution executed codicil to the
                  said Will in his favour directing that he will
                  takeover the complete charge of his cold
                  storage and other properties for entire
                  operation and financial control and will also
                  attend to and look after his day to day
                  working of the business of cold storage etc.
                  and the cases relating to the business with the
                  authorities and operation of the bank
                  accounts. It is contended on behalf of plaintiff
                  that the witnesses before whom the said
                  codicil was executed by father of the plaintiff
                  have proved that the codicil was executed by
                  late Sh. Krishan Lal Khullar on 05.05.1986.
                  9. On the other hand it is the contention of
                  the learned counsel fotr the defendant that the
                  said codicil is false and fabricated by the
                  plaintiff and the witnesses examined by the
                  plaintiff are interested witnesses being the
                  known person to the plaintiff. It is further
                  contended that the plaintiff was having a
                  blank letter head of the firm having signatures
                  of his father and the same has been used for
                  preparation of the codicil and the manner in
                  which it is typed and the mentioning of the
                  attesting witnesses on it shows that the
                  material is typed in such a manner to adjust
                  the same within the blank space above the
                  signatures of father of the plaintiff. It is
                  contended that the affidavits filed for the chief
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                     Page 3 of 11

                  examination of the witnesses are not prepared
                  as per instructions of the witnesses rather they
                  have been prepared by the counsel for the
                  plaintiff and the witnesses have merely signed
                  the same without knowing their contents.
                  10. It is further submitted that the plaintiff has
                  not appeared in the witness box only to avoid
                  the cross examination and if he had appeared
                  in the witness box his fabrication would have
                  been exposed. It is stated that the plaint has
                  not been proved by the plaintiff as he has not
                  appeared in the witness box. On this aspect, it
                  is the contention of the learned counsel for the
                  plaintiff that the plaintiff is not a witness to
                  the codicil and his non-appearance in the
                  witness box does not affect the codicil and as
                  the attesting witnesses have been examined by
                  the plaintiff the codicil has been proved.
                  11. In case of Bhagat Ram & Another Vs.
                  Suresh and Others reported as (2003) 12
                  SCC 35 the Hon‟ble Supreme Court of India
                  considered the matter of codicil and held
                  that “Codicil, as defined, is an instrument
                  made in relation to a Will. It has the effect of
                  explaining, altering or adding to the
                  disposition made by a Will. By fiction of law
                  the codicil, though it may have been executed
                  separately and at a place or time different
                  from the Will, forms part of the related Will.
                  That being the nature and character of
                  codicil, flowing from the definition itself. it
                  would be anomalous to accept the contention
                  that though a Will is required to be executed
                  and proved as per the rules contained in the
                  Succession Act and the Evidence Act but a
                  document explaining, altering or adding to
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                   Page 4 of 11

                  the will and forming part of the will is not
                  required to be executed or proved in the
                  same manner. Section 70 of the Succession
                  Act re-enforces this proposition inasmuch as
                  revocation of an unprivileged Will or codicil
                  is placed at per in the matter of manner of
                  execution.
                       We hold that the same rules of execution
                  are applicable to a codicil which apply to a
                  will to which the codicil relates. So also, the
                  evidence adduced in proof of execution of a
                  codicil must satisfy the same requirements as
                  apply to proof of execution of a will.”
                  12. In the case in hand, it is to be seen
                  whether the witnesses examined by the
                  plaintiff have proved the execution of codicil
                  by the father of the plaintiff beyond suspicion.
                  PW-1 Sh. D.C. Mathur has deposed that he as
                  a typist working with Sh. Harbans Singh Mac
                  typed the codicil and it was signed before him
                  by the excecutor and other attesting witnesses.
                  His chief examination is by way of affidavit
                  and in the cross examination he stated that
                  affidavit was prepared by Sh. Tiwari his
                  advocate. When he was confronted with the
                  mentioning of residence of Mr. Khullar in the
                  affidavit he stated that since he has not
                  prepared the affidavit and it was prepared by
                  his advocate the address of Mr. Khullar was
                  recorded in the affidavit. This witness has not
                  deposed that the affidavit was prepared by his
                  advocate on his instructions.
                  13. Similar is the testimony of PW 3 Dr. Atul
                  K. Luthra in respect of the affidavit filed for
                  his chief examination that the counsel Sh. A K
                  Tiwari drafted his affidavit and he went
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                 Page 5 of 11

                  through it carefully along with copy of Will
                  and codicil. He further stated that he did not
                  make modifications in legal document and
                  that he just went through the document his
                  affidavit to find any discrepancy or not and
                  then he signed the already drafted affidavit by
                  learned counsel for the plaintiff Mr Tiwari. He
                  has also not deposed that the affidavit was
                  drafted by the counsel on his instructions.
                  Considering the testimony of these two
                  witnesses where the affidavits filed for the
                  chief examination have not been prepared on
                  their instructions the affidavits are of no value
                  and cannot be relied upon in the case.
                  14. The codicil is claimed to be typed by PW1.
                  He admitted in the cross examination that the
                  typing of the same and of the Will which was
                  also typed by him are not same and different
                  spaces have been given by him between the
                  lines. In the Will he has given the certificate of
                  the attesting witnesses that testator has signed
                  in their presence and they have also signed it
                  in the presence of testator and in the presence
                  of each other at the same time but no such
                  certificate is given in the codicil. The doctor
                  has also not given his certificate about the
                  state of mind of the testator upon the codicil.
                  It is deposed by Dr Luthra in this regard that
                  as he has given his certificate at the time of
                  execution of Will there was no need for
                  furnishing the certificate again within 24
                  hours of the earlier certificate. If his
                  certificate was not required at the time of
                  execution of codicil then it is not explained as
                  to why he was called at the office of the
                  advocate by the testator when other people
                  were available to attest the execution of
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                   Page 6 of 11

                  codicil.
                  15. It is pleaded by the defendant that his
                  father also executed power of attorney in
                  favour of both brothers at the time of
                  execution of the Will and as after the death of
                  executor a power of attorney has no value so
                  the plaintiff has prepared a false codicil. The
                  plaintiff has not explained if power of attorney
                  was executed in his favour to deal with the
                  properties and business of the testator and
                  that he was appointed as executor in the will
                  by his father why there was need of execution
                  of codicil. The format of typing of the codicil
                  is not similar to the Will which is also typed
                  by the same person it may be possible that the
                  material which is typed on codicil is typed in
                  such a manner to adjust the same within the
                  space available above the signatures of the
                  testator which were already available on the
                  paper. Considering the testimony of the
                  witnesses it may be said that the plaintiff is
                  not able to prove the execution of codicil
                  beyond suspicion. His non-appearance in the
                  witness box also gives an occasion to raise
                  adverse inference against him as the need for
                  execution of the codicil and the manner in
                  which it was executed was to be explained by
                  him as he was accompanying his father at the
                  time of preparation of the codicil as per the
                  testimony of witnesses. In this regard the case
                  of Vidhyadhar vs Manikrao & Anr : AIR 1999
                  SC 1441 may be referred in which the Hon‟ble
                  Supreme Court of India has dealt with the
                  situation where a party has not appeared
                  personally in the witness box in support of its
                  case and held that „Where a party the suit is
                  not appear into the witness box and states his
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                 Page 7 of 11

                  own case on oath and does not offer himself to
                  be crossed-examined by the other side, a
                  presumption would arise that the case set up
                  by him is not correct.
                  16. The PW 2 Sh. Brij Chopra is the school
                  friend of the plaintiff and PW 3 Dr. Atul K
                  Luthra is brother in law of PW2. Both are
                  cross examined much after the cross
                  examination of PW1 and considering their
                  testimony chances of improvising the evidence
                  and the sequence of the execution of the
                  codicil can not be ruled out.
                  17. It is also contended for the plaintiff that
                  the copy of the codicil was used by the mother
                  and was sent to DDA. As per testimony of
                  PW4 the will and codicil received by the DDA
                  was sent by Sh. A.K. Tiwari Advocate by post.
                  Sh. A.K. Tiwari is the Advocate who has
                  represented the plaintiff in this case and he
                  has not appeared in the witness box to give
                  the link evidence that he sent the notice as per
                  instructions of the defendants and that the
                  copy of the codicil was provided to him by
                  them. Considering the facts and circumstance
                  discussed above, the issue is decided against
                  the plaintiff.”
5.     Thus, the Ld. ADJ clearly held that the codicil was not proved in
accordance with law. Ld. counsel for Petitioner submits that this judgment
dated 30th March, 2019 is under appeal before this Court and a RFA is
pending.
6.     Insofar as the second prayer is concerned, ld. counsel for the
Petitioner submits that the declaration has been sought in respect of his
mother’s Will dated 7th February, 2014.
7.     A perusal of the prayers in the present Test. Case shows that in
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                 Page 8 of 11

respect of the Will dated 4th May, 1986, the probate can be issued as the
Respondents do not object to the said Will. However, insofar as the Codicil
is concerned, since in the suit involving the same very parties, the Codicil
has not been accepted by the Court by a final judgment, though in appeal,
the probate of this Codicil cannot be granted at this stage.
8.     Insofar as the declaration, which has been sought, in a testamentary
case, such a declaratory prayer in respect of the mother’s Will would not be
maintainable. In Kanwarjit Singh Dhillon vs. Hardyal Singh Dhillon and
Others, (2007) 11 SCC 357 the Supreme Court held as under:-
          “12. In Chiranjilal Shrilal Goenka v. Jasjit Singh
          [(1993) 2 SCC 507] this Court while upholding the
          above views and following the earlier decisions of this
          Court as well as of other High Courts in India
          observed in para 15 at SCC p. 515 which runs as
          under:
                “15. In Ishwardeo Narain Singh v. Kamta
                Devi [AIR 1954 SC 280] this Court held that the
                court of probate is only concerned with the
                question as to whether the document put forward
                as the last will and testament of a deceased
                person was duly executed and attested in
                accordance with law and whether at the time of
                such execution the testator had sound disposing
                mind. The question whether a particular bequest
                is good or bad is not within the purview of the
                Probate Court. Therefore, the only issue in a
                probate proceeding relates to the genuineness
                and due execution of the will and the court itself
                is under duty to determine it and preserve the
                original will in its custody. The Succession Act is
                a self-contained code insofar as the question of
                making an application for probate, grant or
                refusal of probate or an appeal carried against
                the decision of the Probate Court. This is clearly
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                  Page 9 of 11

                manifested in the fascicule of the provisions of the
                Act. The probate proceedings shall be conducted
                by the Probate Court in the manner prescribed in
                the Act and in no other ways. The grant of probate
                with a copy of the will annexed establishes
                conclusively as to the appointment of the executor
                and the valid execution of the will. Thus it does no
                more than establish the factum of the will and the
                legal character of the executor. Probate Court
                does not decide any question of title or of the
                existence of the property itself.”
          That being the position and in view of the nature of
          allegations made in the plaint, we do not find any
          reason as to how the High Court as well as the civil
          court could come to a conclusion that after the probate
          of the will executed by late S. Kirpal Singh was
          granted, the suit for declaration for title and injunction
          on the above allegation could not be said to be
          maintainable in law. The High Court also while
          holding that the suit was not maintainable, in view of
          the probate granted of the will of late S. Kirpal Singh
          had relied on a decision of this Court, as noted herein
          earlier, in Rukmani Devi [(1985) 1 SCC 144]. We are
          not in a position to agree with the High Court that this
          decision could at all be applicable in the facts and
          circumstances of the present case. A plain reading of
          this decision would not show that after the grant of
          probate by a competent court, the suit for title and
          permanent injunction cannot be said to be
          maintainable in law. What this Court held in that
          decision is that once a probate is granted by a
          competent court, it would become conclusive of the
          validity of the will itself, but, that cannot be decisive
          whether the Probate Court would also decide the title
          of the testator in the suit properties which, in our view,
          can only be decided by the civil court on evidence. It is
          true that the probate of the will granted by the
          competent Probate Court would be admitted into
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                   Page 10 of 11

          evidence that may be taken into consideration by the
          civil court while deciding the suit for title but grant of
          probate cannot be decisive for declaration of title and
          injunction whether at all the testator had any title to
          the suit properties or not.”
Thus, in probate proceedings, no declaratory relief in respect of title of the
property can be sought – especially that the Will of the mother is invalid and
void for whatsoever reasons. The said issue is alien to the present Petition
seeking probate of the Will and codicil of the father. The remedies of the
Petitioner, for seeking declaration and any other reliefs in accordance with
law are, however, left open.
9.     Under these circumstances, the present petition is disposed of with the
following directions.
       1) Probate be granted in respect of the Will dated 4th May, 1986
           executed by Late Shri Krishan Lal Khullar.
       2) Insofar as the Codicil is concerned, subject to the decision in the
           appeal, if the Petitioner succeeds therein, then liberty is granted to
           the Petitioner to seek a probate in respect of the Codicil.
       3) In respect of the declaratory relief and other movable or
           immovable assets are concerned, the Petitioner is permitted to
           avail of his remedies, in accordance with law.
10.    The petition is disposed of in the above terms.            Miscellaneous
application also stands disposed of.
                                                       PRATHIBA M. SINGH
                                                               JUDGE
JULY 19, 2019/dk
TEST.CAS. 104/2014                                                     Page 11 of 11


