$~
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                          Reserved on : 22nd January , 2018
                                         Date of decision :22nd March, 2018
+            RFA 43/2017 & CM APPL. 1337/2017 (stay)
   EAST DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION                           ….. Appellant
                          Through: Ms. Mini Pushkarna, Standing
                                      Counsel for EDMC with Ms.
                                      Anushruti and Ms. Vasundhara
                                      Nayyar, Advocates.
                          versus
    ASHWANI KUMAR AGGARWAL                                   ..... Respondent
                          Through: None.
       CORAM:
        JUSTICE PRATHIBA M. SINGH
                          JUDGMENT
Prathiba M. Singh, J.
1.     These are a batch of appeals which have arisen out of disputes
between Contractors/Plaintiffs (hereinafter, „Contractors‟) on the one hand
and the North Delhi Municipal Corporation (hereinafter, „NrDMC‟) and
East Delhi Municipal Corporation (hereinafter, „EDMC‟), on the other.
NrDMC and EDMC are collectively referred to as `Corporations'. The facts
in each appeal are different and hence separate judgements are being passed
in each of the appeals.
2.     Briefly, these are cases where various work orders were placed on
Contractors by both the Corporations. The works were executed by the
Contractors and thereafter, the Engineer-in-Charge has passed the final bills.
Payments in respect thereof were not made. Suits for recovery were filed by
the Contractors. The Trial Court decreed the suits in favour of the
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 1 of 58

Contractors.
3.     In respect of each of the work orders, the Contractors seek either/all
of the following payments:
       a.     Payment of the principal amount as passed in the final bill;
       b.     Refund of security deposit;
       c.     Interest on account of late payment of the principal amount, as
              also due to delay in refund of security deposit.
4.     The Corporations rely on Clauses 7 and 9 of the General Conditions
of Contract in respect of payment of principal amount and interest, read with
the amendment of 19th May, 2006. In respect of the security deposit, the
Corporations rely on Clauses 17 and 45 of the General Conditions of
Contract for Municipal Corporation of Delhi Works (hereinafter, ‟General
Conditions of Contract‟). In addition, the Corporations also rely upon
Circular dated 10th June 2014 signed by the Chief Engineer, MCD which
was issued in the nature of a clarification. The questions that have arisen in
all these cases are -
       (i)    Whether payment of the principal amount can be delayed in
       view of Clause 7 and Clause 9 of the General Conditions of Contract
       read with the amendments?
       (ii)   Whether the refund of earnest money/security deposit can be
       delayed in view of Clauses 17 and 45 of the General Conditions of
       Contract?
       (iii)  Whether interest is payable on delayed payments/refunds and if
       so, for which period?
5.     Arguments have been addressed by Mr. Sunil Goel and Ms. Mini
Pushkarna on behalf of the Corporations - NrDMC and EDMC, respectively.
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 2 of 58

On behalf of the Contractors in some matters, Mr. Vinay Kumar has made
submissions.
Background of the case
6.     In the present case, work order No.43 dated 27th May, 2013 was
placed on the Contractor. After completion of the work to the satisfaction of
the Engineer-in-Charge, the final bill was passed on 31st July, 2013 for a net
amount of Rs.3,96,597/- (net amount), security of Rs.46,644/- and certain
overhead charges resulting in total amount of Rs.4,66,445/-. The Contractor
served a notice dated 5th March, 2015 calling upon EDMC to make the
payment which was not done. Accordingly, the Contractor filed the subject
suit claiming the entire sum of Rs.4,66,445/- alongwith pendente lite
interest. The Corporation, in its written statement, pleaded as under:
            “6-11. That the contents of para no. 6 to 11 of the
            plaint are wrong and denied. However it is submitted
            that the EDMC has issued the work order no. EE M-
            III/SH/N/TC/2013-14/43 dt. 27/05/2013, Name of
            Work: -IMP./Dev of gali No. 2 East Nathu Colony
            Ashok Nagar by pdg. RMC in C-246, Shahdara North
            Zone. It is further submitted that plaintiff had carried
            out works as mentioned above and completed the
            works. It is further submitted that first and final bills of
            plaintiff was passed on 31/07/2013 gross amount Rs.
            4,66,445/- (Net amount Rs. 3,96,597/-). After passing
            the bill of the plaintiff, the said passed bill were sent to
            the accounts department of EDMC/HQ for releasing
            the payment, but till date no payment have been release
            to the plaintiff due to paucity of funds under non- plan
            head. It is further submitted that even necessary and
            unavoidable payments such as medicines, essential
            hospital          items,          pensions,        medical
            reimbursement/salary of the employee of the EDMC
RFA 43/2017                                                            Page 3 of 58

            are also pending due to shortage of funds. Therefore,
            the payment of the plaintiff will be released once the
            financial position of the EDMC improved.”
7.     Thus, the Corporation simply claimed that due to paucity of funds, it
was unable to pay the contractor’s dues. An application was filed by the
Contractor under Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC, in view of the stand taken by
the Corporation in its pleadings. No reply to the application was filed by the
Corporation. The Contractor led the evidence of the proprietor, Mr. Ashwani
Kumar Aggarwal/PW-1, who in his cross examination stated as under:
            “It is correct that I have gone through the contents of
            NIT, terms and conditions of the tender documents. I
            have knowledge that there were some amendments in
            the terms and conditions vide circular dated 19.5.2006
            of MCD Ex.PW1/D1. It is correct that I have accepted
            terms and conditions of NIT. I do not know if there is
            no clause in the terms and conditions about the award
            of interest. I have not received any interest from MCD
            on account of delay. Vol. As long delay never took
            place earlier. It is correct that I did not submit the bill
            for the work order in question and the bill was
            prepared by the engineer incharge of the defendant
            and thereafter it was accepted by me as correct. Vol.
            After measurement. I do not recollect if I have not
            applied for refund of security.
            I do not dispute general terms and conditions of the
            tender documents of MCD consisting of 82 pages. It is
            correct that security amount is refunded after making
            of final payment of EDMC. It is correct that after final
            payment contractor has to apply for refund of security.
            It is correct that I have not received final payment in
            the present case so far. It is correct to suggest that
            payment in the present case so far. It is incorrect to
            suggest that payment is made to the contractor on the
RFA 43/2017                                                           Page 4 of 58

            queue basis in a particular head of account.”
8.     The Corporation led the evidence of Mr. J.K. Sharma/DW-1,
Assistant Engineer, who stated as under:
            “The payment by EDMC is made to the contractors on
            queue basis only. It is incorrect that payment of
            plaintiff has been delayed. I am not aware if the
            plaintiff been requesting the EDMC repeatedly for
            making his payment. It is incorrect to suggest that
            EDMC has sufficient fund for making payment to the
            plaintiff. It is incorrect to suggest that plaintiff suffered
            any loss due to blockage if money rotation.”
9.     In view of the categorical admission by the Corporation, the Trial
Court vide judgement dated 25th July, 2016 decreed the suit as under:
            “Consequent upon the decision of issue nos.1 to 3 in
            favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant, it is
            held that the plaintiff is entitled not only to get interest
            but also he is entitled to get cost of the suit in his
            favour and against the defendant. Accordingly, interest
            @9% per annum on the principal amount i.e. Rs.
            4,66,445/- is awarded in favour of the plaintiff and
            against the defendant from the date of completion of
            contract work till the payment of principal amount was
            paid to him in pursuance to order of this court with
            cost of the suit and lawyer fee of Rs. 10,000/-.”
10.    EDMC submits that this very Contractor, qua separate transactions
had given consent and his appeals therein were disposed of vide order dated
1st December, 2016 in RFA 192/2016. The fact that the Contractor had
agreed to settle a different transaction by consent terms as recorded in the
said order does not mean that the transaction in the current appeal is also to
RFA 43/2017                                                             Page 5 of 58

be disposed of as per the consent order. The transactions are distinct and
separate. Consent cannot be borrowed into the current transaction where it is
expressly submitted by the Contractor that he does not consent to the terms
contained in order dated 1st December, 2016.
11. History of litigations between contractors and Corporations -
EDMC/ Nr.DMC in the Delhi High Court.
       (i)    Order No.1 - Order dated 1st December, 2016 passed in lead
matter RFA 786/2016 and 192/2016 - These orders were passed in appeals
preferred by the Nr.DMC and EDMC, respectively - In this order, a Learned
Single Judge of this Court records that a consensus has been arrived between
the Corporations and Contractors in the following terms:
            “2.         On 17.11.2016, with the consent of the
            parties, the following order was passed :
                  “6. After interacting with the counsels for the
                  parties, a consensus has been arrived at and
                  the following consent order is passed:-
                (i) The appellants shall file fresh compilations,
                  complete in all respects in respect of the
                  respondents and the other contractors,
                  irrespective of whether they have filed any
                  appeals/suits of recovery or not, so that there
                  is a clarity about their priority in the wait
                  list.
                (ii) The appellants undertake to strictly adhere
                  to the timeline mentioned in the compilation,
                  for releasing payments to the respondents.
                (iii) No payment shall be released out of turn
                  by the appellants.
                (iv) The appellants shall ensure that the
                  budget for release of amounts under the head
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 6 of 58

              of Non-Plan Expenditure is increased on a
              regular basis so that the release of payments
              can be expedited to the respondents and
              other contractors in the wait list, even prior
              to the dates of priority mentioned against
              their names.
            (v) The appellants shall upload the
              compilation on their websites for ease of
              access and update it regularly at the end of
              each month for the respondents and others to
              know what their status is in the wait list.
            (vi) Having regard to the fact that the
              appellants expect the respondents to stay
              their hands and not pursue their legal
              remedies for execution of the impugned
              judgments and decrees for a period
              mentioned hereinafter, it is agreed that
              interest shall be payable to the respondents
              on the principal amount after the expiry of
              three years and ninety days reckoned from
              the date the concerned Division had passed
              the bills of the respondents for payment. In
              other words, a cushion of 90 days is being
              provided to the Head Quarters of both the
              appellants for completing the administrative
              work of receiving and diarising the bills
              received from different Divisions and
              preparing a combined list for payment and it
              is agreed that for the said period, no interest
              shall be payable to the respondents.
            (vii) It is further agreed that the appellants
              will not be liable to pay interest on the
              principal amounts payable to the
              respondents under the impugned judgments
              and decrees, for a period of three years
              reckoned from the date of expiry of 90 days
              mentioned above.
RFA 43/2017                                                   Page 7 of 58

            (viii) However, immediately on expiry of three
              years as noted above, if the amounts remain
              outstanding for any reason whatsoever, the
              appellants shall pay interest @ 9% per
              annum on the principal amount to the
              respondents, for the remaining period, till
              realization.
            (ix) It is further agreed that the aforesaid
              arrangement of payment of interest by the
              appellants @ 9% per annum on the
              outstanding principal amount to the
              respondents shall continue only for a period
              of two years, reckoned from the end of the
              third year as mentioned in clause (vii)
              hereinabove.
            (x) If the amounts remain payable by the
              appellants even thereafter, the respondents
              shall be entitled to seek legal recourse for
              execution of the impugned judgments and
              decrees and claim interest on the decretal
              amount from day one.
            (xi) The respondents undertake that in view of
              the settlement arrived at with the appellants,
              as recorded above, they shall not take any
              steps to file execution petitions in respect of
              the impugned judgments and decrees, subject
              matter of the present appeals, for the period
              mentioned hereinabove.
            (xii) As for the already pending execution
              petitions, orders passed in these proceedings
              shall be placed on record so that they can be
              disposed of by the concerned courts on the
              basis of the consent order, with liberty
              granted to the respondents to file fresh
              execution petitions in case of default on the
              part of the appellants, as has been detailed
              above.”
RFA 43/2017                                                   Page 8 of 58

12.    The said order further records in paragraph Nos.14 to17 as under:
            “14.       The said offer is however unacceptable to the
            counsels for the respondents who submit that they
            would rather pursue the pending suits for payments of
            the security amount with interest etc. as the time line
            mentioned by the appellants for release of the
            payments is too long.
            15.       It is therefore clarified that the consent orders
            passed in these appeals shall only govern the payments
            that are the subject matter of the impugned judgments
            and decrees and the suits that have been instituted by
            the respondents against the appellants for recovery of
            the security amount with interest, etc., and are pending
            adjudication in the trial court, shall continue.
            16.        At this stage, Mr. Sudhir Gupta, learned
            counsel appearing for the respondents in RFA
            701/2016, RFA No.707/2016, RFA 788/2016, RFA
            789/2016, RFA 791/2016 submits, on instructions from
            his clients, that they are ready and willing to settle the
            entire dispute with the appellant/NrDMC by accepting
            the timeline for release of payments, including the
            amount due towards security deposit, as mentioned in
            Annexure-A. The other side is in any case agreeable to
            the said suggestion.
            17.       Accordingly, the entire dispute, subject matter
            of the captioned appeals including the claim of refund
            of security deposit with interest etc. raised in the suits
            instituted by the said respondents out of which the
            appeals have arisen, stand full and finally settled in
            terms of the consent order passed on 17.11.2016. It is
            clarified that the appellant/NrDMC shall refund the
            security amounts to the said respondents, subject
            matter of the pending suits, contemporaneous to the
            release of the decretal amounts, as per the seniority
RFA 43/2017                                                           Page 9 of 58

            assigned to them in the wait list on the same terms and
            conditions as recorded on 17.11.2016. In view of a
            comprehensive settlement having been arrived at
            between the appellant/NrDMC and the respondents in
            the appeals mentioned in para 16 above, the
            respondents in the said cases shall file copies of the
            orders passed in these proceedings in their respective
            suits and be at liberty to approach the trial court for
            seeking refund of the court fees under Section 16 of the
            Court Fees Act.”
13.    Order No.1 dated 1st December, 2016 was passed in lead matter RFA
786/2106 and RFA 192/2016 involving NrDMC and EDMC. By this order,
the Learned Single Judge of this Court disposed of a bunch of NrDMC and
EDMC appeals based on a consensus arrived at between the parties. The
Court refers to an earlier order dated 17th November, 2016 and disposes of
all the appeals in the following terms -
       i)      That the Corporation would prepare a complete list of
       contractors whose payments are due;
       ii)     As and when funds become available, payments would be
       released to the Contractors on the basis of the priority in the waiting
       list. No out of turn payments would be released. The list of the
       Contractors would be uploaded on the website;
       iii)    Interest would be payable after a period of three years and 90
       days from the date when the bill is passed by the concerned division;
       iv)     Interest would not run for a period of three years and 90 days as
       mentioned above;
       v)      Upon the expiry of the said period, if amounts remain
       outstanding, the said interest @ 9 % p.a. on the principal amount for
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 10 of 58

       the remaining period shall be paid;
       vi)    The said interest @ 9% p.a. shall be liable to be paid for a
       period of two years;
       vii)   If after the period of two years, amounts remain outstanding,
       the Contractor shall be free to pursue their legal remedies and seek
       execution of the judgments and decrees passed in their favour and
       also claim interest on the decretal amount as per their respective
       entitlement from day one;
       viii) No execution shall be filed for the period agreed. In so far as
       security amount and interest is concerned, as per paragraph 15, the
       Contractors were at liberty to pursue their remedies, since suits for
       recovery were already pending;
       ix)    In few of the appeals mentioned in paragraph 16 executed
       herein above, settlements was arrived at even qua refund of security
       deposit and interest.
       For the sake of convenience, the above mentioned order dated 1 st
       December, 2016 is referred to as `Order No.1'. On the basis of this
       order, several appeals of the Corporation were disposed of.
14.    Thus, in so far as security amount and interest is concerned, the suits
that are pending adjudication in the Trial Court would continue. Only some
Appellants, therein, agreed for a simple refund of security deposit without
interest and the matter was closed qua the said Contractors. NrDMC and
EDMC had attached Annexure-A along with the said order along with the
details of the names of the Contractors, work orders, proper wait list of the
Contractors with the expected month/year for payments.
       (ii)   Order No.2- Order dated 23rd January, 2017 passed in writ
RFA 43/2017                                                      Page 11 of 58

petitions with the lead matter W.P. (C) 10055/2015 - Several writ petitions
were filed before the Delhi High Court by Contractors seeking their dues
from the Corporation. The Corporation relied upon Clause 7 of the General
Conditions of Contract. A Learned Single Judge of this Court held that the
said writ petitions could be disposed of on the same terms and conditions as
Order No.1, as there is no dispute to the fact that the cases of the writ
petitioners were similar to the parties in the Order No.1. The Court directed
that the Corporation would abide by the timeline. Thus, Order No.1 came to
be followed and the writs came to be disposed of in terms thereof. For the
sake of convenience, the order dated 23rd January 2017 is referred to as
`Order No. 2’.
       (iii) Order No.3 - Orders passed in RFA Nos. 835/2017, 836/2017,
837/2017, 838/2017, 839/2017, 840/2017, and 841/2017 dated 27 th
September, 2017 which relied on an order of this Court dated 25 th
September, 2017 passed in RFA 818/2017, 820/2017 and 821/2107. The
Learned Single Judge of this Court, in Order No.3 followed Order no.2 and
directed as under:
            “3.      I do not find any inconsistency or conflict in
            the order passed by this Court on 25.09.2017 with the
            judgment passed by a learned Single Judge of this
            Court on 01.12.2016 in RFAs 192/2016 and 786/2016.
            The sum and substance continues to remain is that
            payment will be made in queue in terms of Clause 9 of
            the Contract with the earlier final bills prepared being
            paid earlier to the final bills which are prepared
            later.”
       (iv)    Order No.4 - Order dated 9th October, 2017 in RFA 847/2017
and RFA 849/2017 - In these matters also the appeals were disposed of in
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 12 of 58

terms of Order No.1. The relevant portion of the order reads as under:
            “....“3. I do not find any inconsistency or conflict in
            the order passed by this Court on 25.09.2017 with the
            judgment passed by a learned Single Judge of this
            Court on 01.12.2016 in RFAs 192/2016 and 786/2016.
            The sum and substance continues to remain is that
            payment will be made in queue in terms of Clause 9 of
            the Contract with the earlier final bills prepared being
            paid earlier to the final bills which are prepared later.
            4. Appeals are accordingly disposed of.”
            3. These appeals are therefore also disposed of in
            terms of the order dated 27.9.2017 passed in RFA Nos.
            835/2017, 836/2017 and 837/2017 decided on
            27.9.2017.
            4. RFAs stand disposed of accordingly.”
For the sake of convenience, this order would be referred as ‘Order No.4’.
15.    A summary of all the above mentioned 4 orders shows that each of
the orders is based on Order No.1 of 1st December, 2016. The said order i.e.
Order No.1 has the following unique features:
       a)      It was an order passed in appeals by consent of parties;
       b)      The order dealt with payments of Principal amounts and
       interest thereon qua the bills that were already passed and consent
       terms were recorded in respect thereof.
       c)      The order also deals with security deposit and refunds thereof.
       On this aspect, some parties accepted the terms for refunds as
       submitted by the Corporation but some parties agreed to continue to
       pursue their respective suits.
       d)      In so far as interest on the payment of the bills were concerned,
       the parties therein consented that interest would be paid only if the
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 13 of 58

       amounts remained outstanding after a period of three years.
       e)      None of the four orders above adjudicated the legal issues on
       merits. The orders did not go into the validity of Clauses 7 and 9 of
       the General Conditions of Contract.
16.    Orders 1 - 4 would have been binding on this Court except for the fact
that Order No.1 dated 1st December, 2016, thereafter, became subject matter
of Special Leave Petitions, filed by various contractors, in the Supreme
Court. In addition, the Contractors in the present appeals have refused to
abide by the terms of Order No.1 as the said order was a consent order.
Proceedings before the Supreme Court.
17.    Order No.1 came to be assailed before the Supreme Court in Special
Leave to Appeal (C) No. 9623/2017 Yashpal Gulati v. EDMC. The
Supreme Court recorded on 15th September, 2017 as under:
            “It is stated by the learned counsel for the East Delhi
            Municipal Corporation that two bills have already
            been paid to the petitioner and the third bill in respect
            of which payment is due will be cleared in the month of
            November, 2017.
            The respondent- Corporation is directed to act
            accordingly.
            List the matter in the first week of December, 2017.”
18.    In many connected Special Leave Petitions (hereinafter, „SLPs‟), the
Supreme Court vide order dated 15th September 2017 recorded as under:
            “Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and
            perused the relevant material.
            Delay condoned.
            Issue Notice.
            List the matter along with Special Leave Petitioner
            (Civil) No.9623 of 2017.
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 14 of 58

            All amounts admitted to be due to the petitioner will
            be paid by the respondent- Corporation in the
            meantime.”
19.    On 5th January, 2018, in several appeals/SLPs arising out of Order
No.1, the Supreme Court passed the following order:
            “Delay condoned.
                   In this group of cases some of the petitioners
            have been paid the principal amount and the earnest
            money whereas some of the petitioners have been paid
            only the principal amount. Some of the petitioners have
            not been paid even the principal amount. Such of the
            petitioners who have not been paid the principal
            amount/earnest money/security deposit be paid the
            amounts due under the aforesaid heads.
            The present Special Leave Petitions have been filed
            against order(s) of the High Court which appears to be
            consent order(s). Disputes have been raised that the
            petitioners have not given their consent. We are not
            inclined to go into the said aspect of the matter.
            However, we leave it open for the petitioners to agitate
            the said question before the High Court, if they are so
            advised.
                   With the aforesaid observation, the present
            Special Leave Petitions as well as all pending
            applications therein shall stand disposed of”.
20.    The Supreme Court directed payments to be made to the Contractors
who approached the Court by way of SLPs, “in the meantime”, on the first
hearing. By the order disposing of the SLPs, the payment of Principal
amount, Earnest money and Security deposit were directed to be made. This
in effect meant that the said Contractors were not to stand in the queue but
payments were released to them under Supreme Court orders. The Supreme
Court did not adjudicate the matter on the question of interest or the question
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 15 of 58

as to whether consent was given.
21.     Thus, in effect, Order No.1 dated 1st December, 2016, to the extent
that it gave sanctity to the queue system which was also subsequently
followed by Learned Single Judges of this Court, appears to have been
superseded by the Supreme Court insofar as the Queue system of payment is
concerned. In any event, all the three issues on which consent had been
initially recorded in order dated 1st December, 2016 i.e. payment of principal
on queue basis, payment of interest only after three years and 90 days, as
also security deposit, was open for re-agitation. Order No.1 was in effect
modified in respect of the Contractors who approached the Supreme Court.
Subsequent Orders No.2, 3 and 4 are passed on the basis of Order No.1. On
the issues of law raised in those appeals and writs, there was no decision on
merits.
22.     It is settled as far back as in 1989, when the Supreme Court in
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Gurnam Kaur (1989) 1 SCC 101 held
that consent orders do not adjudicate upon the merits of the dispute and
hence do not constitute binding precedents. Relevant extract of the judgment
is as under:
            “10. It is axiomatic that when a direction or order is
            made by consent of the parties, the court does not
            adjudicate upon the rights of the parties nor does it lay
            down any principle. Quotability as „law‟ applies to the
            principle of a case, its ratio decidendi. The only thing
            in a judge‟s decision binding as an authority upon a
            subsequent judge is the principle upon which the case
            was decided. Statements which are not part of the ratio
            decidendi are distinguished as obiter dicta and are not
            authoritative...”
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 16 of 58

This position taken by the Supreme Court has been followed by a Single
Judge of this Court in Yash Sehrawat v. Board of Control for Cricket in
India 2014 (141) DRJ 518.
23.    There are two different sets of appeals in this batch. The first batch of
appeals are those in which the order dated 1 st December, 2016 was passed in
respect of the same work orders. The second set of appeals arises out of
different work orders, though sometimes the contractors are the same. To the
extent the appeals relate to the same work order, the parties shall be bound
by the 1st December, 2016 order. However, the said order cannot apply in
the second set of cases as the transactions are completely separate and
distinct. The appeals arise out of completely different suits. Consent terms of
different proceedings and transactions cannot be imposed. Moreover, even
insofar as the first set of appeals are concerned, Contractors have pressed for
the relief of interest on Principal amounts. Order Nos.1 to 4 do not constitute
precedents as they were based on the initial consent order which stood
modified/merged in the orders passed by the Supreme Court. The question
of consent was also left open by the Supreme Court for being re-agitated.
Even in the first set of appeals where the issue of security deposit and
interest thereon was left open by the order of 1 st December 2016,
Corporations argue that security deposit is not liable to be refunded until the
final bill is passed – which can only happen as per the queue system, subject
to availability of funds. This is not acceptable to Contractors who argue that
refund of security deposit is not dependent on the passing of the final bill.
Hence, the legal and factual issues in these appeals have to be adjudicated
on their own merits.
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 17 of 58

Questions
24.    The questions, therefore, that arise in this appeal and all the connected
appeals are:
       (i)    Whether payment of the principal amount can be delayed in
       view of Clause 7 and Clause 9 of the General Conditions of Contract
       read with the amendments?
       (ii)   Whether the refund of earnest money/security deposit can be
       delayed in view of Clauses 17 and 45 of the General Conditions of
       Contract?
       (iii)  Whether interest is payable on delayed payments/refunds and if
       so, for which period?
Question No. 1- Payment of Principal amount
25.    Whenever tenders are called for and work orders are placed by the
Corporation, all Contractors are bound by the General Conditions of
Contract. The said conditions are published by the Corporations and are
"Standard Form". No deviation is usually permissible from the said General
Conditions of Contract. Registered Contractors are aware of the General
Conditions of Contract and apply for the tenders accordingly. They also
execute the work orders, fully conscious of the General Conditions of
Contract. However, the question that arises is whether the two clauses
relating to non-payment of bills indefinitely, though the bills are passed by
the Executive Engineer and non-payment of interest for delayed payment,
would be legal and valid?
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 18 of 58

Clauses relied upon
26.    The Corporations rely on Clauses 7 and 9 of the General Conditions
of Contract, so do the Contractors. There are however, different versions of
the said clauses, especially Clause 9. The work orders have been awarded
post-2008. There is actually no clarity as to which version of the clause was
applicable during which period and hence the latest clause is being applied
uniformly in all cases. The Clauses relied upon by the Corporation are
Clauses 7 and 9 of the General Conditions of Contract, which are
reproduced below:
            “CLAUSE 7
            Payment on Intermediate Certificate to be Regarded
            as Advances:
               No payment shall be made for work estimated to
            cost Rs. Twenty thousand or less till after the whole of
            the work shall have been completed and certificate of
            completion given. For works estimated to cost over Rs.
            twenty thousand, the interim or running account bills
            shall be submitted by the contractor for work executed
            on the basis of such recorded measurement on the
            format of the department in the triplicate on or before
            the date of every month of the fixed for the same by the
            Engineer-in-Charge. The contractor shall not be the
            entitled to be paid any such interim payment if the
            gross work done together with the note
            payment/adjustment of advances of material collected,
            if any, since the last such payment is less then the
            amount specified in Schedule „F‟ in which case the
            interim bill shall be prepared on the appointed date of
            month after the requisite progress is achieved.
            Engineer-in-charge shall arrange to have the bill
            verified by taking or causing to be taken, where
            necessary, the requisite measurement of the work. In
            the event of the failure of the contractor to submit the
            bills. progress is achieved. Engineer-in-Charge shall
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 19 of 58

            prepare or cause to be prepared such bills in which
            event no claims whatsoever due to delays on payment
            including that of interest shall be payable to the
            contract. Payment on account of admissible shall be
            made by the Engineer-in-Charge certifying the sum to
            which the contractor is considered entitled by the way
            of interim payment at such rates as decided by the
            Engineer-in-Charge. The amount admissible shall be
            paid by the 30th working day after the day of
            presentation of the bill by the contractor to the
            Engineer-in-Charge of his Asst. Engineer together with
            the account of the material is issued by the department,
            or dismantled materials, if any. The payment of
            passed bills will be subject to availability of funds in
            particular head of account from time to time in MCD.
            Payment of bills shall be made strictly on Queue basis
            the i.e. first the past liabilities will be cleared and after
            that the release of payment for passed bills be in order
            of the demand received at HQ under particular head of
            accounts. No interest shall be payable to the
            contractor in case of delay in payment on account of
            non-availability of fund in the particular head of
            account of the MCD.
             All such payment shall be regarded as payments by
            way of advances against final payment only and shall
            not preclude the requiring of bad, unsound and
            imperfect or unskilled work to be rejected, removed,
            taken away and reconstructed or re-erected. Any
            certificate given by the Engineer-in-Charge relating to
            the work done or materials delivered forming part of
            such payment, may be modified or corrected by any
            subsequent such certificates(s) or by the final
            certificate and shall not by itself be conclusive
            evidence that any work or materials to which it relates
            is/are in accordance with the contract and
            specifications. Any such interim payment or any part
            thereof shall not it any respect conclude, determine or
            effect in any way powers of Engineer-in-Charge under
RFA 43/2017                                                             Page 20 of 58

            the contract or any of such payments be treated as final
            settlement and adjustment of accounts or in any way
            vary or effect the contract.
               Pending consideration of extension of date of
            completion interim payments shall to be made as
            herein provides, without prejudice to the right of the
            departments to take action under the terms of this
            contract for delay in the completion of work, if the
            extension of date of completion is not granted by the
            competent authority.
               The Engineer-in-Charge in his sole discretion on the
            basis of a certificate from the Asstt. Engineer to the
            effect that the work has been completed upto the level
            in question make interim advance payments without
            detailed measurements for work done (other than
            foundations, items to be covered under finishing items)
            upon lintel level (including sunshade etc.) and slab
            level, for each floor working out at 75% of the assessed
            value. The advance payment so allowed shall be
            adjusted in the subsequent interim bill by taking
            detailed measurements thereof.
            CLAUSE-9 Payment of final bill
            The final bill shall be submitted by the contractor in
            the same manner as specified in interim bills within
            three months of physical completion of the work or
            within one month of the date of the final certificate of
            completion furnished by the Engineer-in-Charge
            whichever is earlier. No further claims shall be made
            by the contractor after submission of the final bill and
            these shall be deemed to have been waived and
            extinguished. Payment of those items of the bill in
            respect of which there is no dispute and of items in
            dispute, for quantities and rates as approved by
            Engineer-in-Charge, will, as far as possible be made
            after the period specified hereinunder the period being
            reckoned from the date of receipt of bill by the
            Engineer-in-Charge or his authorised Asstt. Engineer,
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 21 of 58

            complete with account of material issued by the
            department and dismantled. The payment of passed
            bills will depend on availability of funds in particular
            head of account from time to time in MCD. Payment of
            bills shall be made strictly on Queue basis i.e. first the
            past liability will be cleared and after that the release
            of payment for passed bills will be in order of the
            demand received at the HQ and the particular head of
            account. No interest shall be payable to the contractor
            in case of delay in payment on account of non-
            availability of fund in the particular head of account
            of MCD.
            (i) If the tendered value of work is upto Rs. 5 lacs: 6
            months
            (ii) If the tendered value of work exceeds Rs. 5 lacs: 9
            months”
27.    In addition, the Corporation also relies on the amendment to the
General Conditions of Contract dated 19th May, 2006 which reads as under:
            “Addition to clause 7, clause 9 and clause 9A,
            regarding payment of bills to the contractors
            The payment of passed bills will depend on availability
            of funds in particular head of account from time to
            time in MCD. Payments of bills shall be made strictly
            on Queue basis i.e. first the past liabilities will be
            cleared and after that the release of payment for
            passed bills will be in order of the demand received at
            HQ under particular head of account.”
28.    A further Circular was issued on 10th June 2014 by the Office of Chief
Engineer of the Corporation to the following effect:
            “                       CIRCULAR
            Subject:- Implementation of various protection clause
            available in the General Terms & Conditions.
            It has been brought to the notice of the Chief Law
            Officer that following clauses existing in the General
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 22 of 58

            Terms & Conditions are not taken care of while
            pleading cases before the arbitrators & ADJ Courts
            i.e. at first court level. It is a well settled law that a
            plea not taken up before the first court cannot be
            aggregated before the higher court i.e. the appellate
            court. The protection clauses are enumerated as
            under:-
            1. Clause 7 : It says that if the Contractor does not
            prepare and submit the bills, then Engineer-in-Charge
            of MCD will prepare the same and in such an event the
            contractor will not be entitled to any claims
            whatsoever due to delay in payment including that of
            interest.
            2. Clause 17: The security deposit shall not be
            refunded before expiry of one year from the date of
            completion of work.
            3. Clause 45: Security deposit shall not be refunded till
            the contractor produces clearance certificate from the
            Labour Officer.
            4. Clause 9: Contractor will get payment of his passed
            bills depending upon availability of funds in particular
            head of account. Payment will be made strictly on
            queue basis. No interest will be payable to contractor
            in case if delay in payment on account of non-
            availability of funds in particular head of account of
            MCD.
            All Chief Engineers are hereby requested to direct the
            concerned EEs to take care of above mentioned clauses
            of agreement while pleading Arbitration/Court Cases
            at initial level itself.
                                                         Sd/-
                                            Chief Engineer (Plg.)”
29.    On the basis of the above Clauses, amendment and Circular, the
submission of the Corporation is that:
       a)      For both advance payment and for final bills, the payment has
       to be certified by Engineer-in-Charge;
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 23 of 58

        b)    The payment of the passed bills will be made subject to
        availability of funds in the specific head from time to time with the
        Corporation;
        c)    The payment of bills shall be strictly made on queue basis;
        d)    No interest shall be payable in case of delay in payment, on
        account of non-availability of funds.
30.     On the other hand, it is the submission on behalf of the Contractors
that since their clients, in these cases, have not given any consent they
cannot be made to be bound by Orders 1-4. Further, it is their submission
that the queue system was not followed by the Supreme Court in the SLPs,
in respect of payment of Principal, Security deposit etc. Thus, it is their
submission, that the present suits arise out of different transactions and
consent has not been given by their clients. It is their further submission that
even in those cases, the Supreme Court has reopened the issue of consent
itself and thus, the said orders cannot bind the contractors in these cases.
Analysis of the Clauses
31.     Clause 7 of the General Conditions of Contract deals with the
payment on the basis of intermediate certificates as advance payments and
Clause 9 of the General Conditions of Contract relates to payment of final
bills. In both cases, the Engineer-in-Charge has to certify the payments. So
far there can be no issue. Obviously if payments have to be made to
Contractors, the Engineer-in-Charge who is getting the work done has to
certify that the work has actually been done on site and the material etc. for
which payment is being executed has been duly employed in the works.
32.     However, the quandary for the Contractor begins after the bills are
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 24 of 58

passed by the Engineer-in-Charge. Clause 7 provides that the amount so
certified shall be paid by the 30th working day after the presentation of the
bill by the Contractor. However, thereafter comes the big caveat i.e. that the
Corporation should have funds available with it under the specific head of
account.
33.    It is slightly unfathomable as to how the Corporation can postpone the
payment to the Contractor, indefinitely. The issuance of the tender and the
work order in favour of the Contractor has to be on the pre-condition that
funds are available with the Corporation. To ask the Contractor to wait
endlessly for his payment is wholly arbitrary. The Corporation which hands
over the works contract to the Contractor cannot say “Do the work now, I
will pay when I have the money”. Even if such a clause has been signed and
accepted by the Contractor, it does not make the clause valid inasmuch as it
would render a fundamental condition of contract being hit by provisions of
the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (hereinafter, „Contract Act‟). Every contract,
to be valid, has to have consideration and the indefinite postponement of
consideration would be wholly unconscionable. In fact a Single Judge of this
Court in Jagbir Singh Sharma v. Municipal Corporation of Delhi [order
dated 15th July, 2007 in CS(OS) 1797/2007] (hereinafter, „Jagbir Singh‟),
while dealing with Clause 9 of the General Conditions of Contract (as it then
stood) has held as under:
            “7.       …A careful reading of the said clause
            indicates that it stipulates two different time periods
            for making payment. In cases where tendered value of
            the work is upto Rs.5 lakhs, payment is required to be
            made within three months and where the tendered
            value of the work exceeds Rs.5 lakhs, the payment is to
            be made within six months. Learned counsel for the
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 25 of 58

            defendant submitted that the contract uses the
            expression “as far as possible”. This expression to my
            mind supports the case of the Plaintiffs. The expression
            “as far as possible” is a pointer that every endeavor
            should be made by MCD to make payment within the
            time period stipulated in Clause 9. Normally and in
            due course, payments will be made within the time limit
            mentioned. The applications filed for leave to defend
            do not set out and give any reason for the delay in
            making the payments. Normally, payment should be
            made within a reasonable time after the contract has
            been executed and the party has performed his
            obligations under the contract. Section 46 of the Indian
            Contract Act, 1872 stipulates that where no time limit
            is specified, the engagement must be performed within
            a reasonable time.
            8. In the applications for leave to defend, it is stated
            that payments will be made as and when funds in a
            particular budget head are available with the MCD. Ex
            facie, the stand taken in the leave to defend
            applications cannot be accepted and has to be rejected.
            Once the defendant-MCD admits its obligation to make
            payment, the said payment has to be arranged for and
            budgeted for by them. The plaintiffs have no role to
            play in the said exercise. How the defendant manages
            their internal affairs is their own business. In fact,
            Clause 9 of the Contract stipulates that “as far as
            possible the MCD will make endeavor to make the
            payment within the said period”…..”
34.    The clause which the Court dealt with in the said case reads as under:
            "CLAUSE 9
            Payment of Final Bill
               The final bill shall be submitted by the contractor in
            the same manner as specified in interim bills within
            three months of physical completion of the work or
            within one month of the date of the final certificate
            completion furnished by the Engineer-in-Charge
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 26 of 58

            whichever is earlier. No further claims shall be made
            by the contractor after submission of the final bill and
            these shall be deemed to have been waived and
            extinguished. Payments of those items of the bill in
            respect of which there is no dispute and of items in
            dispute, for quantities and rates as approved by the
            Engineer-in-Charge, will, as far as possible, be made
            within the period specified hereinunder, the period
            being reckoned from the date of receipt of bill by the
            Engineer-in-Charge or his authorized Asstt. Engineer,
            complete with account of materials issued by the
            Department and dismantled materials
            (i)      If the Tendered value of work is upto Rs. 5
                     lakhs : 3 months
            (ii)     If the Tendered value of work exceeds Rs. 5
                     lakhs : 6 months "
35.     A perusal of the old Clause 9 reveals that there was an actual limit for
making of payment i.e. 3 months and 6 months and in the context of the said
Clause, it was held in Jagbir Singh (supra) that “every endeavor should be
made by MCD to make payment with the time period stipulated in Clause
9”. In the case of Jagbir Singh (supra), the Corporation, in its leave to
defend application had submitted that payment would be made as and when
funds in a particular budget head are available with it. This Court
categorically rejected this stand of the Corporation by holding “Ex facie, the
stand taken in the leave to defend applications cannot be accepted and has
to be rejected”. This Court held that the Contractors have no role to play in
the internal affairs of the Corporation. But a perusal of the present Clause
i.e., the new Clause 9 of the General Conditions of Contract shows that what
was expressly rejected by this Court, even as a defense in the leave to defend
application in Jagbir Singh (supra), has now come to be added in the
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 27 of 58

Clause itself along with a second element of a queue basis, which were not
part of the earlier Clause and has now been made part of the new Clause. It
is, however, completely incongruous that the addition of conditions of
availability of funds and queue basis has been made, while at the same time
retaining an upper limit of 6 months and 9 months as against the earlier 3
months and 6 months in Clause 9 of the General Conditions of Contract.
Clause 9 is, therefore, in the teeth of the judgment of this court in Jagbir
Singh (supra) and is nothing but an attempt to neutralize the said judgment.
A Corporation which gets works executed cannot therefore include a term in
the contract which is per se unconscionable and unreasonable as -
       a)     There is no fixed time period as to when the funds would be
       available;
       b)     There is also no fixed mechanism to determine as to when and
       in what manner the head of account is to be determined and as to how
       the contractor would acquire knowledge of these two facts;
       c)     There is also no certainty as to how many persons are in the
       queue prior to the Contractor and for what amounts;
       d)     There is enormous ambiguity in the receipt under the particular
       heads of accounts.
36.    These clauses in effect say that the Contractor is left with no remedy
if the Corporation does not pay for the work that has been executed. Such a
Clause would be illegal and contrary to law.
37.    Corporations which form a part of the State as envisaged under
Article 12 of the Constitution have to conduct their activities in accordance
with law and public policy. Instrumentalities of States ought to be saddled
with a higher responsibility to behave reasonably and not arbitrarily. It can
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 28 of 58

be no justification for a Corporation to claim that it would float the tender, it
would issue the works contract, it would get the work executed, its Engineer
would supervise the work, the Engineers would pass the bills, but yet no
payment would be made. Such a luxury ought not to be available to anyone,
even a private individual/corporation who enters into a contract, let alone a
State Corporation.
38.    While the Contractors have argued that they have an unequal
bargaining power with the Corporation, the Corporation argues that these are
commercial contracts and the Contractor has signed the contract with open
eyes. In Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited and Anr. v.
Brojo Nath Ganguly and Anr. (1986) 3 SCC 156, the Supreme Court held:
            “89. ....The principle deducible from the above
            discussions on this part of the case is in consonance
            with right and reason, intended to secure social and
            economic justice and conforms to the mandate of the
            great equality clause in Article 14. This principle is
            that the courts will not enforce and will, when called
            upon to do so, strike down an unfair and unreasonable
            contract, or an unfair and unreasonable clause in a
            contract, entered into between parties who are not
            equal in bargaining power. It is difficult to give an
            exhaustive list of all bargains of this type. No court can
            visualize the different situations which can arise in the
            affairs of men. One can only attempt to give some
            illustrations. For instance, the above principle will
            apply where the inequality of bargaining power is the
            result of the great disparity in the economic strength of
            the contracting parties. It will apply where the
            inequality is the result of circumstances, whether of the
            creation of the parties or not. It will apply to situations
            in which the weaker party is in a position in which he
            can obtain goods or services or means of livelihood
            only upon the terms imposed by the stronger party or
RFA 43/2017                                                           Page 29 of 58

            go without them. It will also apply where a man has no
            choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give his
            assent to a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a
            prescribed or standard form or to accept a set of rules
            as part of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable
            and unconscionable a clause in that contract or form
            or rules may be. This principle, however, will not apply
            where the bargaining power of the contracting parties
            is equal or almost equal. This principle may not apply
            where both parties are businessmen and the contract is
            a commercial transaction. In today's complex world of
            giant corporations with their vast infra-structural
            organizations and with the State through its
            instrumentalities and agencies entering into almost
            every branch of industry and commerce, there can be
            myriad situations which result in unfair and
            unreasonable bargains between parties possessing
            wholly disproportionate and unequal bargaining
            power. These cases can neither be enumerated nor
            fully illustrated. The court must judge each case on its
            own facts and circumstances.
            90. It is not as if our civil courts have no power under
            the existing law. Under Section 31(1) of the Specific
            Relief Act, 1963 (Act No. 47 of 1963), any person
            against whom an instrument is void or voidable, and
            who has reasonable apprehension that such
            instrument, if left outstanding, may cause him serious
            injury, may sue to have it adjudged void or voidable,
            and the court may in its discretion, so adjudge it and
            order it to be delivered up and cancelled.
            91. Is a contract of the type mentioned above to be
            adjudged voidable or void? If it was induced by undue
            influence, then under Section 19A of the Indian
            Contract Act, it would be voidable. It is, however,
            rarely that contracts of the types to which the principle
            formulated by us above applies are induced by undue
            influence as defined by Section 16(1) of the Indian
            Contract Act, even though at times they are between
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 30 of 58

            parties one of whom holds a real or apparent authority
            over the other. In the vast majority of cases, however,
            such contracts are entered into by the weaker party
            under pressure of circumstances, generally economic,
            which results in inequality of bargaining power. Such
            contracts will not fall within the four corners of the
            definition of "undue influence" given in Section 16(1).
            Further, the majority of such contracts are in a
            standard or prescribed form or consist of a set of rules.
            They are not contracts between individuals containing
            terms meant for those individuals alone. Contracts in
            prescribed or standard forms or which embody a set of
            rules as part of the contract are entered into by the
            party with superior bargaining power with a large
            number of persons who have far less bargaining power
            or no bargaining power at all. Such contracts which
            affect a large number of persons or a group or groups
            of persons, if they are unconscionable, unfair and
            unreasonable, are injurious to the public interest. To
            say that such a contract is only voidable would be to
            compel each person with whom the party with superior
            bargaining power had contracted to go to court to
            have the contract adjudged voidable. This would only
            result in multiplicity of litigation which no court should
            encourage and would also not be in the public interest.
            Such a contract or such a clause in a contract ought,
            therefore, to be adjudged void. While the law of
            contracts in England is mostly judge-made, the law of
            contracts in India is enacted in a statute, namely, the
            Indian Contract Act, 1872. In order that such a
            contract should be void, it must fall under one of the
            relevant sections of the Indian Contract Act. The only
            relevant provision in the Indian Contract Act which
            can apply is Section 23 when it states that "The
            consideration or object of an agreement is lawful,
            unless . . . the court regards it as . . . opposed to public
            policy."
RFA 43/2017                                                            Page 31 of 58

            92 . The Indian Contract Act does not define the
            expression "public policy" or "opposed to public
            policy". From the very nature of things, the expressions
            "public policy", "opposed to public policy" or
            "contrary to public policy" are incapable of precise
            definition. Public policy, however, is not the policy of a
            particular government. It connotes some matter which
            concerns the public good and the public interest. The
            concept of what is for the public good or in the public
            interest or what would be injurious or harmful to the
            public good or the public interest has varied from time
            to time. As new concepts take the place of old,
            transactions which were once considered against
            public policy are now being upheld by the courts and
            similarly where there has been a well recognized head
            of public policy, the courts have not shirked from
            extending it to new transactions and changed
            circumstances and have at times not even flinched from
            inventing a new head of public policy. There are two
            schools of thought - "the narrow view" school and "the
            broad view" school. According to the former, courts
            can not create new heads of public policy whereas the
            latter countenances judicial law-making in this area.
            The adherents of "the narrow view" school would not
            invalidate a contract on the ground of public policy
            unless that particular ground had been well-
            established by authorities..... Hardly ever has the voice
            of the timorous spoken more clearly and loudly than in
            these words of Lord Davey in Janson v. Driefontein
            Consolidated Gold Mines Limited 1902 A.C.
            484"Public policy is always an unsafe and treacherous
            ground for legal decision." That was in the year 1902.
            Seventy-eight years earlier, Burrough, J., in
            Richardson v. Mellish 1824 (2) Bing. 229; (s.c.) 130
            E.R. 294 and 1824 All E.R. Rep 258, described public
            policy as "a very unruly horse, and when once you get
            astride it you never know where it will carry you." The
            Master of the Rolls, Lord Denning, however, was not a
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 32 of 58

            man to shy away from unmanageable horses and in
            words which conjure up before our eyes the picture of
            the young Alexander the Great taming Bucephalus, he
            said in Enderyby Town Football Club Ltd. v. Football
            Association Ltd. 1971 Ch. 591. "With a good man in
            the saddle, the unruly horse can be kept in control. It
            can jump over obstacles." Had the timorous always
            held the field, not only the doctrine of public policy but
            even the Common Law or the principles of Equity
            would never have evolved. Sir William Holdsworth in
            his "History of English Law", Volume III, page 55, has
            said:
            In fact, a body of law like the common law, which has
            grown up gradually with the growth of the nation,
            necessarily acquires some fixed principles, and if it is
            to maintain these principles it must be able, on the
            ground of public policy or some other like ground, to
            suppress practices which, under ever new disguises,
            seek to weaken or negative them.
            It is thus clear that the principles governing public
            policy must be and are capable, on proper occasion, of
            expansion or modification. Practices which were
            considered perfectly normal at one time have today
            become obnoxious and oppressive to public
            conscience. If there is no head of public policy which
            covers a case, then the court must in consonance with
            public conscience and in keeping with public good and
            public interest declare such practice to be opposed to
            public policy. Above all, in deciding any case which
            may not be covered by authority our courts have before
            them the beacon light of the Preamble to the
            Constitution. Lacking precedent, the court can always
            be guided by that light and the principles underlying
            the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles
            enshrined in our Constitution.”
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 33 of 58

39.    The question therefore would be as to whether the Court in this case
should take a narrow view or a broad view. In Brojo Nath Ganguly and
Anr. (supra), the Supreme Court clearly held that:
            “The types of contracts to which the principle
            formulated by us above applies are not contracts which
            are tainted with illegality but are contracts which
            contain terms which are so unfair and unreasonable
            that they shock the conscience of the court. They are
            opposed to public policy and require to be adjudged
            void.”
40.    Thus, the argument of `unequal bargaining power' may not apply in
commercial contracts of the kind, which are the subject matter of the present
appeal. This however does not take away the important aspect of the
contract i.e., that it is still a Standard Contract, signed by the Contractor on
the dotted line. With most of the work orders, the General Conditions of the
Contract are not even attached. They are simply taken to be read and known
to the Contractor. Even presuming that the parties are of equal bargaining
power, the question is whether the clauses in such General Conditions stand
the test of `reasonableness'.
41.    In Indian Oil Corporation Limited v. Nilofer Siddiqui & Ors. (2015)
16 SCC 125 (hereinafter, „Nilofer Siddiqui‟), the Supreme Court has, in the
context of an LPG dealership and termination of the same, held as under:
            “32. We agree with the contentions advanced by Mr.
            Sibal that Condition 8 of the letter of allotment is
            unconscionable as it gives IOCL an unfettered right to
            terminate the distributorship without assigning any
            reason. In the instant case, Respondent 2 is far weaker
            in economic strength and has no bargaining power
            with IOCL. At the time when the letter of allotment was
            issued, Respondent 2 had no other means of livelihood
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 34 of 58

            and was dependent on the grant of Indane Gas agency
            by IOCL for sustenance of himself and his family
            members. The letter of allotment contains standard
            terms and Respondents 2 and 3 had no opportunity to
            vary the same.
            33. Condition 8 of the letter of allotment provides for
            unilateral termination of distributorship without
            assigning any reason which is liable to be read down
            in the light of Article 14 of the Constitution of India as
            well as observations made by this Court in Central
            Inland Water Transport Corpn. Ltd. case……”
42.    In Nilofer Siddiqui (supra), the Court found that the distributorship
had been terminated arbitrarily and unfairly. On the strength of Article 14 of
the Constitution of India and the decision in Brojo Nath Ganguly and Anr.
(supra), the Supreme Court read down the provisions of the condition of the
contract that gave unfettered powers of termination to the IOCL and restored
the distributorship of the petitioner. Thus, irrespective of the bargaining
power of the parties, the clauses of a contract have to abide by the test of
reasonableness and have to be conscionable.
43.    In the present case, the combined effect of the Clauses and the
Circular and amendments, set out above, is that if the Corporation does not
procure funds, it is not liable to even pay the Contractor any interest and the
Contractor has no remedy. This by itself would mean that such a Clause
could be read as leading to a contract without consideration and hence
unlawful under Section 23 of the Contract Act. The Corporation being an
instrumentality of State, such a contract would also be opposed to public
policy under Section 23 of the Contract Act. Section 46 of the Contract Act
is also clear that if no time for performance of a contract is specified, it has
to be performed within a reasonable time. Reading these provisions
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 35 of 58

together, it is clear that an open ended Clause which in effect says that the
payment shall be made at an undetermined time in the future, subject to
availability of funds, in a particular head of accounts is wholly unreasonable
and such a term would also be unfair.
44.    It is equally strange that the Corporation seeks to justify the non-
payment on the ground of non-availability of funds for medicines or hospital
items or pensions or salaries of the Corporation. Running the Corporation is
not the business of the Contractor. It is for the Corporation to manage its
affairs as per the funds available with it and it cannot be a defense that the
Contractor should bear the brunt of non-payment for years, of works
executed by him.
45.    Mrs. I.K. Sohan Singh v. State Bank of India AIR 1964 P&H 123,
involved a transaction of a sale deed wherein the balance sale consideration
was to be paid “as soon as possible” but at a time when the vendee is in a
position to make the payment. The question arose as to whether the time
prescribed for making the payment of balance consideration was reasonable.
The Punjab & Haryana High Court, following the dicta of Justice
Warrington in Watling v. Lewis 1911 1 Ch. 414, held the balance sum ought
to be paid within a reasonable time in view of Section 46 of the Contract
Act. The Court held as under:
            “9 . The words "as soon as possible" which preceded
            the words "but at a time when the former is in a
            position to make the payment" also relate to the time of
            payment. It was neither pleaded nor was it the case of
            the defendant that if she never had the financial
            resources or the means to make the payment of the
            amount of Rs. 25,000, she was to be altogether
            absolved from all liability to make payment of the
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 36 of 58

            balance amount of sale consideration. While
            construing the disputed contract embodied in the sale
            deed, the real covenant cannot be so construed that an
            absolute obligation arising under it can be allowed to
            be destroyed by a subsequent clause contained in the
            same deed. In re Tewkesbury Gas Company Tysoe v.
            The Company 1911 2 Ch.279, a company had issued a
            series of debentures each of which contained a
            covenant by the company that it would 'on or after'
            January 1, 1898, pay to' the registered holder of the
            debenture the principal sum thereby secured. The
            debenture then stated as follows: "The debentures to be
            paid off will be determined by ballot, and six calendar
            months' notice will be given by the company of the
            debentures drawn for payment." The company never
            paid off any of the debentures or held any ballot. In an
            action by one of the debenture-holders, it was held that
            on the construction of the covenant and in the events
            that had happened the principal money secured by the
            debenture was presently due and payable, and that, if
            the provision as to balloting and notice meant that the
            company was never to be bound to pay off any
            debenture unless it elected to do so and balloted and
            gave notice accordingly, the provision was void for
            repugnancy on the principle stated in Sheppard's
            Touchstone, p. 273, and illustrated in Watting v. Lewis
            1911 1 Ch. 414. In the latter case Warrington, J., came
            to the following conclusion:-
            “The result is, I think, that first there is a covenant to
            pay the money and to indemnify, and then the parties
            have attempted to qualify that covenant by using words
            the effect of which, if effect is to be given to them,
            would be to destroy the personal liability. That being
            so, the words they have used can have no effect at law
            and the liability remains”.
            10. Consequently there is a good deal of force in the
            submission of Mr. Kapur that the true import of the
            stipulation in the sale deed with regard to payment of
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 37 of 58

            the amount of balance consideration of Rs. 25,000 was
            that the same would be payable within a reasonable
            time by virtue of the application of Section 46 of the
            Contract Act as it must be deemed that no time for
            performance had been specified. It may be mentioned
            that this view justifiably commended itself to the Court
            below.”
46.    A similar view is echoed in Hungerford Investment Trust Ltd. v.
Haridas Mundhra and others AIR 1972 SC 1826 wherein it was held that
though no specific time was provided for payment of purchase money, it has
to be construed as reasonable time under Section 46 of the Contract Act. The
Court, however, held that what is reasonable is a question of fact. The
observation of the Supreme Court reads as under:
            “25. It was contended on behalf of Mundhra that he
            was always ready and willing to pay the purchase
            money but since the decree did not specify any time for
            payment of the money, there was no default on his part.
            In other words, the contention was that since the
            decree did not specify a time within which the purchase
            money should be paid and, since an application for
            fixing the time was made by the appellant and
            dismissed by the Court, Mundhra cannot be said to
            have been in default in not paying the purchase money
            so that the appellant might apply for rescission of the
            decree. If a contract does not specify the time for
            performance, the Law will limply that the parties
            intended that the obligation under the contract should
            be performed within a reasonable time. Section 46 of
            the Contract Act provides that where, by a contract a
            promissory is to perform his promise without
            application by the promisee and no time for
            performance is specified, the engagement must be
            performed within a reasonable time and the question
            “what is reasonable time” is, in each particular case,
            a question of fact. We have already indicated that the
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 38 of 58

            contract between the parties was not extinguished by
            the passing of the decree, that it subsisted
            notwithstanding the decree. It was an implied term of
            the contract and, therefore, of the decree passed
            thereon that the parties would perform the contract
            within a reasonable time. To put it in other words, as
            the contract subsisted despite the decree and as the
            decree did not abrogate or modify any of the express or
            implied term of the contract, it must be presumed that
            the parties to the decree had the obligation to complete
            the contract within a reasonable time.”
47.    Learned counsel for the Corporation has relied upon Bank of India v.
K. Mohandas (2009) 5 SCC 313 and Super Poly Fabriks Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Central Excise, Punjab (2008) 11 SCC 398 to argue that
the contract has to be read as a whole. This position is not in dispute.
However, the contract has to be construed as per the principles contained in
Section 46 of the Contract Act.
48.    The learned counsel for the Corporation also relies upon Cauvery
Coffee Traders, Mangalore v. Hornor Resources (International) Co. Ltd.
(2011) 10 SCC 420 (hereinafter, „Cauvery Coffee Traders‟) to argue that
Contractors cannot approbate and reprobate. Since Contractors wanted to
obtain benefits under the work order and the terms of the work order
(including the General Conditions of Contract) were well known to them,
they cannot then argue that “I want the work order but without clause 7 &
9”. This argument would have been acceptable and appealing if the Clause
under the contract had some reasonable time limit fixed for the payment to
be made, while following a queue system. However, the Corporation argues
that there is no time limit fixed at all. There are too many contingencies and
conditions that are stipulated in order to make payment, namely:
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 39 of 58

             (i) funds should be available with the Corporation;
             (ii) funds should be available under specific head;
             (iii) the Contractors’ turn to be paid should arise; and
             (iv) Interest would not be paid for the delayed period.
49.    These four conditions are so vague and ambiguous into the future that
at no point would a Contractor, who had executed the work order, be able to
demand payment. On the one hand, the Contractor is expected to obtain all
the construction material at his own expenses, employ labour at his own
expenses and execute the work order. Thereafter, he has to submit his bills
to the Corporation and the Engineer-in-Charge has to pass the said bills. So
far, the conditions are reasonable. However, to say that even after the bills
are passed the payment would be made if and when the funds are available,
if and when Contractor’s turn comes, is in effect to say that it would make
the payment in 1 year, 5 years, 10 years or not pay at all. Such a condition in
any contract would be illegal, unconscionable and unreasonable. There is no
question of estoppel by election in such a case. In Cauvery Coffee Traders
(supra) the Supreme Court's observation on approbate and reprobate was in
the context of a transaction that stood concluded `after extensive and
exhaustive bilateral deliberations'. The position in the present cases is the
opposite. Here it is a standard form contract which is to be accepted without
much choice. The only choice before a Contractor is simply to not to apply
for or accept the work order itself. Thus, the authority cited on this
proposition would not apply.
50.    The counsel for the Corporation also relies upon New Bihari Biri
Leaves Co. v. State of Bihar (1981) 1 SCC 537 to submit that once a party
has accepted the terms of the contract and takes the advantage of the terms
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 40 of 58

which are in his favour, he cannot then repudiate the other parts of the
contract. This is again a general principle. The payment of consideration
goes to the root of a contract. Without consideration, there is no valid
contract. The contractor, apart from having the work orders placed on him,
and making the deposit of the earnest money/security amount has executed
the contract after making his own expenditure in terms of the material used
and the payments to labour and other overheads. Under the contract entered
into with the Corporation apart from placing of the work order and hoping of
clearance of the final bills, there is no other term of which the other
Contractor has taken advantage of. Any term of the contract has to be
construed within the four corners of law. A term in a contract which is
contrary to law has to be interpreted as per the applicable provisions. In that
sense, there is no repudiation by the Contractor.
51.    On the word `reasonable' the Corporation relies on Veerayee Ammal
Vs. Seeni Ammal AIR 2001 SC 2920. Even in the said judgment the
Supreme Court holds:
            "13. The word "reasonable" has in law prima facie
            meaning of reasonable in regard to those
            circumstances of which the person concerned is called
            upon to act reasonably knows or ought to know as to
            what was reasonable. It may be unreasonable to give
            an exact definition of the word "reasonable". The
            reason varies in its conclusion according to
            idiosyncrasy of the individual and the time and
            circumstances in which he thinks. The dictionary
            meaning of the "reasonable time" is to be so much time
            as is necessary, under the circumstances, to do
            conveniently what the contract or duty requires should
            be done in a particular case. In other words it means
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 41 of 58

            as soon as circumstances permit. In Law Lexicon it is
            defined to mean:
               "A reasonable time, looking at all the
               circumstances of the case; a reasonable time
               under ordinary circumstances; as soon as
               circumstances will permit; so much time as is
               necessary under the circumstances, conveniently
               to do what the contract requires should be done;
               some more protracted space than 'directly'; such
               length of time as may fairly, and properly, and
               reasonably be allowed or required, having regard
               to the nature of the act or duty and to the
               attending circumstances; all these convey more or
               less the same idea.""
Thus, the reasonableness has to be seen from the facts of each case.
52.    A harmonious interpretation of the Clauses in the General Conditions
of Contract and the amendment of 2006, has to be made, failing which, the
Clauses would be contrary to law and to the basic principles of valid
contracts. An indefinite open ended Clause for making payment would be
unreasonable and hence contrary to Section 46 of the Contract Act. Reading
the contract as a whole with the amendment of May, 2006, it is clear that
insofar as payment under Clause 9 of the General Conditions of Contract is
concerned, the Corporation itself specifies the time for payment of the final
bills as 6 months and 9 months. Thus, the contract itself considers and
specifies the reasonable time. However, the same is sought to be diluted by
specifying that this period shall be adhered to `as far as possible'. The queue
system and availability of funds are deemed by the Corporation to override
the 6 months and 9 months period. There is no reason as to why the court
should consider that the intention was to prescribe no upper limit for making
of payment and leave the period for payment as an open ended one.
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 42 of 58

Question No.2 - Refund of Security deposit
53.    In respect of each work order, the Contractors have to deposit 10% as
the security deposit at the initial stage. Upon the payment of the final bill
and after issuance of labour clearance certificate, the security deposit is
liable to be refunded. The Contractors have, in some of the appeals included
the security deposit amount in the principal amount claimed and in some
other cases the refund of security deposit has been sought for separately. In
either case, there is no doubt that the security deposit is liable to be refunded
after the submission of the documents, certificates from the Labour Officer.
Clause 17 and Clause 45 relating to refund of security deposit reads as
under:
            “CLAUSE 17
            Contractor liable for damages, defects during
            maintenance period :
               If the contractor or his working people or servants
            shall break, deface, injure or destroy any part of
            building in which they may be working, or any
            building, road, road kerb, fence, enclosure, water pipe,
            cables, drains, electric or telephone post or wires,
            trees, grass or grassland, or cultivated ground
            contiguous to the premises on which the work or any
            part is being executed, or if any damage shall happen
            to the work while in progress, from any cause whatever
            or if any defect, shrinkage or other faults appears in
            the work within twelve months (six months in the case
            of work costing Rs.5.00 lacs and below except road
            work) after a certificate final or otherwise of its
            completion shall have been given by the Engineer-in-
            Charge as aforesaid arising out of defect or improper
            materials or workmanship the contract shall upon
            receipt of a notice in writing on that behalf make the
            same good at his own expense or in default the
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 43 of 58

            Engineer-in-Charge cause the same to be made good
            by other workmen and deduct the expense from any
            sums that may be due or at any time thereafter may
            become due to the contractor, or from his security
            deposit or the proceeds of sale thereof or of a sufficient
            portion thereof. The security deposit of the contractor
            shall not be refunded before the expiry of twelve
            months (six months in the case of work costing Rs.5.00
            lacs except dense carpet works) after the issue of the
            certificate final or otherwise, of completion of work or
            till the final bill has been prepared and passed
            whichever is later. In case of dense carpet works the
            Security Deposit of the contractor shall not be
            refunded before the expiry of 5 & 7 years of
            maintenance from last day of the month in which a
            particular road is completed in case of binder of
            penetration 60/70 grade & CRMB 60 binders
            respectively.
            CLAUSE 45
            Release of Security deposit after labour clearance :
                Security Deposit of the work shall not be refunded
            till the contractor produces a clearance certificate
            from the Labour Officer. As soon as the work is
            virtually complete the contractor shall apply for the
            clearance certificate to the Labour Officer under
            intimate on to the Engineer-in-Charge. The Engineer-
            in-Charge on receipt of the said communication, shall
            write to the Labour Officer to intimate if any complaint
            is pending against the contractor in respect of the
            work. If complaint is pending on record till after 3
            months after completion of the work and/or no
            communication is received from the Labour Officer to
            this effect till six months after the date of completion it
            will be deemed to have received the clearance
            certificate and the security Deposit will be released if
            otherwise due.”
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 44 of 58

54.    Clauses 17 and 45 relating to security deposits have also been
interpreted in the Circular dated 10th June 2014, as under:
            “Clause 17:- The security deposit shall not be
            refunded before expiry of one year from the date of
            completion of work.
            Clause 45:- Security deposit shall not be refunded till
            the contractor produces clearance certificate from the
            Labour Officer.
55.    A perusal of all the aforementioned Clauses reveals that:
       a) For refund of security deposit, a clearance certificate is needed
       from the Labour Officer;
       b) Once the work is completed, the Contractor would apply for the
       clearance certificate under intimation to the Engineer-in-Charge;
       c) The Engineer-in-Charge has to communicate to the Labour Officer
       if there is any complaint in respect of the work executed;
       d) If after completion of the work, 3 months have elapsed and no
       communication is received, after date of completion, there is a
       deemed clearance certificate and the security deposit is liable to be
       released.
56.    Thus, irrespective of the date of payment of the principal amount, the
security deposit cannot be held back beyond a period of 6 months from the
date when application is made to the Labour Officer for issuance of the
clearance certificate. These Clauses do not brook any delay in so far as the
refund of the security deposit is concerned. Moreover, there is no clarity
whatsoever as to how the refund of Security deposit is subject to the queue
system and availability of funds. The Clause itself does not contemplate any
such condition. Thus, the security deposit is liable to be refunded upon the
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 45 of 58

compliance of the conditions in Clauses 17 and 45 of the General Conditions
of Contract. The Supreme Court also directed immediate payment of
Security deposit in its order dated 5th January 2018.
Order XII Rule 6
57.    Further reliance has also been placed on a number of orders in respect
of Order XII Rule 6 and as to when a decree on admission can be passed. In
the present case, no oral evidence is actually required to be adduced. The
awarding of the contract is not disputed. The execution of the contract is not
disputed. The final bill having been passed by the Engineer-in-Charge is not
disputed. What is disputed is the time when the payment is to be made. This
is only a matter of interpretation of the Clauses of the General Conditions of
Contract. In cases where there are factual disputes, evidence can be led to
adjudicate those facts. However, in the present cases, there being no factual
dispute and only a question of application of the Clauses of the General
Conditions of Contract and their interpretation is involved, the approach of
the Trial Court in applying Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC cannot be faulted.
58.    It is the settled position in law, even in the authorities cited by the
Corporation that when the pleadings are clear, they constitute admission. A
reading of the written statement shows that the Corporation does not
seriously dispute the passing of the final bills and the amount of Security
deposited. Only the interest component is seriously disputed.
59.    As per Himani Alloys Ltd. v. Tata Steel Ltd. (2011) 15 SCC 273 cited
by the Corporation, the test for the invoking of Order XII Rule 6 of the CPC
being that the admission so made must clear and unequivocal, on the face of
which it is impossible for the party making it to succeed. In the light of the
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 46 of 58

stand in the written statement, there is a clear admission as to the final bill
amount as also that the Contractor has to wait in a queue. Thus the Trial
Court has rightly invoked the provisions of Order XII Rule 6.
Question No.3- Whether Interest is payable?
60.    The question that now arises is as to whether interest is payable on the
principal amount and the delay in refund of security deposit. This question
has been considered by two Single Judges of this Court in cases involving
almost identical clauses in R.K. Pabbi v. DDA [CS(OS) No. 1368/2012
dated 9th January, 2014] and Varinder Jeet Singh v. Municipal
Corporation of Delhi & Anr. 2013 (134) DRJ 284 (hereinafter, „Varinder
Jeet Singh‟), which in turn relied upon the decision of a Single Judge of this
Court in Jagbir Singh (supra).The judgement in Varinder Jeet Singh
(supra), after discussing the law on the subject held:
            “15. It is settled law that if a person is deprived of the
            use of money to which he is legitimately entitled, he
            has a right to be monetarily compensated for the said
            deprivation. [Ref: (1992) 1 SCC 508: Secretary,
            Irrigation Deptt. Govt. of Orissa vs. G.C. Roy; (2004)
            5 SCC 65: Ghaziabad Development Authority vs.
            Balbir Singh, and (2009) 8 SCC 507: Sri
            Venkateswara Syndicate vs. Oriental Insurance
            Company Ltd. and Anr.]. The object behind awarding
            interest to a party, who has suffered loss, due to a
            legitimate deprivation of the enjoyment of the use of
            money that he was entitled to rightfully, is to balance
            the equities and while doing so, the facts involved in
            each case must be examined by the Court.
            16. The statutory provisions with regard to payment of
            interest are laid down in Section 3 of the Interest Act,
            1978, that provides that in any proceedings for the
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 47 of 58

            recovery of any debt or damages or in any proceedings
            in which a claim for interest in respect of any debt or
            damages already paid is made, the court may, if it
            thinks fit, allow interest to the person entitled to the
            debt or damages or to the person making such claim,
            as the case may be, at a rate not exceeding the current
            rate of interest, if the proceedings do not relate to a
            debt payable by virtue of a written instrument at a
            certain time, from the date mentioned in this regard in
            a written notice given by the person entitled or the
            person making the claim to the person liable, then
            interest will be claimed, till the date of institution of the
            proceedings.
            17. In the present case, admittedly, the plaintiff had
            issued a notice dated 09.04.2009, calling upon the
            defendants/MCD to clear the outstanding dues with
            interest payable @ 24% per annum. In view of the
            provisions contained in Section 3 of the Interest Act,
            1978, the plaintiff is entitled to claim interest from the
            date, the principal amount was due and payable to him
            by the defendants/MCD...”
61.    In almost similar circumstances, a Contractor had filed a suit under
Order XXXVII of the CPC against the MCD claiming interest on delayed
payments. In NDMC v. Prem Chand Gupta [RFA Nos. 623/2017 and
628/2017 dated 17th July, 2017] (hereinafter, „Prem Chand Gupta‟) a Single
Judge of this Court held that under Clause 9 of the General Conditions of
Contract, interest is liable to be paid. The relevant portion is extracted herein
below:
            “5. In view of the ratio laid down in the case of M/s
            N.K. Garg Co. (supra), it is held that the
            appellant/defendant cannot claim on the basis of
            Clause 9, that it is not liable to pay interest. The court
            below has thus rightly decreed the suit for the rate of
RFA 43/2017                                                             Page 48 of 58

            interest at 8/9% per annum.”
62.    This judgment has relied upon another judgment of a Single Judge of
this Court in       Union of India v. N.K. Garg 2015 (224) DLT 668
(hereinafter, „N.K. Garg‟) wherein the Court had held that non-payment of
interest would be contrary to the provisions of the Interest Act, 1978. The
Corporation argues that the judgment in N.K. Garg (supra) has been stayed
by a Division Bench of this Court in FAO(OS) No. 73/2016 vide order dated
9th March, 2016. However, the judgment in Prem Chand Gupta (supra) has
not been reversed or set aside. In fact, the order in Prem Chand Gupta
(supra) has also been reiterated subsequently on 14th September, 2017, when
the Corporation had sought recall of the order dated 17 thJuly, 2017 on the
ground that the judgment in N.K. Garg (supra) had been stayed. While
dealing with the judgment in N.K. Garg (supra), the Single Judge of this
Court reiterated the order dated 17th July, 2017 in the following terms:
            2. The applications for recall of the judgment dated
            17.7.2017 are misconceived. Whenever a judgment
            is appealed from and operation of the judgment is
            stayed, it is the operative part of the judgment
            which is stayed and not the legal position on the
            basis of which the case is decided. This is because
            a judgment is judgment between two private
            parties and is a judgment in personam and not a
            judgment in rem. The judgment of this Court dated
            17.7.2017 relying upon Union of India Vs. M/s
            N.K. Garg & Co. 2015 (224) DLT 668 is therefore
            not wrong as argued by the appellant and simply
            because the judgment in the case of M/s N.K. Garg
            & Co. (supra) has been challenged before a
            Division Bench of this Court and the Division
            Bench has stayed operation of the judgment in the
            case of M/s N.K. Garg & Co. (supra).
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 49 of 58

            3. If the contention of the applicant/appellant is
            accepted as correct, then, the same would result in
            the fact that if a case is decided on a particular
            legal position, and the judgment in that case is
            subject matter of appeal and operation of which is
            stayed, then, no further case can at all be decided
            in terms of the legal proposition laid down in the
            judgment which is appealed.
             4. Another argument which is urged before this
            Court is that other coordinate benches of this
            Court have held that in view of clause that interest
            is not payable, hence, interest could not be paid,
            however, the argument is misconceived because
            the judgment in the case of M/s N.K. Garg & Co.
            (supra) proceeds on the basis that such a clause
            denying interest is itself hit by Section 23 of the
            Contract Act, 1872 and hence such a clause
            denying interest is void and therefore cannot be
            relied upon.”
63.    On this aspect, the Corporation unabashedly relies on the amendment
dated 19th May, 2006. In effect, therefore, the Corporation says that it would
not pay any interest in case of delayed payments as per the amended
conditions of contract. Thus, even if a Contractor is willing to wait, for God
knows how long, he would not be entitled to any interest.
64.    The provisions of Section 3 of The Interest Act, 1978 and Section 34
of the CPC clearly recognize that the Court may allow interest to the person
entitled to the debt or damages. The question is whether interest would be
awardable even if the contract prohibits the same. The question of award of
interest in commercial contracts has been discussed by the Supreme Court in
Union of India Vs. M/s. Bright Power Projects (I) P. Ltd (2015) 7 SCALE
638 (hereinafter `Bright Power') and recently in Chittaranjan Maity Vs.
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 50 of 58

Union of India (2017) 9 SCC 611 (hereinafter `Chittaranjan Maity'). Both
these cases dealt with the prohibition of award of interest in the context of
Section 31(7)(a) of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter,
„1996 Act‟). In these two cases the Supreme Court held that when the terms
of the agreement had prohibited award of interest, the arbitrator could not
award interest pendente lite.
65.    Clause 9 in the present case, which deals with interest not being liable
to be paid, merely stipulates as under:
            "Clause 9.............. No interest shall be payable to the
            contractor in case of delay in payment on account of
            non-availability of fund in the particular head of
            account of MCD.
            (i) If the tendered value of work is upto Rs. 5 lacs: 6
            months
            (ii) If the tendered value of work exceeds Rs. 5 lacs: 9
            months”
66.    The Clause in the present case does not prohibit award of interest. It
merely stipulates that no interest is payable in case of delay due to non-
availability of funds, for a period of 6 months and 9 months, meaning
thereby any delay beyond the said period would attract interest. This is in
contradistinction to clauses which contain absolute prohibitions for payment
of interest. The Supreme Court in Secy, Irrigation Deptt Govt of Orissa Vs.
G.C.Roy (1992) 1 SCC 508 (hereinafter `G.C.Roy') held as under:
            "43. The question still remains whether arbitrator has
            the power to award interest pendente lite, and if so on
            what principle. We must reiterate that we are dealing
            with the situation where the agreement does not
            provide for grant of such interest nor does it prohibit
            such grant. In other words, we are dealing with a case
            where the agreement is silent as to award of interest.
RFA 43/2017                                                           Page 51 of 58

            On a conspectus of aforementioned decisions the
            following principles emerge:
            (i) A person deprived of the use of money to which he is
            legitimately entitled has a right to be compensated for
            the deprivation, call it by any name. It may be called
            interest, compensation or damages. This basic
            consideration is as valid for the period the dispute is
            pending before the arbitrator as it is for the period
            prior to the arbitrator entering upon the reference.
            This is the principle of Section 34, Civil Procedure
            Code, and there is no reason or principle to hold
            otherwise in the case of arbitrator.
            (ii) An arbitrator is an alternative form (sic forum) for
            resolution of disputes arising between the parties. If so,
            he must have the power to decide all the disputes or
            differences arising between the parties. If the
            arbitrator has no power to award interest pendente
            lite, the party claiming it would have to approach the
            court for that purpose, even though he may have
            obtained satisfaction in respect of other claims from
            the arbitrator. This would lead to multiplicity of
            proceedings.
            (iii) An arbitrator is the creature of an agreement It is
            open to the parties to confer upon him such powers
            and prescribe such procedure for him to follow, as they
            think fit, so long as they are not opposed to law. (The
            proviso to Section 41 and Section 3 of Arbitration Act
            illustrate this point). All the same, the agreement must
            be in conformity with law. The arbitrator must also act
            and make his award in accordance with the general
            law of the land and the agreement.
            (iv) Over the years, the English and Indian Courts have
            acted on the assumption that where the agreement does
            not prohibit and a party to the reference makes a claim
            for interest, the arbitrator must have the power to
            award interest pendente lite. Thawardas has not been
            followed in the later decisions of this Court. It has been
RFA 43/2017                                                          Page 52 of 58

            explained and distinguished on the basis that in that
            case there was no claim for interest but only a claim
            for unliquidated damages. It has been said repeatedly
            that observations in the said judgment were not
            intended to lay down any such absolute or universal
            rule as they appear to, on first impression. Until Jena
            case almost all the Courts in the country had upheld
            the power of the arbitrator to award interest pendente
            lite. Continuity and certainty is a highly desirable
            feature of law.
            (v) Interest pendente lite is not a matter of substantive
            law, like interest for the period anterior to reference
            (pre-reference period). For doing complete justice
            between the parties, such power has always been
            inferred"
67.    The judgment of the Constitution Bench in G.C. Roy (supra) was
under the Arbitration Act, 1940 where a provision similar to Section
37(1)(a) of the 1996 Act, was not present. G.C. Roy (supra) clearly holds
that interest would be payable depending on the terms of the contract.
68.    Such a clause is clearly violative of the provisions of the Interest Act,
1978 and the Contract Act as has been held in Prem Chand Gupta (supra)
wherein this Court has held that non-payment of interest is invalid and void
as per Sections 16(2) and 23 of the Contract Act.
69.    A conjoint reading of Clauses 7 & 9 along with the amendment dated
19th May, 2006, clearly shows that for the payment of bills, the Contractors
have to follow the queue basis and as and when the amount is available
under the particular head of account, the amount would be payable. The
amendment does not, however, have a condition that no interest is payable
for delayed payment. Such a condition exists only in Clause 7. Clause 9,
therefore, when read with the amendment has to mean that the Corporation
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 53 of 58

itself considers 6 months and 9 months to be the reasonable periods for
which the payments of the final bills can be held back. Obviously, therefore,
if payments are made, whether on a queue basis or otherwise, beyond the
period of 6 months and 9 months, interest is payable.
70.    In view of the question of interest having been gone into detail and
non-payment having been held to be illegal by various Single Judges of this
Court, in cases involving the Corporations, it is held that non-payment of
interest beyond the period of 6 months and 9 months, as stipulated in Clause
9 of the General Conditions of Contract, would be contrary to law. Hence,
the Contractors are entitled for payment of interest after a period of 6
months - 9 months respectively.
71.    It is completely unconscionable and illegal for the Corporation to
argue that no interest is payable. Thus, in those cases where the Contractor
has complied with the various conditions in respect of Principal and refund
of Security deposit, interest would be payable.
Conclusions and Findings
72.    The General Conditions of Contract i.e., clauses 7 and 9 which are
admittedly part of the work orders issued by both the NrDMC and the
EDMC are being tested in these batch of cases. A contract which stipulates
that the consideration would be paid in an unforeseen time in the future
based on certain factors which are indeterminable, would in effect be a
contract without consideration. Even if the contract is held to be a valid
contract, then the concept of `reasonableness' has to be read into the same.
Section 46 of the Contract Act and the explanation thereto is clear that
“what is a reasonable time is a question of fact in each case.” A
RFA 43/2017                                                     Page 54 of 58

Corporation which gets works executed cannot therefore include terms in
the contract which are per se unconscionable and unreasonable as -
       a)      There is no fixed time period as to when the funds would be
       available;
       b)      There is also no fixed mechanism to determine as to when and
       in what manner the head of account is to be determined and as to how
       the Contractor would acquire knowledge of these two facts;
       c)     There is also no certainty as to how many persons are in the
       queue prior to the Contractor and for what amounts;
       d)     There is enormous ambiguity in the receipt under the particular
       heads of accounts.
73.    These clauses in effect say that the Contractor is left with no remedy
if the Corporation does not pay for the work that has been executed. Such a
Clause would be illegal and contrary to law. Such clauses, even in
commercial contracts, would be contrary to Section 25 read with Section 46
of the Contract Act.
74.    The clauses do not specify an outer time limit for payment. The
expression reasonable time has to be `a time'. The concept of time itself is
ensconced with specificity and precision. Clause 9 is the opposite of being
precise. It is as vague and ambiguous as it could be because it depends on
factors which are totally extraneous to the contract, namely -
      Allotment of funds to the Corporation by the Government;
      Allotment of funds in a particular head;
      Allotment of funds for payments who are in queue prior to the
        contractor;
75.    Thus, these factors, which are beyond the control of the Contractor
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 55 of 58

and which would govern the payment of consideration, make the said
clauses of the contract completely unreasonable. The clauses have to thus,
be read or interpreted in a manner so as to instill reasonableness in them.
76.    By applying the above said principles, in respect of final bills raised
by Contractors for works executed, that have been approved by the
Engineer-in-Charge, the Clauses have to be read in the following manner:
       a)      Reasonable time for making of payments of final bills in
       respect of work orders up to Rs.5 lakhs shall be 6 months and work
       orders exceeding Rs.5 lakhs shall be 9 months from the date when the
       bill is passed by the Engineer-in-Charge.
       b)      The queue basis can be applicable for the payments to be made
       in chronology. However, the outer limit of 6 months and 9 months
       cannot be exceeded, while applying the queue system.
       c)      The payments are held to become due and payable immediately
       upon the expiry of 6 months and 9 months and any non-payment
       would attract payment of interest for the delayed periods.
       d)      A conjoint reading of Clauses 7 & 9 along with the amendment
       dated 19th May, 2006, clearly shows that for the payment of bills, the
       contractors have to follow the queue basis and as and when the
       amount is available under the particular head of account, the amount
       would be payable. The amendment does not, however, have a
       condition that no interest is payable for delayed payment. Such a
       condition exists only in Clause 7. Clause 9, therefore, when read with
       the amendment has to mean that the Corporation itself considers 6
       months and 9 months to be the reasonable periods for which the
       payments of the final bills can be held back. Obviously, therefore, if
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 56 of 58

       payments are made, whether on a queue basis or otherwise, beyond
       the period of 6 months and 9 months, interest is payable.
       e)     To the extent that queue basis is applied only for clearing of
       payments which do not extend beyond the period of 6 months and 9
       months period, it is reasonable. However, if the queue basis is applied
       in order to make Contractors wait for indefinite periods for receiving
       payments, then the same would be unreasonable and would have to
       therefore be read down.
       f)     The Security amount/Earnest money deposited would be
       refundable upon the fulfilment of the conditions contained in Clauses
       17 and 45 of the General Conditions of Contract. Interest would be
       payable on delayed payments.
Final decree on facts
77.    The Trial Court, in its judgment dated 26th May, 2016, has directed a
decree for the entire sum along with interest. The interest rate is being
modified and insofar as refund of security amount is concerned, interest is
being granted only from the date of filing of the suit, as the records do not
reflect either compliance or non-compliance with Clauses 17 and 45 of the
General Conditions of Contract.
78.    On the basis of the facts, the pleadings and the evidence recorded and
the conclusions above, the Contractor’s suit is liable to be decreed as under:
       (i)    Decree for principal amount of Rs.3,96,597/- as per the final
              bill duly approved by the Engineer-in-Charge along with
              interest @ 8% simple interest p.a. payable upon the expiry of
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 57 of 58

            six months from 31st July, 2013, i.e.,date of approval of final
            bill;
       (ii) Decree for a sum of Rs.46,664/- towards refund of security
            deposit along with interest @ 8% from the date of institution of
            suit till date;
79.    The Corporation is directed to compute the payments to be made to
the Contractor in terms of the principal, security deposit and interest as
decreed above, within four weeks. The payment shall be made within 8
weeks thereafter, failing which, interest @ 12% per annum would be
payable, upon expiry of the said period till date of payment.
80.    The impugned judgment/decree is modified in the above terms.
Decree sheet be drawn accordingly. Appeal stands disposed of along with all
pending applications. No order as to costs.
81.    By way of separate order passed today in these appeals, certain
guidelines are issued.      These guidelines shall be read along with the
judgment pronounced today in all these appeals.
                                                  PRATHIBA M. SINGH, J.
                                                          Judge
MARCH 22, 2018/Rahul/dk
RFA 43/2017                                                     Page 58 of 58

$~
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ RFA Nos.160/2017, 167/2017, 171/2017, 208/2017, 136/2017, 56/2017,
58/2017, 50/2017, 53/2017, 166/2017, 573/2017, 571/2017, 570/2017,
397/2017, 42/2017, 43/2017, 419/2017, 420/2017, 421/2017, 422/2017,
425/2017, 427/2017, 429/2017, 430/2017, 431/2017, 432/2017, 434/2017,
436/2017, 437/2017, 438/2017, 439/2017, 440/2017, 443/2017, 444/2017,
445/2017, 447/2017, 558/2017, 563/2017, 574/2017, 410/2017, 418/2017,
1009/2016 & 560/2017
       CORAM:
        JUSTICE PRATHIBA M. SINGH
                            ORDER
       %                    22.03.2018
       These are a batch of appeals which have arisen out of disputes
between Contractors/Plaintiffs (hereinafter, „Contractors‟) on the one hand
and the North Delhi Municipal Corporation (hereinafter, „NrDMC‟) and
East Delhi Municipal Corporation (hereinafter, „EDMC‟), on the other.
NrDMC and EDMC are collectively referred to as `Corporations'. The facts
in each appeal are different and hence separate judgements are being passed
in each of the appeals.
       The present guidelines are being issued in all the appeals. The Court
has had the opportunity of perusing the trial court records in all these 43
appeals. A perusal of the records reveals the following:-
    1. In most cases, the Contractors who are awarded the work orders do
       not submit the interim or final bills to the Engineer-in-Charge for
       approval;
    2. The final measurement recordal is done by the Engineer-in-Charge;
    3. The final bill is also prepared and passed by the Engineer-in-Charge
       on his own accord and the Contractor then accepts it;
RFA 43/2017                                                       Page 1 of 4

    4. The procedure for obtaining labour clearance certificate from the
        Labour Officer is not followed;
    5. Once the bills are passed, Contractors are made to wait endlessly for
        their payments on the ground of non-availability of funds;
    6. Even for refunds of Security Deposit and Earnest money deposits, the
        Contractor is made to wait till the final payment is made;
    7. The measurement books and the photographs of work, actually carried
        out, are not produced in evidence.
        The above process is contrary to the General Conditions of Contract.
It is therefore, necessary and important that all the steps of the Contract are
followed by the Contractors and the Corporations. The following guidelines
are being passed:
    1. Along with the work order, all the Clauses of the General Conditions
        of Contract should be attached;
    2. On the award of the Work order, periodic inspections of the work
        being carried out should be done by the Engineer-in-Charge;
    3. If possible, photographs of the works at different stages should be
        taken and maintained on the record;
    4. Interim bills should be submitted by the Contractor – duly certifying
        the work which has been carried out;
    5. Final bills should be submitted by the Contractor – duly certifying the
        work carried out along with photographs;
    6. The Bill should be scrutinised by the Engineer-in-Charge, works
        should be recorded in the measurement book and thereafter, the bill
        should be passed;
RFA 43/2017                                                        Page 2 of 4

   7. Once the Bill is passed, the payment schedule of 6 months and 9
       months should be adhered to. Delay in payments would result in
       Interest being levied;
   8. For refunds of Security deposit and Earnest Money deposit, the
       Contractor should unscrupulously comply with the conditions in
       Clauses 17 and 45. For refunds to be made, payment of final bill need
       not be awaited. Once the conditions of Clauses 17 and 45 are
       complied with and the final bill is passed, refunds ought to be made;
   9. In suits relating to recovery of Contractor’s dues, all the evidence
       including the NIT, General Conditions of Contract, periodic
       inspection reports, Final bill as submitted, Final bill as passed,
       Measurements carried out, Photographs etc., should be produced and
       duly exhibited.
   10.IT infrastructure ought to be created to maintain records of the work
       orders, inspection reports, final bills, photographs etc., digitally, as it
       is noticed that the trial court record does not contain all the relevant
       documents and in several cases, different versions of clauses are
       relied upon by both sides, bills are not properly understandable and
       there is no evidence of actual inspections or measurements having
       been taken. Maintenance of digital records will make it more
       transparent and easily accessible for the officials and for production in
       the Court in case of future litigation.
       Adherence to the above shall ensure that the works are duly carried
out as per the quality standards prescribed and there is proper record of work
being done. Once the work is carried out payments ought not to be delayed,
RFA 43/2017                                                         Page 3 of 4

inasmuch as delay in payments compromises on availability of quality civil
work for the Corporations, who take care of basic amenities for citizens such
as roads, pavements, civil works, sewerage lines etc.
       These guidelines shall be read along with the judgments pronounced
today in these appeals.
                                                PRATHIBA M. SINGH, J.
                                                         Judge
MARCH 22, 2018/Rahul/dk
RFA 43/2017                                                      Page 4 of 4


