*                    IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI
%                      Judgment reserved on: 03.08.2009
                       Judgment delivered on:06.08.2009
+                       CRL. APPEAL 11/2001
       MANTORI @ NOOR MOHD.                     …Appellant
                     Through : Mr. K.B.Andley, Sr. Adv. with
                                 Mr. M.Shamikh, Advocate
                                  versus
       STATE (GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI) …Respondent
                     Through : Mr.Pawan Sharma, Advocate
                        CRL. APPEAL 103/2001
       BABU KHAN                              …Appellant
                     Through : Mr. Riaz Mohd., Advocate
                                  versus
       STATE (GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI) …Respondent
                     Through : Mr.Pawan Sharma, Advocate
                        CRL. APPEAL 24/2001
       LACHHO @ BIJLI                        …Appellant
                     Through : Ms. Ritu Gauba, Advocate
                                  versus
       STATE (GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI) …Respondent
                     Through : Mr.Pawan Sharma, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE INDERMEET KAUR
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
    to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?                  Yes
3. Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?           Yes
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                         Page 1 of 26

: PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
1.           Vide      impugned     judgment     and   order     dated
2.12.2000, appellants Babu Ram and Mantori have been
convicted for the offence of murdering Rekha. All appellants
have been convicted for the offence of conspiracy to murder
Rekha.       Vide     order    of sentence   dated   5.12.2000,     the
appellants have been convicted to undergo sentence for life
and to pay a fine in sum of Rs.500/- each.
2.           The case of the prosecution, which as per the
impugned judgment, stands established in the light of the
evidence led, has been very finely summarized in para 43 of
the impugned decision and we can do no better other than to
reproduce      the     findings   pertaining  to  the   incriminating
circumstances noted by the learned Trial Judge. The same are
as under:-
      “43. In my considered view, the prosecution has
      successfully brought home beyond pale of all doubts,
      the following facts:-
      (a)    the deceased Rekha, a eunuch was disciple of
      A-1 Lachho, another eunuch;
      (b)    the deceased was living in the area of Pahar
      Ganj with other eunuches, in particular PW5 Meena
      and PW6 Anita. She was living a life in style, would
      enjoy good clothes, sport a scooter fitted with stereo,
      thus indicating she had a very good income. She had
      adopted a child of about 3/3.5 years. The evidence
      indicates A-1 had cause of grudge against the
      deceased;
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                           Page 2 of 26

      (c)    on 1.10.89, A-1 Lachho brought four persons,
      including A-2 Mantori @ Noor Mohammod and A-3
      Babu Khan to Dargah Nazaria Peer near Mehrauli and
      at her request Kale Baba Khan, the then Khitmadgar
      of the Dargah allowed the said four persons including
      A-2 to A-3 to stay as guests in the Dargah;
      (d)    on 3.10.89 A-1 Lachho came to the house of
      the deceased in the morning, took lunch with her and
      asked her (the deceased) to take her (A-1) to Qutub,
      Dargah Nazaria Peer, Chhatarpur Mandir, etc. on her
      scooter. At this request, the deceased took A-1
      Lachho on her scooter towards Qutab, also taking
      along her adopted child;
      (e)    at about 3/3.30 p.m. A-1 Lachho came to
      Dargah Nazaria Peer with the adopted child of the
      deceased and talked in secrecy with A-2 and A-3
      besides two others staying there as guests at her
      instance, whereupon, the said four persons went
      towards Qutab Dargah which was to take them on a
      route leading into the jungle.
      (f)    After about half an hour, at 4.00 p.m. or so on
      3.10.89, A-1 came out of Dargah Nazaria Peer
      leaving a message with PW4 to the effect that if
      Rekha (the deceased) was to come there, she was to
      be told that A-1 Lachho had gone to Qutab Dargah.
      Instead of going towards the Qutab, A-1 Lachho was
      seen proceeding in opposite direction i.e., towards
      Katwaria Sarai;
      (g)    Just as A-1 Lachhco had set out towards the
      Katwaria Sarai, the four persons mentioned above,
      which would include A-2 and A-3, were seen coming
      running in a nervous state and badly perspiring, and
      immediately on arrival of the said persons A-1
      snatched the child from the arms of PW4 and ran
      with the said four persons towards Katwaria Sarai;
      (h)    A-1 Lachho returned the adopted child of the
      deceased Rekha at her residence to PW6 Anita at
      about 5/5.30 p.m. on 3.10.89 with the message that
      Rekha had stayed back for the night at Mehrauli;
      (i)    On 4.10.89 at about 8.45 a.m. PW2 Sukhbir
      during his patrolling in the jungle as Chowkidar
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                       Page 3 of 26

      stumbled upon the scooter Ex.PX of the deceased
      and her dead body lying at some distance with a cut
      injury in the neck. After information was lodged with
      the police, during inspection of the scene of crime,
      besides the personal effects of the deceased, a
      dagger blood stained Ex.P11 and angocha Ex.P10A
      were also found lying in close vicinity of the scene of
      crime, with angocha being positively identified as in
      use of A-2 Mantori ;
      (j)    upon arrest on the basis of disclosure made
      during interrogation by A-2 Mantori and A-3 Babu
      Khan their respective clothes including shirt Ex.P12
      and tehmad Ex.P13 of A-2, and shirt Ex.P14 and
      tehmad Ex.P15 of A-3 Babu Khan, were recovered
      from the bushes very close to the scene of crime on
      7.10.89 and 18.10.89. All these clothes had blood
      stains which have been found by the CFSL to be of
      Group “A” (human origin, the same as blood Group of
      the deceased).
      (k)    the post mortem examination of the dead body
      of Rekha brought out that she died on account of
      shock as a result of sharp incised big wound present
      in the neck of the size of 20x10 cms and depth of 15
      cms which had cut the internal carotid, other vessels,
      along with muscles and facia, which was possibly
      caused with dagger Ex. P11 and which injury had
      been sustained sometime between 1345 hours to
      1745 hours on 3.10.89, which would be proximate to
      the time when the four guests staying at Dargah at
      the instance of A-1, including A-2 and A-3, had
      proceeded into the jungle after talking with her so as
      to return after half an hour in nervous state.”
3.           Noting the aforesaid incriminating circumstances
and the evidence wherefrom the same has been held to be
established, the learned Trial Judge has noted a few decisions
pertaining to the principles of law applicable to circumstantial
evidence and the law of conspiracy as also the last seen
evidence theory.        The conclusions have been drawn by the
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                        Page 4 of 26

learned Trial Judge in para 48 and 49 of the decision which
read as under:-
      “48. Applying the above said principles of law to the
      facts established by the prosecution in this case, it is
      found the guilt of the A-1 to A-3 has been brought
      home beyond all manner of doubts. The evidence
      indicates A-1 had cause of grudge against the
      deceased. A-1 had brought A-2 and A-3, along with
      two others, to Delhi and got them accommodated as
      guests in Dargah Nazaria Peer sometime in the
      evening of 1.10.89. A-1 went to the house of the
      deceased in the morning of 3.10.89 and sweet talked
      her into accompanying her on the pretext of visiting
      Qutab, Dargah Nazaria Peer, Chatarpur Mandir etc.
      on her scooter. On this journey, which proved to be
      fatal for the deceased, her adopted child of 3/3.5
      years was also accompanying her. Sometime around
      3/3.30 p.m. on 3.10.89 A-1 came to Dargah Nazaria
      Peer only with the adopted child of the deceased.
      This only gives rise to one possibility that she had
      somehow got separated from the deceased on some
      pretext or the other in order to arrange, as the
      circumstances would show, that the deceased to be
      fatally attacked in the jungles near the Dargah.
      When A-1 came to Dargah Nazaria Peer at aforesaid
      time, she was seen talking in secrecy with A-1 and A-
      3 and two others (absconding) who were staying as
      guests in the Dargah at her instance whereafter the
      said four persons went in the direction leading into
      the jungle where the murder actually took place. Just
      after half an hour or so of the four said persons
      having left, they were seen running out in
      perspiration and in nervous state when A-1 left the
      scene with them, also carrying along the adopted
      child of the deceased.         These circumstances
      definitely indicate knowledge about and involvement
      in the death of Rekha, the eunuch, in the jungle. The
      adopted child of the deceased was returned by A-1 to
      PW6 Anita at the house of the deceased sometime
      around 5/5.30 p.m. with the message that Rekha had
      stayed back for overnight at Mehrauli. Earlier, A-1
      had told PW4 that if Rekha was to come to Dargah,
      she was to be told that A-1 had gone to Qutab
      Dargah. Both these assertions by A-1 were false in
      that A-1 was seen proceeding in an opposite
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                       Page 5 of 26

      direction indicating she never intended to go towards
      Qutab and there was no occasion for A-1 to have told
      PW6 that Rekha was staying overnight at Mehrauli,
      since she had already died in the jungles and could
      not have given that kind of indication if she was yet
      to meet A-1 at Dargah Nazaria Peer. The false
      statements given to PW4 and PW6 one after the
      other conjointly indicate guilty knowledge.            The
      evidence has brought out that the shirts and
      tehmads of A-2 and A-3 respectively with blood
      stains were recovered at their instance from near the
      scene of crime. Besides this, angocha Ex.P10A of A-2
      had been recovered from near the dead body. These
      circumstances along with the conduct of A-2 and A-3
      in coming out of the jungle around the same time as
      the murder took place shows they had played an
      active role in the commission of the crime. Since
      they were all along moving and hobnobbing with A-1,
      under her instructions, it is sufficiently clear that they
      with A-1, and two said others, were party to a
      criminal conspiracy to commit the murder of Rekha,
      the eunuch.
      49.    The above facts and circumstances collectively
      indicate that it can reasonably be inferred that A-1
      intended to cause the death of Rekha, the eunuch
      and had arranged A-2 and A-3 with two others to
      came at Dargah Nazaria Peer, and had also made
      Rekha the eunuch to take the fatful journey in the
      direction of Qutab on 3.10.89 so that she could be
      way-laid by her said 6 conspirators and done to
      death in the jungle. The conduct of co-conspirators
      in going into the jungle immediately after talking to
      A-1 in secrecy when she arrived at Dargah Nazaria
      Peer at about 3/3.30 p.m. just before the death took
      place; and then rushing out of the jungle in a nervous
      state badly perspiring, and fleeing away from the
      scene is relevant even as against A-1 by virtue of
      section 10 Evidence Act. On the basis of same
      principle, the conduct of A-1 in giving false messages
      to PW4 and PW6 as mentioned above, and her
      conduct in arranging the availability of the deceased
      in the area where the murder took place are relevant
      also as against A-2 and A-3, who were her co-
      conspirators.          The circumstances proved are
      consistent only the hypothesis of the guilt of A-1 to
      A-3 and they are not explainable on any other
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                          Page 6 of 26

      hypothesis including that of innocence of any of
      these three accused persons. The circumstances
      proved show a complete chain that in all human
      probability, the murder had been committed by A-2
      and A-3 with two others (absconders), in furtherance
      of common object to achieve that end, pursuant to
      the criminal conspiracy in which each of them was a
      party.      These are the only rational deductions
      possible, as against mere fantastic possibilities of
      freak inferences to the contrary, based on probative
      force of facts and circumstances (State of UP Vs Hari
      Mohan 2000 VII A8 (SC) 389 relied upon). The case
      is distinguishable on facts from Saju Vs. State of
      Kerala 2000 III AD(Cr.) SC 433.”
4.           At the hearing of the appeals, learned counsel for
the appellants urged that Rekha being murdered in a forest
area near Idgah Mehraulli on 3.10.1989 is not disputed by
them. Learned counsel urged that what the appellants dispute
is that they were responsible for the murder of Rekha. Thus,
learned counsel submitted that such evidence which proves
the commission of the crime in the forest area and the victim
being Rekha, need not be looked into.      Counsel agreed that
only such evidence be considered which has been held to be
inculpatory of the appellants.
5.           Learned counsel urged that testimony of Sukhbir
PW-2, Sayeed Munir PW-4, Meena PW-5 and Anita PW-6
besides that of the investigating officer namely Insp.Bheem
Singh PW-17 and Insp.Satish Sharma PW-16 needs to be
considered.
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                     Page 7 of 26

6.           It all commenced when on 4.10.1989 Sukhbir PW-2
employed as a chowkidar by DDA reported for duty at 8:00 AM
and proceeded to the forest area near Idgah Mehraulli.         (It
appears that the duty of PW-2 was to keep a watch for
unauthorized encroachment in land belonging to DDA in
Mehraulli, where, huge illegal encroachments used to take
place and as of today have assumed alarming proportions).
He saw an abandoned two-wheeler scooter and the dead body
of a woman with pieces of cloth of a saree scattered around
the body. He went to PS Mehraulli and reported the said fact
which was entered in the daily diary vide DD No.3A Ex.PW-2/A.
7.           Insp.Bheem Singh PW-17, posted as the SHO of the
police station proceeded to the spot in the company of Sukhbir
and took along with him Const.Mahender Singh PW-13 and
Const.Kuldeep Singh PW-14. The three police officers reached
the spot along with Sukhbir. Indeed, they found a dead body
which was not of a woman but an eunuch. Insp.Bheem Singh
immediately made an endorsement Ex.PW-17/A beneath the
copy DD No.3A and sent Const.Kuldeep Singh PW-14 to the
police station for registration of an FIR for the offence of
murder as the neck of the person killed had been slit and it
was apparent that the deceased had been murdered. The FIR
was immediately registered. Crime team, a photographer and
a dog squad was summoned.        The crime team could detect
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                    Page 8 of 26

nothing worthy of lifting from the spot. The dog squad got no
clues as the sniffer dogs simply sniffed around the dead body
and a few meters here and there. HC Dharamvir Singh PW-3 a
photographer took 11 photographs of the place of occurrence
being Ex.PW-3/1 to Ex.PW-3/11.
8.           Insp.Bheem Singh collected torn pieces of saree,
collectively exhibited as Ex.P-1. A cup Ex.P-2. A pair of two
chappals Ex.P-3 and Ex.P-4.          Two empty bottles Ex.P-5 and
Ex.P-6. A nose pin Ex.P-7. Pieces of broken bangles Ex.P-8. A
hair pin Ex.P-9. A wrist watch Ex.P-10 and a gamcha Ex.P-10A
from near the dead body and recorded the said fact in the
seizure memo Ex.PW-2/B. He lifted blood stained soil and soil
sample from the spot as recorded in the memo Ex.PW-2/C. A
dagger Ex.P-11 was lifted a few meters away from the dead
body and was seized vide seizure memo Ex.PW-2/F. Its sketch
Ex.PW-2/E was drawn.            A two-wheeler scooter lying nearby
bearing registration No.DDM-7512 was seized as recorded in
the seizure memo Ex.PW-2/D.             The recovery memos were
prepared by the investigating officer and were signed by
Sukhbir PW-2.
9.           News had spread in the area of a dead body
recovered in the jungle.           As usually happens in India, an
inquisitive crowd proceeded to the jungle and in the crowd was
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                         Page 9 of 26

Sayeed Munir and one Kaley Baba Khan who immediately
recognized the dead body being that of Rekha.
10.          The dead body was seized and sent to the mortuary
at AIIMS where Dr.R.K.Sharma conducted post-mortem on
5.10.1989. The post-mortem commenced at 11:45 AM and the
post-mortem         report     Ex.PW-9/A  was   drawn     up      by
Dr.R.K.Sharma after the post-mortem in which he opined that
the time of death was about 42 to 46 hours prior to the post-
mortem.      He noted a sharp incised cut in the neck cutting
through the blood vessels, internal carotid and the neck
muscles. He also noted multiple contusions on the left and the
right thigh as also the lumber region.        He opined that the
cause of death was immediate and the result of injury No.1.
He noted that the body was of an eunuch. Penis was absent.
Small vagina and atrophic cliotoris was seen.               It was
subsequently opined by Dr.R.K.Sharma that the injuries could
possibly be inflicted with the dagger Ex.P-11.
11.          The investigating officer recorded the statements of
Sayeed Munir and Kale Baba as per which both of them stated
that they were khidmatgars/sewadars at the dargah Nazaria
Pir, Mehraulli, and that appellant Lachho was a visitor at the
dargah. Deceased Rekha, a disciple of Lachho used to visit the
dargah for offering prayers. On 1.10.1989 at around 8:30/9:00
PM in the night, Lachho came with four persons at the dargah.
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                        Page 10 of 26

Said persons had stayed at the dargah at the asking of Lachho
who gave Rs.100/- to Kale Baba for their expenses. The said
persons stayed at the dargah on 2.10.1989.      Whereas Kale
Baba further informed that he left the dargah in the afternoon
on 3.10.1989 and learnt on 4.10.1989 about a dead body
being found in the forest area, Sayeed Munir gave further
information that on 3.10.1989 Lachho had come to the dargah
with a small child in the late afternoon and had spoken with
the said three persons in a hushed manner by taking them to a
corner. After the talk, the four persons went towards Kutub
Dargah and half an hour thereafter, Lachho and the small child
left. Before leaving, Lachho told Sayeed Munir to tell Rekha
that she i.e. Lachho had gone to Kutub Dargah.                He
accompanied Lachho to some distance and since Lachho was
limping he carried the child in his arms.     Lachho did not
proceed in the direction towards Kutub Dargah but started
walking towards Katwaria Sarai.     They had hardly moved a
little distance, when the four persons who had stayed at the
Dargah and had left a few hours earlier came running in a
nervous state. The moment Lachho saw them, she snatched
the child from his arms and all of them ran towards Katwaria
Sarai. He was perplexed by their conduct but left it at that.
Next day he heard about a dead body being found and
curiosity took him to the jungle. He saw the dead body and
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                    Page 11 of 26

realized that Rekha had been murdered. Both, Kale Khan and
Sayeed Munir stated that if the four persons who had stayed at
the Dargah at the request of appellant Lachho were brought
before them they could recognize them.             The investigating
officer contacted Meena PW-5 and Anita PW-6 and recorded
their statements as per which Meena informed that she was
the disciple of Rekha who was, in the past, a disciple of
Lachho.     Rekha was a popular eunuch and had a lavish life
style.    Lachho was envious of Rekha.           In the morning of
3.10.1989 Lachho took Rekha and a child treated as a son by
Rekha to an Idgah in Mehraulli.           In the evening at around
5/5:30 PM Lachho left the child back telling Meena and Anita
that Rekha would come the next day as she had decided to
spend the night at the Dargah in Mehraulli.
12.          Obviously, Lachho was the person whose identity
was made known to the investigating officer and as per the
information given by Kale Khan and Sayeed Munir she was a
suspect. Only she could give the identity of the others named
as the ones who had stayed at her request in the Dargah
where     Sayeed      Munir    and   Kale  Khan   were  working      as
khidmatgars.          Lachho     was  apprehended    and   so    were
appellants Babu Khan and Mantori. The involvement, by name
of co-accused Raju @ Yakub (proclaimed offender) was made
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                          Page 12 of 26

known to the police as per the disclosure statement of Lachho.
The fourth person could not be identified.
13.          As per the prosecution, appellant Mantori and Babu
Khan confessed to the crime and got recovered their shirt and
tehmad; being Ex.P-12 and Ex.P-13 belonging to Mantori and
Ex.P-14 and Ex.P-15 belonging to Babu Khan, from near the
bushes close to the place of the incident after the two were
arrested.      The shirt and the tehmad Ex.P-12 and Ex.P-13
respectively of Mantori were recovered on 7.10.1989.          The
shirt and the tehmad Ex.P-14 and Ex.P-15 of Babu Khan were
recovered on 18.10.1989. The report Ex.PX-A of the serologist
is that human blood of group „AB‟ i.e. the blood group of the
deceased was detected on the said two shirts and the
tehmads.
14.          As per the learned Trial Judge, the recovery of the
two shirts and the two tehmads is pursuant to the disclosure
statement of Mantori and Babu Khan followed by the two
leading the police to the spot wherefrom the same were
recovered and the fact that the shirts and the tehmads were
stained with human blood of the same group as of the
deceased was a piece of incriminating evidence against
appellant Mantori and appellant Babu Khan.
15.          In our opinion the recovery of the shirt and the
tehmad at the instance of appellant Mantori as also the
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                      Page 13 of 26

recovery of another shirt and a tehmad at the instance of
appellant Babu Khan inspires no confidence and unfortunately,
the learned Trial Judge has glossed over the circumstances
and the manner under which the same have been recovered.
16.          What has been overlooked by the learned Trial
Judge is that the two recovery memos i.e. the recovery memo
Ex.PW-16/A dated 7.10.1989 pertaining to the recovery of the
shirt and the tehmad at the instance of appellant Mantori
shows that the shirt and the tehmad were recovered from
within the bushes in the jungle at a distance of about 500
meters from the place where the dead body of Rekha was
recovered on 3.10.1989. Similarly, the recovery memo Ex.PW-
8/C dated 18.10.1989 pertaining to the recovery of the shirt
and the tehmad at the instance of appellant Babu Khan shows
that the shirt and the tehmad were recovered from within the
bushes in the jungle at a distance of about 200 yards from the
place where the dead body of Rekha was recovered on
3.10.1989.       The learned Trial Judge has glossed over the
admission made by Insp.Bheem Singh PW-17, who during
cross examination, admitted that a dog squad was brought at
the spot on 4.10.1989 and that the sniffer dog could pick up no
clues. We agree with the contention urged by learned counsel
for the appellants that under the circumstances i.e. the
recoveries being from a place accessible to the public and the
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                     Page 14 of 26

sniffer dogs being unable to pick up any leads on 4.10.1989,
the recoveries do not inspire any confidence.           Surely, the
sniffer dogs would have detected the presence of blood
stained clothes lying in the vicinity of 200 yards to 500 meters
from where the dead body of Rekha was found, if they were
there. Further, the site plan Ex.PW-17/B shows that the place
where the dead body of the deceased was found is adjoining
two kachha rastas which lead to the Dargah in Mehraulli i.e. is
a place accessible to the public at large.           Recoveries of
common objects from a place accessible to the public at large
have always been treated with a pinch of salt by Courts.
17.          That takes us to the crux of the matter.            The
testimony of the persons whose statements were recorded by
the investigating officer during investigation.
18.          We find that in the list of witnesses filed along with
the charge sheet, the name of Kale Baba has been entered at
serial No.6. Along with the charge sheet his statement under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. has been filed.       But, Kale Baba has not
been examined as a witness. A reason is forthcoming. It is in
the testimony of Sayeed Munir PW-4, that Kale Baba left the
Dargah.
19.          This takes care of the submission made by Ms.Ritu
Gauba      learned     counsel   for appellant  Lachho    that    the
prosecution has withheld a vital witness for reasons best
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                         Page 15 of 26

known to the prosecution and therefore an adverse inference
should be drawn against the prosecution and benefit should be
given to her client.         No doubt, where a crucial witness is
withheld by the prosecution, and evidence led is shaky, benefit
has to be given to the accused as held in the decisions
reported as AIR 1981 SC 911 Dudh Nath Pandey Vs. State of
U.P. and 2000 SCC (Cri.) 703 Rangbahadur Singh Vs. State of
U.P. But, if a witness is not traceable and the prosecution has
not deliberately withheld the production of a witness, no such
adverse inference can be drawn.
20.          Since, the prosecution has not deliberately withheld
Kale Baba as its witness, we hold that nothing adverse can be
drawn against the prosecution on said point.
21.          Sayeed Munir PW-4 deposed as under:-
       “I had come to Dargah, Nazaria Peer, Mehrauli, three
       four months before the incident in question. One
       Kaley Babe Khan was a Sevadar in the same Dargah.
       Accused Lachho present in the court and deceased
       Rekha used to come to that Dargah in my presence.
       They used to meet me and Kaley Baba Khan during
       their visits. On 1.10.1989, at about 5.30 PM, all the
       accused persons present in the court, came to the
       Dargha. Accused-Lacho told Kaley Babe Khan that
       the other accused persons present in the court were
       her guests and that they would stay in the Dargah for
       some days. Accused Lachho gave Rs.100/- to Kaley
       Babe Khan for their expenses. Accused-Lachho went
       away, while the three accused persons stayed
       behind. On 2.10.1989, the three accused persons,
       namely, Raju @Yakub, Mantoori and Babu Khan were
       present in the Dargah.         On 3.10.1989, accused
       Lachho came to the Dargah with a small child at
       about 3/3.30 PM. She talked to the other three
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                       Page 16 of 26

       accused persons for about half an hour by taking
       them to one corner. There was another person, who
       had stayed along with the three accused persons in
       the Dargah. I do not know his name but I can
       identify in case he is brought before me. While
       Lachho came inside the Dargah and sat with me, the
       remaining four persons went away towards the side
       of Qutab Dargah. After about half an hour, she left
       the Dargah. Before leaving, she told me to convey to
       deceased-Rekha that she had gone to Qutub Dargah.
       I accompanied Lachho to some distance.          Since
       accused-Lachho was limping. I carried the child.
       Accused-Lachho did not go towards the side of Qutub
       Dargah but started going towards Katwaria Sarai.
       She had hardly left, when all other accused persons
       came running in a nervous state, badly perspiring.
       The moment, accused Lachhoo saw those persons,
       she snatched the child from me and all of them
       started running towards Katwaria Sarai. Thereafter, I
       returned to the Dargah. On 4.10.1989, I came to
       know from Kaley Babe Khan, that a murder had
       taken place in a jungle in between our Dargah and
       Shahi Idgah, Mehrauli. Myself and Kaley Babe Khan
       went to the spot. At the spot, we noticed a cup,
       which belonged to our Dargah and a piece of cloth,
       i.e. Angocha which I had seen around the neck of
       Mantoori about two days. I also noticed some empty
       bottles of liquor and torn pieces of sarees. I can
       identify the cup and that Angocha.
       (At this state, a sealed parcel is opened and cup is
       taken out). Ex.P-2 is the same cup.
       (At this stage, another sealed parcel is opened and
       angocha is taken out). Ex.P10A is the same angocha,
       which was recovered from the spot, and I identify the
       same vide memo Ex.PW-4/A, which bears my
       signatures at point „A‟.”
22.            Meena PW-5 deposed as under:-
       “I knew Rekha, the deceased, for the last about 10 to
       12 years from the date of the incident, as she was
       my Guru. Accused Lachoo present in Court was the
       Guru of deceased-Rekha. I know accused-Lachoo for
       the last about 10 to 12 years. Deceased-Rekha and
       accused-Lachoo used to operate in the same area for
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                      Page 17 of 26

       the purposes of seeking „Inaam‟ on the birth of a son
       or daughter. Deceased Rekha was born as eunuch
       and so is accused-Lachoo. I am also eunuch by birth.
       Anita is my disciple. About 5-6 years before the
       death of Rekha, we all used to live together, i.e.
       myself, Anita and Rekha. Deceased-Rekha was very
       popular in the area and had established lot of
       goodwill. As such, people used to like her and used
       to give good „Inaam‟/Bakshish to her.        Accused-
       Lachhoo was residing separately. Deceased-Rekha
       used to live well and in-style. She used to travel in a
       two-wheeler scooter, fitted with stereo, which was
       owned by her. She was fond of music, good clothes
       etc.    Her life style evoked jealousy in accused-
       Lachhoo. About three years ago, in the days of
       Navratras, on the third instant, accused-Lachhoo
       came to the place where we were living, at about 9
       AM.     She asked deceased-Rekha to take her to
       Qutub, Dargah Peer, Chattarpur Mandir etc., on her
       scooter. Accused Lachhoo also had lunch with us.
       Thereafter, deceased-Rekha along with a small child
       whom she had adopted, took accused-Lachhoo
       towards Qutub side on her two wheeler. At about 4
       PM I also went out of my house to buy vegetables
       etc. When I returned home, I saw that the small child
       whom Rekha had taken along with her, wac back
       home. I asked Anita whether Rekha had returned
       home or not, she told me that Rekha had not
       returned bu the child was left at home by accused-
       Lachhoo. She also tole me that Lachhoo informed
       her that Rekha was to stay in Mehrauli for the night
       and would return the next day. Next day, a eunuch
       came to our house and told us that the dead body of
       Rekha was found lying in a jungle, near Dargah,
       Nazaria Peer, Mehrauli. I went to the spot along with
       that eunuch where I identified the dead body of
       Rekha.         The police carried out the inquest
       proceedings in my presence.         I put my thumb
       impression at point A and B on the inquest
       proceedings. Ex.PW-5/A is the inquest proceedings.
       Thereafter I returned home.
       On 6th instant, the police came to our house at about
       2:30 PM. The police made inquiries from us about
       accused Lachhoo. On our telling that she was known
       to us, they took me to Shahganj Chowk, Masjid Wali
       Gali, where accused-Lachhoo lived. On reaching
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                       Page 18 of 26

       there, we came to know that she had left the house
       with an old man for Ajmeri Gate. We looked for her
       in Ajmeri Gate, but on not finding her there, we came
       towards Darya Ganj and from there to ISBT. At ISBT,
       near a three wheeler scooter stand, I was able to
       spot accused-Lachhoo along with one old man and
       another person. On my pointing out, the police
       apprehended all the three persons.            Accused-
       Lachhoo tried to draw public attention by clapping in
       eunuch style, but the crowd was dispersed by the
       police. Accused-Babu Khan and accused-Mantoori
       present in the Court were the persons, who were
       found with accused Lachoo and were apprehended
       by the police. All the three were brought to the
       Police Station Mehrauli where, personal seach of
       Mantoori and Lachhoo was taken, vide memo, Ex.PW-
       5/B and Ex.PW-5/. Both the memos Ex.PW-5/B and C
       bear my thumb impression at point A. Another
       eunuch Daya was already in the police station before
       the accused persons were brought there.             On
       interrogation, accused Lachhoo made a disclosure
       statement Ex.PW-1/A, which also bears my thumb
       impressions at point A. In her disclosure statement,
       accused-Lachhoo stated that she had engaged
       accused-Raju @ Yakub present in the Court, for
       Rs.10,000/- to commit murder of Rekha. (Accused-
       Raju @Yakub has been identified by the witness for
       the first time in the Court). The dead body of the
       deceased was handed over to me and her father
       Wachan Singh, vide memo Ex.PW-5/D. It bears my
       thumb impressions at point A.”
23.          Anita PW-6 deposed as under:-
       “For the last about 5 -6 years, I am living at the
       abovementioned address with Meena and deceased-
       Rekha. I know accused-Lachhoo, present in the Court
       as she was Guru of Rekha. We used to operate in the
       area of Pahar Ganj for getting Bakshish etc. on the
       birth of a son or a daughter. About three years ago on
       3rd October, deceased-Rekha had left the house along
       with her adopted son and accused-Lachhoo on her two
       wheeler scooter, towards Mehrauli side, as was asked
       by accused-Lachhoo. They left the house at about 12
       Noon or 1 PM after taking lunch. Meena had also left
       the house at about 4 PM and I was, therefore, alone in
       the house. At about 5/5:30 PM, accused Lachoo came
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                       Page 19 of 26

       and left the child in the house. I inquired from her
       about Rekha whom I used to address as Mummy.
       Accused-Lachhoo told me that she would stay in
       Mehrauli for the night and would return the next day.
       On the next morning, eunuch named-Daya came and
       informed us that Rekha had been murdered and her
       dead body was found in a jungle, near Darga Peer,
       Mehrauli. As such, Meena went with Daya to the place
       where the dead body was lying.”
24.          It is apparent that the testimony of Anita and
Meena establishes that appellant Lachho took along with her
deceased Rekha and her adopted child in the morning of
3.10.1989.      She came back in the evening at around 5/5:30
and returned the adopted child of Rekha and told Anita and
Meena that Rekha would return the next day as she had
decided to stay overnight at the Dargah in Mehraulli.        The
post-mortem report Ex.PW-9/A of the deceased establishes
that the deceased died somewhere between 12:00 noon to
4:00 PM. Thus, it is apparent that Lachho had something up
her sleeve.       Rekha had never desired to stay back at the
Dargah in Mehraulli and Lachho had clearly told a lie to Anita
and Meena. Her conduct is suspicious. Evidence pertaining to
her suspicious conduct is admissible and relevant under
Section 8 of the Evidence Act.
25.          The testimony of Sayeed Munir PW-4 establishes, as
held by the learned Trial Judge, that Lachho had spoken
suspiciously and with secrecy with appellants Mantori and
Babu Khan on 3.10.1989 and by this time the adopted son of
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                     Page 20 of 26

Rekha was in the company of Lachho. The time was around
3/3:30 PM. Lachho stayed back after the talk and appellants
Mantori and Babu Khan along with two other person left
towards Qutub Dargah i.e. in the direction where Rekha‟s dead
body was found. After about half an hour i.e. around 4:00 PM
Lachho left the Mehraulli Dargah informing Sayeed Munir to
tell Rekha that she and her son were going to Qutub Dargah.
But, Lachho proceeded in the opposite direction towards
Katwaria Sarai. Since she was limping and had a child in her
lap, to help Lachho, Sayeed Munir took the child in his lap and
accompanied her. A short distance was covered when Mantori,
Babu Khan and the other two persons came running.              They
were sweating and were perplexed. Certainly, the conduct of
the appellants is suspicious as they were seen running from a
direction    where      Rekha    had been  murdered    and     were
perplexed. The time corresponds to the time of Rekha being
killed as evidenced by the opinion of the doctor who conducted
the post-mortem of the deceased.         Their further conduct as
also the conduct of Lachho of snatching Rekha‟s son from the
arms of Sayeed Munir and running away is also indicative of
their guilty mind.
26.          Why did Mantori and Babu Khan get perplexed? It
appears on seeing Sayeed Munir with Lachho. The timings of
the event are important. Lachho spoke to Mantori and Babu
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                        Page 21 of 26

Khan and two other persons at around 3/3:30 PM.         The talk
was secretive.         Lachho stayed back at Mehraulli Dargah.
Mantori, Babu Khan and two other persons left.      After about
half an hour, Lachho and Rekha‟s son left and around same
time Mantoi, Babu Khan and the other two persons came
running back.         On seeing Sayeed Munir, all five namely
Lachho, Mantori, Babu Khan and two other persons ran away.
27.          The motive of Lachho to kill Rekha has emerged
through the testimony of PW-5 and PW-6 and has rightly been
held to be established by the learned Trial Judge.
28.          There is another incriminating evidence against
appellant Mantori, which unfortunately has apparently been
somewhat diluted due to the learned Trial Judge not being
vigilant. The same pertains to the testimony of Sayeed Munir
qua the Angocha Ex.PW-10/A recovered from the spot where
dead body of Rekha was discovered on 4.10.1989.           As per
Sayeed Munir the said Angocha Ex.P-10 was seen by him
around the neck of Mantori on 2.10.1989. We note that in his
statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C., Sayeed Munir has so
informed the investigating officer.       We further note that
pertaining to said Angocha and his deposition in Court by way
of examination-in-chief, Sayeed Munir was given a suggestion
that he did not tell said fact to the police when his statement
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was recorded. He responded that he
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                      Page 22 of 26

did not remember whether he had said so.               Surprisingly
enough, Sayeed Munir was confronted with his statement
Ex.PW-4/DA recorded on 4.10.1989 under Section 161 Cr.P.C.,
where said fact has been mentioned.            We are extremely
surprised at the stupidity of said part of the cross examination.
We need to note the same, which is as under:-
       “I do not remember if I had stated before the police
       that the Angocha recovered at the spot was seen by
       me around the neck of accused Mantori two days prior
       to the incident. (Confronted with statement Ex.PW-
       4/DA where it is not recorded that he had not seen the
       Angocha around the neck of accused Mantori two days
       prior to the incident).”
29.          We note that in his statement Ex.PW-4/DA,
Sayeed Munir has clearly stated that the Angocha Ex.Pw-
10/A was seen by him around the neck of Mantori two days
prior. The statement has been recorded on 4.10.1989. Two
days prior would be 2.10.1989.
30.          How has the learned Trial Judge diluted said very
incriminating evidence which proves Mantori‟s presence
near the deceased?            By not putting said incriminating
circumstance to Mantori.           Unfortunately, whereas the
evidence pertaining to all articles seized from the place of
occurrence i.e. Ex.P-1 to Ex.P-10 and Ex.P-11 have been put
to Mantori and the other accused, the incriminating
evidence of the Angocha Ex.P-10A being recovered from
near the dead body of Rekha has not been put to her.
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                        Page 23 of 26

31.          Ignoring said evidence, in view of the testimony
of PW-4, there is sufficient evidence wherefrom the
involvement of Mantori in the crime stands established and
thus the dilution in the evidence of Ex.P-10A being a
circumstance against Mantori makes no difference.
32.          But, we would like to note a decision of not too
distance a past of the Supreme Court on the issue as to
what should be the approach at a criminal trial where an
incriminating circumstance is not put to an accused. The
decision is reported as 1976 (4) SCC 355 Ishwar Singh Vs.
State of U.P. In para 4 it was noted and observed as under:-
       “4. It appears that though Ishwar Singh was
       convicted under Section 302 simpliciter, the charge
       on this count framed against Ishwar Singh and Harpal
       Singh was for an offence punishable under Section
       302 read with Section 149. The relevant charge
       reads:
       Fourthly: That you, along with the aforesaid other
       accused, the same day, at the same time and place,
       were members of an unlawful assembly, in
       prosecution of the common object of which, some of
       the members did commit murder by intentionally
       causing the death of Chauhal Singh and you are
       thereby, under Section 149, I.P.C, guilty of causing
       the said offence punishable under Section 302 of the
       Indian Penal Code and within the cognizance of the
       Court of Session.
       In his examination under Section 342 of the Criminal
       Procedure Code also Ishwar Singh was asked no
       question to enable him to answer the allegation that
       he struck Chauhal Singh on the chest with a ballam.
       The question asked was:
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                      Page 24 of 26

       Q. 4. The prosecution evidence is that on the
       aforesaid day, time and place, in furtherance of the
       common object of the aforesaid unlawful assembly,
       you along with the other accused persons committed
       the murder of Chauhal Singh and caused injuries to
       Mahabir Singh, Ghanshiam, Satyapal, Jaipal, Pritam
       and Dharam Pal Have you anything to say about this?
       To this the answer was "It is wrong".
       Was this an illegality vitiating the trial or was it a
       curable irregularity having regard to the facts and
       circumstances of the case? The F.I.R. mentions that
       Ishwar Singh "gave a thrust with the ballam" to
       Chauhal Singh which killed him. The eyewitnesses
       repeat this story. Also, no grievance appears to have
       been made in the High Court that Ishwar Singh was
       prejudiced in his defence by being convicted of an
       offence with which he was not charged. The point was
       raised for the first time here before us. Considering all
       the relevant circumstances, we do not think it could
       be said that the accused was prejudiced in his trial.”
33.          We note that in view of the statement made by
Sayeed Munir PW-4 in his examination in chief that the
Angocha PW-10/A recovered from the spot was seen by him
around the neck of Mantori two days prior to 4.10.1989,
Sayeed Munir was cross examined by counsel for Mantori
with reference to his said statement in examination in chief.
The cross examination is as noted in para 28 above. Thus,
full opportunity was availed by Mantori to cross examine
Sayeed Munir on the Angocha Ex.PW-10/A. From a perusal
of the impugned decision it is apparent that no grievance
appears to have been made before the learned Trial Judge
of Mantori being prejudiced in her defence.
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                        Page 25 of 26

34.          The view taken by the learned Trial Judge of
there being a conspiracy at the behest of Lachho who was
the beneficiary of the crime i.e. it was her intention to kill
and get rid of Rekha and pursuant thereto the appellants
and their companions murdering Rekha is correct in light of
the evidence led.
35.          We find no merits in the appeals.
36.          The appellants are on bail. Their bail bonds and
surety bonds are cancelled. The appellants shall surrender
and suffer the remaining sentence.
                                    (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                               JUDGE
                                        (INDERMEET KAUR)
                                                JUDGE
August 06, 2009
mm
Crl.Appeal Nos.11, 103 & 24/2001                      Page 26 of 26


