*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                      Judgment Reserved On: 28th September, 2010
                      Judgment Delivered On: 2nd November, 2010
+                            W.P.(C) 6423/2010
       NEENA SHAD                                      ..... Petitioner
                             Through:    Petitioner in person
                                    versus
       MCD                                            ..... Respondent
                             Through: Mr.Gaurang Kanth and Ms.Biji
                                         Rajesh, Advocates
                             W.P.(C) 6113/2010
       DR.SUNIL CHAUDHARY                              ..... Petitioner
                             Through:    Petitioner in person
                                    versus
       MCD & ORS.                                     ..... Respondents
                             Through: Mr.Gaurang Kanth and Ms.Biji
                                         Rajesh, Advocates
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.     Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see
       the judgment?
2.     To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3.     Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
1.     Between the years 2001-2002 Municipal Corporation of
Delhi (hereinafter referred to as “MCD”) appointed 41 doctors
as Medical Officers (Ayurveda) on contractual basis, including
  W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                                Page 1 of 32

the petitioners who are married to each other. The relevant
portion of the letters containing the terms and conditions of
the appointment of said Medical Officers issued by MCD reads
as under:-
      “….With reference to his/her Walk-in-interview and
      approval of Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of
      Delhi, Dr.Neena Shad/Dr.Sunil Chaudhary is hereby
      given Offer of Appointment to the post of Ayurvedic
      Vaid on contract basis at a fixed amount of
      Rs.10,000/- per month initially for a period of six
      months, or till such time the post is filled up on
      regular basis through UPSC, whichever is earlier
      subject to the following terms and conditions:-
      1.      The post is purely on contract basis for a period
      of six months or till such time the post is filled up on
      regular basis by CED through UPSC, whichever is
      earlier. The appointment can terminated at any time
      on either side by giving one month‟s notice or by
      paying one month‟s salary without assigning any
      reason……” (Emphasis Supplied)
2.    From      time     to   time,   MCD   extended   the  term      of
appointment of the aforesaid Medical Officers including the
petitioners. Remuneration of the said Medical Officers was also
enhanced.
3.    On      13.07.2007        a   complaint  was    made    to    the
Commissioner MCD by petitioner Neena Shad, who was then
posted at Bihari Pur Ayurvedic dispensary, against one Shiv
Dayal Kain, Compounder in the said dispensary, inter-alia
alleging     that    she    was    sexually  harassed  by  the     said
Compounder. In view of the complaint made by petitioner
Neena Shad, Commissioner, MCD directed Dr.Ashok Garg,
Chief Medical Officer to investigate into the matter and submit
a report in said regard.
4.    On 16.07.2007 Dr.Ashok Garg, Chief Medical Officer,
submitted a report wherein he opined that Mr.Shiv Dayal Kain
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                           Page 2 of 32

be transferred from Bihari Pur dispensary to Ayurvedic
dispensary of Swami Dayanand Hospital. He further opined
that ‘I found no harassment with MOI/C by the pharmacist. It
has come to my notice that both are faulty one or the other
issue.’
5.     Thereafter        one     Mr.Shri   Ram    was   appointed        as
Compounder in Bihari Pur Ayurvedic Dispensary. Petitioner
Neena Shad alleged that since the said Compounder was not
discharging his duties in a satisfactory manner she went to the
office of Chairman, Medical Relief and Public Health Committee
on 22.11.2007 to complain about Compounder Shri Ram where
she was manhandled by Mr.Prakash Chand Dagar, Peon to the
Chairman, while she was waiting to meet the Chairman. The
petitioner filed a complaint with Commissioner, MCD regarding
the said incident.
6.     Considering the problems between petitioner Neena
Shad and Compounder Shri Ram, a decision was taken by the
higher      officials   of   the    Health  Department    of   MCD      on
23.11.2007        to    transfer    the  petitioner  from    Bihari    Pur
dispensary to Nand Nagari dispensary.
7.     On the same date i.e. 23.11.2007 Dr.Vidya Sagar
Sharma, who was officiating as DHO (ISM) accompanied by
Dr.Ashok Garg, Chief Medical Officer, visited Nand Nagari
dispensary to facilitate petitioner Neena Shad in joining the
said dispensary. Petitioner Neena Shad alleged that Dr.Vidya
Sagar had touched her in a derogatory manner. The police was
called on the spot to inquire into the matter.
8.     In his defence, Dr.Vidya Sagar stated that on the
directions of Chairman, Medical Relief and Public Health
Committee he along with Dr.Ashok Garg had gone to Nand
Nagari dispensary to facilitate petitioner Neena Shad in joining
the said dispensary where petitioner Neena Shad was present
  W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                             Page 3 of 32

along with her husband Dr.Sunil Chaudhary. Petitioner Neena
Shad and her husband unnecessarily picked up a fight with
him and thereafter called the police and falsely accused him of
sexually harassing Neena Shad.
9.     An enquiry was conducted into the aforesaid matter by
the Office of Deputy Commissioner of Police and a report was
submitted in said regard, which report reads as under:-
       “Allegations leveled by the Complainant against her
       Senior Doctor Vidya Sagar Sharma and Dr.Ashok
       Garg are uncalled for as the entire episode took
       place in public where her husband was also present.
       Allegations of molestation/Indecent behavior are
       false, baseless and motivated.”
10.    Thereafter petitioner Neena Shad filed a complaint
against Dr.Vidya Sagar before Commissioner, MCD. In terms of
the directions issued by Supreme Court in the decision
reported as Vishaka v State of Rajasthan (1997) 6 SCC 241,
Commissioner, MCD referred the afore-noted two complaints
filed by petitioner Neena Shad against Prakash Chand Dagar
and Dr. Vidya Sagar respectively to Sexual Harassment
Complaints          Committee       (hereinafter  referred    to     as
“Committee”) comprising of following members:- (i) Ms.Meera
Akolia, Municipal Secretary, MCD; (ii) Mr.P.K. Gupta, Director
(Printing & Stationary), MCD; (iii) Dr.Vireshwar, Chief Medical
Officer, Town Hall Dispensary, MCD; (iv) Ms.Meenakshi Sobti,
P.R.O., Kasturba Hospital and (v) Ms.Aparna Bhat, NGO
Member.
11.    During       the     pendency    of  proceedings   of   Sexual
Harassment Complaints Committee, a report was submitted by
Dr.M.L. Khatri, DHO (ISM) in March 2008 regarding the conduct
of petitioner Neena Shad, the relevant portion whereof reads
as under:-
  W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                          Page 4 of 32

       “Dr.Neena Shad is working as Medical Officer (Ay.)
       on contract basis since 2001 and presently posted at
       Ay. Dispensary Nand Nagri. During her stay in
       various dispensaries her behavior towards with
       junior and subordinate staff was not found
       satisfactory. It came into notice that the officer who
       asked for her punctuality and behave properly to
       juniors, she always leveled allegations of sexual
       harassment upon everyone. It has happened with
       previous DHO Dr.V.P. Kanoji and the junior staff who
       worked/working under her supervision in a awful
       situation which is created by her for her own
       interest. It is pertinent to say that during last year
       Deptt. made so many transfers of pharmacists but
       none of them was interested to work under her with
       the fear of leveling false sexual harassment
       charges….” (Emphasis Supplied)
12.    The first hearing of the Committee took place on
15.05.2008. In the said hearing, the notices for appearance
before Committee were issued to the petitioners, Ms.Sudesh
Kumari, Ms.Renu Gill, Dr.Vidya Sagar Sharma and Dr.Ashok
Garg. The hearing was adjourned to 22.05.2008.
13.    On the next hearing i.e. 22.05.2008 Dr.M.L. Khatri, DHO
(ISM), informed the Committee that the notices for hearing
could not be served upon the petitioners. Regarding the non-
service of notices to the petitioners, Dr.M.L. Khatri stated
before the Committee that when contacted over telephone
regarding the service of the notices the petitioners stated that
they will personally collect the notices from the office but they
did not come to the office. In view of non-service of notices to
the petitioners, the Committee decided that the notices for
appearance be delivered in the respective dispensaries where
the petitioners are working and waited for the status of service
of notices.
14.    In the meantime, witnesses; Dr.Vidya Sagar, Dr.Ashok
Garg, Ms.Renu Gill and Ms.Sudesh Kumari were examined.
  W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                       Page 5 of 32

15.    Dr.Vidya Sagar reiterated the defence taken by him
before the police. Dr.Ashok Garg duly corroborated the
statement of Dr.Vidya Sagar and firmly denied that any
incident of sexual harassment had taken place on 23.11.2007
as alleged by petitioner Neena Shad.
16.    Ms.Renu Gill who had worked as ANM with petitioner
Neena Shad for a period of over two months stated that
petitioner Neena Shad used to cry for no reason and pick up
fights with other members of staff. That husband of Neena
Shad used to accompany her to the dispensary and attend
patients even though he was posted at another dispensary.
That Neena Shad used to come to the dispensary late, take
away the attendance register of the dispensary to her
residence and bring her child to the dispensary every day.
That she had sought the transfer from the dispensary in
question due to the behavior of Neena Shad.
17.    Ms.Sudesh Kumari who was posted as Compounder in
Nand Nagari dispensary stated that Neena Shad used to cry
easily and pick up fights with people. Regarding incident of
sexual harassment, she stated that Dr.Vidya Sagar had no
occasion to touch Neena Shad.
18.    Regarding the service of notice to petitioner Neena Shad,
the pharmacist in Nand Nagari dispensary informed the
Committee that Neena Shad had left the Committee around
noon stating that she was going to the office for some work.
Regarding the service of notice to petitioner Sunil Chaudhary,
the petitioner was not found present in the dispensary at the
time when the dispatch rider reached there. Mr.Keshav Das,
Compunder refused to receive the notice and stated that
Dr.Sunil Chaudhary had left the office to collect the notice
personally, which statement was found to be untrue by the
Committee.
  W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                      Page 6 of 32

19.    At about 04.00 P.M. one Keshav Dass, Compounder came
in the office of Committee to collect the notice of Dr.Sunil
Chaudhary.        When      questioned by the members   of    the
Committee, he informed that Dr.Sunil Choudhary had sent him
to collect the notice. When further inquiries were made from
Keshav Dass he feigned fainting. The members of the
Committee were of the view that Keshav Dass was under the
tremendous influence of Dr.Sunil Chaudhary and feared his
wrath.
20.    In the meantime, the Committee sent the dispatch rider
to the residence of the petitioners to serve the notices where
the petitioners treated him very badly. First the petitioners
refused to receive the notices falsely stating that they do not
reside there. When the dispatch rider insisted upon serving
the notices, the petitioners seized the keys of the motorcycle
of the dispatch rider whereupon the police was called. It was
only upon the intervention of the police that the petitioners
returned the keys to the dispatch rider.
21.    In view of the afore-noted uncooperative and obstructive
behavior of petitioner Neena Shad, the Committee chose not
to give any further opportunity to her to present her case
before the Committee and submitted its report inter-alia
opining that the allegations of sexual harassment leveled by
petitioner Neena Shad against Dr.Vidya Sagar and Mr.Prakash
Chand Dagar are false and baseless. The relevant portion of
the report of the Committee reads as under:-
       “CONCLUDING COMMENTS
       This is one of the strangest cases that the
       Committee has received. The Complaints Committee
       on Sexual Harassment was set up to provide speedy
       redressal to the victims of sexual harassment. The
       Committee comprises of Senior Officers of MCD and
       the complaints are heard on priority basis to ensure
  W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                    Page 7 of 32

     that women are not harassed. However, the present
     case seems to be a case of total abuse of this fora.
     The Committee takes strong objection to the conduct
     of the complainant due to the following reasons:
     a       Although she was given a hearing of over 2
     hours on the first day of hearing totally
     uninterrupted, the complainant chose to call the
     Chairperson of the Committee late at night to
     discuss the case and she had to be firmly told to
     refrain from making those calls;
     b.      The cross examination was fixed to facilitate
     the hearing. The complainant was advised that she
     would be intimated about the date and she should
     appear before the Committee. However, not only did
     she not appear, she misbehaved with the Dispatch
     Rider specially sent to her residence by calling the
     police. This incident also subjected senior officials of
     the MCD to harassment and humiliation late into the
     night;
     c.      After having got the notice, Dr.Shad feigned
     the illness by stating that both she and her husband
     have taken ill and cannot before the Committee;
     d.      The Complainant had made allegations against
     a Peon in the office of Chairman, MRPH Committee, a
     compounder, Shiv Dayal and Dr.Vidya Sagar Sharma.
     However, before the Committee she first stated that
     she does not want to pursue against the Peon and
     Shiv Dayal. She then changed her statement and
     stated that she would like to think about it. She has
     not intimate the Committee till about her decision;
     e.      When the Committee tried to contact her at the
     dispensary during working hours, she was found
     absent from the dispensary. She had not taken
     permission to leave the dispensary during working
     hours. She had informed her pharmacist that she
     was going out on official work and misled her;
     f.      Dr.Vidya Sagar in his statement before the
     Committee also brought to the attention of the
     Committee the manner in which the complainant
     along with her husband had threatened other staff
     by calling the police, going to their houses with
W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                        Page 8 of 32

     hooligans etc. The Committee had looked at the file
     containing these complaints and is surprised as to
     why no action was taken by the department…..
     The Committee‟s responsibility is only to look into
     the merits of the allegations of sexual harassment.
     However, due to the shocking conduct of the
     complainant, her husband Dr.Sunil Chaudhary and
     certain other persons of the Health Department, the
     Committee is constrained to make the following
     observations.
     a.      The doctor couple seem to have terrorized the
     department as the DHO, (ISM) Dr.M.L.Khatri, the
     pharmacists and other staff was visibly scared of
     them;
     b.      The administration of the DHO (ISM) is very
     weak. Although he was aware about the conduct of
     both the doctors and their indiscipline, he allowed
     them to go scot free;
     c.      The complainant herself has shown highly
     insubordinate behavior. She had herself admitted
     that she had questioned Dr.Vidya Sagar why he
     visited her dispensary. She never marked her
     attendance at the hospital, refused to receive the
     notices sent by this Committee. She also did not
     respect the hierarchy. She went above the
     departmental officers directly to the Commissioner
     and when it suited her also met the Chairman for
     routine administration matters;
     RECOMMENDATIONS:
     The         Committee        makes     the    following
     recommendations.
     1.      The present complaint of sexual harassment is
     rejected as there is no merit in the complaint;
     2.      Contract staff should not be given independent
     charge of the dispensaries.
     3.      Strict disciplinary action is recommended
     against both Dr.Neena Shad and Dr.Sunil Chaudhary
     for abusing the process of law, taking law onto their
W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                       Page 9 of 32

        own hands and showing total disregard to the
        committee as well as other Senior Officers of their
        department;” (Emphasis Supplied)
22.     In view of the recommendations contained in the afore-
noted report of the Committee, Commissioner MCD took a
decision on 17.06.2008 not to continue with the engagement
of the petitioners with MCD as both of them were a nuisance
and no subordinate person was ready to work at the
dispensary where they could be posted.
23.     On 15.07.2008 an Office Order was issued by MCD
extending the term of appointment of 35 out 39 Medical
Officers who were similarly placed as the petitioners. The
extensions could not be granted to 4 Medical Officers due to
the fact that DHO (ISM) did not forward their Performance
Appraisals to the concerned authority.
24.     On 03.07.2008 Office Order(s) were issued by MCD
dispensing with the services of the petitioners. The said Office
Order(s) reads as under:-
        “Dr.Sunil Choudhary/Neena Shad was employed in
        MCD on contract basis as Medical Officer (Ayurveda).
        His/her period of contract has expired on
        07.05.2008. The Competent Authority has not
        approved his/her re-engagement and hence, he/she
        is no more in Municipal services.
        This issues with the prior approval of the Competent
        Authority.”
25.     On 01.08.2008 Office Order(s) were issued by MCD
granting extensions to 4 Medical Officers who were not
granted       extensions      earlier due to non-receipt  of   their
Performance Appraisals as also to 26 Medical Officers who
were junior to the petitioners.
26.     Aggrieved by the Office Order dated 03.07.2008 issued
by MCD, petitioner Neena Shad filed a writ petition bearing
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                       Page 10 of 32

No.7037/2008 under Articles 226 and 227 of Constitution of
India before this Court. At this juncture, it would be most
apposite to note some of the averments made by the
petitioner in the said petition:-
        “1. That your humble Petitioner is aggrieved by the
        letter/order no 378/ADC (H)/2008 dated 03-07-2008
        in which the services of the petitioner was removed
        on the pretext that the competent authority has no
        approved her re-engagement and hence she is no
        more in Municipal Services. While other persons who
        are junior and the senior from the petitioner still
        working with the respondents…..
        …
        15. That it is submitted that the said posts are still
        not filled by the Union Public Service Commission
        and the other persons who was employed with the
        petitioner is still working with the respondents.
        ….
        17. That it is submitted that the respondent twice
        appointed on the contract basis approx. 35 doctors
        with the same conditions as the same applied in the
        case of the petitioner.
        18. That the services of the petitioner removed
        with no reason and except that the authorities did
        not extend the contract period. No reason has been
        assigned why the period of the petitioner and her
        husband have not been extended out of the
        complete list.
        ….
        GROUNDS:
        ….
        D      BECAUSE the services of the petitioner was
        terminated on the basis of pick and choose;
        E      BECAUSE no reason has been assigned why
        only the petitioner and her husband‟s services were
        terminated/not extended while other persons are still
        working with the respondent;
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                        Page 11 of 32

        F      BECAUSE there were other person/doctors who
        are either junior or senior to the petitioner is still
        working with the respondents;
        G      BECAUSE the impugned order is the violation of
        Article 14 and 21 of Constitution of India;
        …..” (Emphasis Supplied)
27.     Vide order dated 26.09.2008 this Court dismissed the
said writ petition on the ground that a contractual appointment
does not confer any legal right upon the holder of such a post
and it is the prerogative of the employer to allow the
contractual appointee to continue him in service and the court
cannot interfere if such a discretion exercised is by the
employer unless the discretion is found to be vitiated by mala
fide or extraneous considerations.
28.     Aggrieved by the order dated 26.09.2008 passed by this
Court, petitioner Neena Shad filed letters patent appeal before
a Division Bench of this Court, which appeal was dismissed
vide order dated 24.10.2008.
29.     Thereafter petitioner Neena Shad filed another writ
petition bearing No.11791/2009 under Articles 226 and 227 of
Constitution of India before this Court inter-alia highlighting
that MCD had meted out a most discriminatory treatment to
her by extending the term of appointment of all the 39 Medical
Officers who were similarly placed as the petitioners including
the four Medical Officers who were not given extension in the
first instance as also of 26 Medical Officers who were junior to
the petitioners, which petition stood transferred to Principal
Bench,       Central     Administrative Tribunal,  New Delhi     for
adjudication.
30.     Vide impugned judgment and order dated 28.04.2010,
the Tribunal dismissed the petition filed by petitioner Neena
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                      Page 12 of 32

Shad on the ground that even though facts and circumstances
of the case do suggest that a discriminatory treatment was
meted out to petitioner Neena Shad, she is not entitled to any
relief in view of the fact that the present application is based
on     the     same     cause      of action as the Writ    Petition
No.11791/2009 filed by Neena Shad before this Court, which
petition stood dismissed by this Court. The relevant portion of
the impugned judgment is being noted herein under:-
        “5. Pursuant to notice issued by this Tribunal, the
        respondent has entered appearance and filed its
        reply contesting the claim of the applicant. It is
        significant to mention that on the basic facts with
        regard to employment of the applicant and her
        husband on contractual basis, the dates of their
        employment, and employment of others along with
        the applicant on same terms and conditions, there is
        no dispute at all. There is no dispute either with
        regard to 26 doctors being appointed after
        appointment of the applicant on same terms and
        conditions. The applicant, the basic facts as
        mentioned above, contends that she and her
        husband have been discriminated. There are hardly
        any arguments by the learned counsel representing
        the respondent to counter the plea raised by the
        respondent………
        9.      Having heard the applicant and Shri Bhardwaj,
        learned counsel representing the respondent, we are
        of the view that even though, the applicant may
        appear to have a case of discriminatory treatment
        meted out to her, but because of her filing writ
        petition for the same relief and on the plea of
        discrimination as well, it would be difficult to give
        any relief to her. We are of the firm view that the
        pleadings with regard to discrimination meted out to
        the applicant were indeed made in the earlier writ
        petition filed by her and the relief asked for, in any
        case, was the same as has been asked for in the
        present Application. The mere fact that nothing with
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                        Page 13 of 32

       regard to discrimination came to be referred to by
       the learned single Judge who dismissed the petition,
       may not entitle the applicant to file fresh petition for
       the same cause of action. Even though, as
       mentioned above, the plea of the applicant is based
       upon discrimination, the same did not come to be
       referred to or discussed, but once, it was taken, the
       applicant ought to have stressed upon the same, and
       if yet aggrieved, she could seek remedies like review
       or appeal against the orders passed by the learned
       single Judge/Division Bench, but fresh petition on the
       same plea would be impermissible. We are conscious
       that by virtue of provisions contained in Section 22
       of the Act of 1985, the Tribunal is not bound by the
       procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure,
       but, at the same time, as per the provisions
       contained in the same very section, it shall be
       guided by the principles of natural justice. Provisions
       contained in Section 11 CPC are in fact based upon
       the principle of natural justice that no one can be
       vexed twice for the same cause of action. Even if,
       therefore, provisions of Section 11 CPC may not be
       strictly applicable in the present case, principles of
       natural justice would come in the way of the
       applicant in asking for any relief having already lost
       her cause up to the Division Bench of the Hon‟ble
       High Court of Delhi.
       12. In view of the discussion made above, even
       though, prima facie it appears that the applicant
       may have a case for retention in service on the
       ground of discriminatory treatment meted to her, we
       are unable to grant any relief to her. The applicant
       appears to have chosen a wrong cause of action. As
       mentioned above, in our view, her remedy lay in
       requesting the Hon‟ble High Court for review or else,
       approach the Hon‟ble Supreme Court for the relief.
       Second petition on the same ground for the same
       relief cannot be entertained. The same is thus
       dismissed. There shall, however, be no order as to
       costs.” (Emphasis Supplied)
31.    After the dismissal of the application filed by petitioner
Neena Shad, her husband Sunil Choudhary filed an application
under Section 19, Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 before
W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                         Page 14 of 32

the Tribunal inter-alia taking the same grounds as taken by
petitioner Neena Shad in her application.
32.     Vide impugned judgment dated 02.07.2010, the Tribunal
dismissed the application filed by petitioner Sunil Choudhary
on the ground that the same is barred by limitation in view of
Section 21 of Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 which
provides that an application should be filed before the Tribunal
within a year of passing of final order by the concerned
authority. It was held by the Tribunal that the cause of action
for filing the present application arose on 03.07.2008 when
MCD issued the office order dispensing with the services of the
petitioner, which is a final order within the meaning of Section
20 of Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and thus petitioner
ought to have filed the application on or before 02.07.2009
whereas he filed the same in the year 2010.
33.     Aggrieved by the judgment dated 02.07.2010 passed by
the Tribunal, petitioner Sunil Choudhary          filed  a review
application before the Tribunal on the ground that the office
order dated 03.07.2008 issued by MCD was not a final order
within the meaning of Section 20 of Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 inasmuch as a representation dated 28.01.2009 was
filed by the petitioner against the said office order and the
same was not considered by MCD.
34.     Vide order dated 11.08.2010, the Tribunal dismissed the
aforesaid       review      application filed by petitioner    Sunil
Choudhary on the ground that the petitioner has not been able
to demonstrate that there was an error apparent on the face of
the record in the judgment dated 02.07.2010 passed by the
Tribunal.
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                       Page 15 of 32

35.     Aggrieved by the judgments dated 28.04.2010 and
02.07.2010 and the order dated 11.08.2010 passed by the
Tribunal, the petitioners have filed the above-captioned
petitions under Articles 226 and 227 of Constitution of India.
36.     During the hearing of the above captioned petitions, the
petitioners, who appeared in person, advanced following 3
submissions:-
A       That being „State‟ within the meaning of Article 12 of
Constitution of India, MCD is expected not only to act fairly but
also     reasonably       and    bona  fide. By extending   term     of
appointment of the Medical Officers who were similarly placed
as the petitioners as also of the Medical Officers who were
juniors to the petitioners and denying similar benefit to the
petitioners      MCD      has    meted   out a  most  discriminatory
treatment to the petitioners and thereby committed a serious
violation of Articles 14 and 16 of Constitution of India. Having
found that MCD had meted out a discriminatory treatment to
petitioner Neena Shad, the Tribunal committed an illegality in
dismissing the application filed by her on a technical ground.
B       That on a proper construction Office Order dated
03.07.2008 issued by MCD amounts to termination of the
services of the petitioners and therefore MCD ought to have
held an inquiry in terms of Article 311 (2) of Constitution of
India before issuing Office Order.
C       That while adjudicating the present matter(s) this Court
should not draw an adverse inference against the petitioners
from the facts pertaining to lodging of complaints of sexual
harassment by petitioner Neena Shad for MCD had not brought
said facts to the notice of the Tribunal.
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                         Page 16 of 32

37.     In addition to the above, petitioner Sunil Chaudhary
argued that the Tribunal committed an error in holding that
Office Order dated 03.07.2008 issued by MCD was a final order
within the meaning of Section 20 of Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 and computing limitation period for filing the
application by petitioner Sunil Choudhary before the Tribunal
on the said basis.
38.     What is the limitation period for filing an application
under Section 19 of Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 before
the Tribunal?
39.     The answer to the aforesaid question lies in Sections 20
and 21 of Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, which read as
under:-
        “20. Application not to be admitted unless
        other remedies exhausted.—(1) A Tribunal shall
        not ordinarily admit an application unless it is
        satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the
        remedies available to him under the relevant service
        rules as to redressal of grievances.
        (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person
        shall be deemed to have availed of all the remedies
        available to him under the relevant service rules as
        to redressal of grievances,—
        (a) if a final order has been made by Government
        or other authority or officer or other person
        competent to pass such order under such rules,
        rejecting any appeal preferred or representation
        made by such person in connection with the
        grievance; or
        (b) where no final order has been made by the
        Government or other authority or officer or other
        person competent to pass such order with regard to
        the appeal preferred or representation made by such
        person, if a period of six months from the date on
        which such appeal was preferred or representation
        was made has expired.
        (3) For the purposes of sub-sections (1) and (2), any
        remedy available to an applicant by way of
        submission of a memorial to the President or to the
        Governor of a State or to any other functionary shall
        not be deemed to be one of the remedies which are
        available unless the applicant had elected to submit
        such memorial.”
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                      Page 17 of 32

        “21. Limitation.—(1) A Tribunal shall not admit an
        application,—
        (a) in a case where a final order such as is
        mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (2) of Section
        20 has been made in connection with the grievance
        unless the application is made, within one year from
        the date on which such final order has been made;
        (b) in a case where an appeal or representation
        such as is mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (2)
        of Section 20 has been made and a period of six
        months had expired thereafter without such final
        order having been made, within one year from the
        date of expiry of the said period of six months.
        (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
        section (1), where—
        (a) the grievance in respect of which an
        application is made had arisen by reason of any
        order made at any time during the period of three
        years immediately preceding the date on which the
        jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal
        become exercisable under this Act in respect of the
        matter to which such order relates; and
        (b) no proceedings for the redressal of such
        grievance had been commenced before the said
        date before any High Court,
        the application shall be entertained by the Tribunal if
        it is made within the period referred to in clause (a),
        or, as the case may be, clause (b) of sub-section (1)
        or within a period of six months from the said date,
        whichever period expires later.
         (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
        section (1) or sub-section (2), an application may be
        admitted after the period of one year specified in
        clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1), or, as the
        case may be, the period of six months specified in
        sub-section (2), if the applicant satisfies the Tribunal
        that he had sufficient cause for not making the
        application within such period.”
40.     A    cumulative      reading of Sections   20   and    21     of
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 shows that (i) in cases
where an appeal has been preferred or representation has
been made by an aggrieved person in respect of his grievance
and an order has been passed by the competent authority
rejecting such appeal or representation, the limitation period
for filing an application before the Tribunal is one year from
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                          Page 18 of 32

the date of passing of such order by the competent authority;
(ii)  in    cases    where      an appeal  has  been  preferred     or
representation has been made by an aggrieved person in
respect of his grievance and no order has been passed by the
competent authority within the period of six months from the
date when such appeal was preferred or representation was
made, the limitation period for filing an application before the
Tribunal is one year from the date of expiry of aforesaid six
months.
41.     The idea behind enactment of Sections 20 and 21 of
Administrative Act, 1985 is obvious. The Courts would get
clogged in case an aggrieved person is compelled to approach
the court immediately upon a wrong being done. It is for this
reason provision is made that an aggrieved person must first
ventilate his grievance before competent authority by filing a
representation and should approach the court on rejection or
non-consideration of his representation.
42.     In the instant case, a categorical averment was made by
petitioner Sunil Choudhary in his review application that he had
made a representation dated 28.01.2009 against the Office
Order dated 03.07.2008 passed by MCD; that no order was
passed       by    the    competent   authority in respect   of    his
representation and that inadvertently he could not file the said
representation along with the original application filed by him
before the Tribunal.
43.     Having regard to the facts that the original application
filed by petitioner Sunil Choudhary before the Tribunal was
drafted and prosecuted by the petitioner himself and that the
petitioner is a layman who is not aware of the legal nuances, a
liberal view of the matter ought to have been taken by the
Tribunal and the non-filing of representation dated 28.01.2009
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                        Page 19 of 32

by the petitioner along with the original application should
have been excused.
44.     Be that as it may, petitioner Sunil Choudhary made his
representation on 28.01.2009. No order was passed by the
competent authority in respect of said representation till
27.07.2009 i.e. period of six months from the date of making
of representation by the petitioner. Keeping in view the
provisions of Sections 20 and 21 of Administrative Tribunals
Act, 1985 limitation period available to petitioner Sunil
Choudhary for filing an application before the Tribunal was one
year from 27.07.2009 i.e. expiry of period of six months from
the date of making of representation by the petitioner. The
original application was filed by petitioner Sunil Choudhary
before the Tribunal on 25.05.2010, thus well within the
limitation period prescribed under Section 21 of Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985. Thus, the Tribunal was wrong in holding
that the application filed by petitioner Sunil Chaudhary was
barred by limitation.
45.     Having found that the application filed by petitioner Sunil
Chaudhary was not barred by limitation, the option available to
us is to remand the application to the Tribunal for adjudication
on merits. However, in view of the fact that the grievances
raised by petitioners Sunil Chaudhary and Neena Shad are
identical and we are dealing with the matter of petitioner
Neena Shad, we deem it fit to adjudicate the matter of
petitioner Sunil Chaudhary as well.
46.     What is a “cause of action”?
47.     Cause of action has been explained or defined by
different judges in different opinions. Language may vary but
content of each decision is that a cause of action is a factual
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                        Page 20 of 32

situation, the existence of which, entitles one person to obtain
from the other a remedy from the court of law. Contours of
cause of action mean every fact, which, if traversed, would be
necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order to obtain a decree.
48.     Are the earlier writ petition filed by petitioner Neena
Shad before this Court and the subsequent petition filed by
her before this Court and transferred to Tribunal based on
same cause of action as held by the Tribunal?
49.     A close reading of the averments made in the two
petitions and a comparison thereof with each other shows that
the answer to the above question is indeed YES. While in the
first petition, petitioner Neena Shad briefly touched upon the
fact that MCD meted out a discriminatory treatment by issuing
Office Order dated 03.07.2008 dispensing with her services
(see the averments made in the first petition, noted by us in
para      26     above),      she  elaborated the allegations      of
discriminatory treatment in the second petition by stressing
upon the fact that MCD had extended term of appointment of
4 Medical Officers who were not granted extensions in the first
instance as also of 26 Medical Officers who were junior to her
and further attempted to substantiate the same by annexing
Office Orders issued by MCD in respect of grant of extensions
to said 30 Medical Officers. Thus, there was only a change in
the content of both the petitions while the cause of action
remained the same i.e. issuance of Office Order dated
03.07.2008 by MCD dispensing with the services of petitioner
Neena Shad. If some evidence came to be possessed by Neena
Shad in support of allegations of discriminatory treatment
meted out to her by MCD after the dismissal of the first
petition or if she was aggrieved by the fact that this Court did
not deal with the said allegations while dismissing the first
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                       Page 21 of 32

petition the remedies available to her was to either file a
review application before this Court or challenge the order of
this Court before superior Court. It was not permissible to
petitioner Neena Shad to file a fresh petition on the same
cause of action by changing the content of the petition from
the first petition.
50.     Whether MCD was required to hold an inquiry in terms of
Article 311(2) of Constitution of India before issuing Office
Order(s) dated 03.07.2008 dispensing with the services of the
petitioners?
51.     Part XIV of Constitution of India deals with “Services
under the Union & the States”. Articles 310 and 311 contained
under the said part read as under:-
        “310. Tenure of office of persons serving the
        Union or a State.—(1) Except as expressly
        provided by this Constitution, every person who is a
        member of a defence service or of a civil service of
        the Union or of an all-India service or holds any post
        connected with defence or any civil post under the
        Union, holds office during the pleasure of the
        President, and every person who is a member of a
        civil service of a State or holds any civil post under a
        State holds office during the pleasure of the
        Governor of the State.
        (2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civil post
        under the Union or a State holds office during the
        pleasure of the President or, as the case may be, of
        the Governor of the State, any contract under which
        a person, not being a member of a defence service
        or of an all-India service or of a civil service of the
        Union or a State, is appointed under this Constitution
        to hold such a post may, if the President or the
        Governor , as the case may be, deems it necessary
        in order to secure the services of a person having
        special qualifications, provide for the payment to him
        of compensation, if before the expiration of an
        agreed period that post is abolished or he is, for
        reasons not connected with any misconduct on his
        part, required to vacate that post.”
        “311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank
        of persons employed in civil capacities under
        the Union or a State.—(1) No person who is a
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                         Page 22 of 32

        member of a civil service of the Union or an all-India
        service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil
        post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or
        removed by an authority subordinate to that by
        which he was appointed.
        [(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed
        or removed or reduced in rank except after an
        inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges
        against him and given a reasonable opportunity of
        being heard in respect of those charges
        [Provided that where it is proposed after such
        inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such
        penalty may be imposed on the basis of the
        evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall
        not be necessary to give such person any
        opportunity of making representation on the penalty
        proposed:
        Provided further that this clause shall not apply—
        (a) where a person is dismissed or removed or
        reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has
        led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or
        (b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or
        remove a person or to reduce him in rank is satisfied
        that for some reason, to be recorded by that
        authority in writing, it is not reasonably practicable
        to hold such inquiry; or
        (c) where the President or the Governor, as the
        case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the
        security of the State it is not expedient to hold such
        inquiry.
        (3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a
        question arises whether it is reasonably practicable
        to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2),
        the decision thereon of the authority empowered to
        dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in
        rank shall be final.”
52.     What is the extent of protection available to the
government servants under Article 311?
53.     Clause (1) of Article 311 is quite explicit and hardly
requires any discussion. The scope and the ambit of clause (1)
is that government servants are entitled to the judgment of
the authority by which they were appointed or some authority
superior to that authority and that they should not be
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                        Page 23 of 32

dismissed or removed by a lesser authority in whose judgment
they may not have the same faith. The underlying idea
obviously is that a provision like this will ensure to them a
certain amount of security of tenure. Clause (2) protects
government servants against being dismissed or removed or
reduced in rank without being given a reasonable opportunity
of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in
regard to them. It is to be noted that in clause (1) the words
“dismissed” and “removed” have been used while in clause (2)
the words “dismissed” “removed” and “reduced in rank” have
been used.
54.     What      is   meant       by the expressions “dismissed”,
“removed” and “reduced in rank” occurring in Article 311(2)?
55.     This aspect of the matter was examined in great detail by
Supreme Court in the decision reported as Parshotam Lal
Dhingra v Union of India 1958 SCR 828. After tracing the
history of service rules, Supreme Court observed as under:-
        “It follows from the above discussion that both at the
        date of the commencement of the 1935 Act and of
        our Constitution the words “dismissed”, “removed”
        and “reduced in rank”, as used in the service rules,
        were well understood as signifying or denoting the
        three major punishments which could be inflicted on
        government servants. The protection given by the
        rules to the government servants against dismissal,
        removal or reduction in rank, which could not be
        enforced by action, was incorporated in sub-sections
        (1) and (2) of Section 240 to give them a statutory
        protection by indicating a procedure which had to be
        followed before the punishments of dismissal,
        removal or reduction in rank could be imposed on
        them and which could be enforced in law. These
        protections have now been incorporated in Article
        311 of our Constitution. The effect of Section 240 of
        the 1935 Act reproduced in Articles 310 and 311, as
        explained by this Court in S.A. Venkataraman v.
        Union of India 25 has been to impose a fetter on the
        right of the government to inflict the several
        punishments therein mentioned. Thus under Article
        311(1) the punishments of dismissal, or removal
        cannot be inflicted by an authority subordinate to
        that by which the servant was appointed and under
        Article 311(2) the punishments of dismissal, removal
        and reduction in rank cannot be meted out to the
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                       Page 24 of 32

        government servant without giving him a reasonable
        opportunity to defend himself. The principle
        embodied in Article 310(1) that the government
        servants hold office during the pleasure of the
        President or the Governor, as the case may be, is
        qualified by the provisions of Article 311 which give
        protection to the government servants. The net
        result is that it is only in those cases where the
        government intends to inflict those three forms of
        punishments that the government servant must be
        given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
        against the action proposed to be taken in regard to
        him. It follows, therefore, that if the termination of
        service is sought to be brought about otherwise than
        by way of punishment, then the government servant
        whose service is so terminated cannot claim the
        protection of Article 311(2) and the decisions cited
        before us and referred to above, insofar as they lay
        down that principle, must be held to be rightly
        decided.” (Emphasis Supplied)
56.     There are different species of government service. The
strength of a service or a part of a service sanctioned as a
separate unit is, in the Fundamental Rules, Section 3, Chapter
II, Rule 9(4), called the cadre. Each cadre consists of a certain
number of posts. According to Rule 9(22) of the Fundamental
Rules, a permanent post means a post carrying a definite rate
of pay sanctioned without limit of time. Due to rush of work or
other exigencies some “temporary posts” are often created. A
temporary post is defined in Rule 9(30) to mean a post
carrying a definite rate of pay sanctioned for a limited time.
These temporary posts are very often outside the cadre and
are usually for one year and are renewed from year to year,
although some of them may be created for a certain specified
period. The conditions of service of a government servant
appointed to a post, permanent or temporary, are regulated by
the terms of the contract of employment, express or implied,
and subject thereto, by the rules applicable to the members of
the particular service.
57.     Article 311 does not make any distinction between
permanent and temporary members of service or between
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                       Page 25 of 32

persons holding permanent or temporary posts in the matter
of their tenure. The protection envisaged in Article 311 is
equally available to both the classes of government servants.
58. The appointment of a government servant to a
permanent post may be substantive or on probation or on an
officiating basis.
59.     A substantive appointment to a permanent post in public
service confers normally on the servant so appointed a
substantive right to the post and he becomes entitled to hold a
“lien” on the post. This “lien” is defined in Fundamental Rule
Section 3, Chapter II Rule 9(13) as the title of a government
servant to hold substantively a permanent post, including a
tenure post, to which he has been appointed substantively.
The Government cannot terminate his service unless it is
entitled to do so (1) by virtue of a special term of the contract
of employment, e.g., by giving the requisite notice provided by
the contract, or (2) by the rules governing the conditions of his
service, e.g., on attainment of the age of superannuation
prescribed by the rules, or on the fulfillment of the conditions
for compulsory retirement or on abolition of post or on being
found guilty of misconduct, inefficiency, indiscipline or any
other disqualification.
60.     Termination of service of such a servant so appointed
must per se be a punishment, for it operates as a forfeiture of
the servant‟s rights and brings about a premature end of his
employment.
61.     An appointment to a permanent post in government
service on probation means, as in the case of a person
appointed by a private employer, that the servant so
appointed is taken on trial. The period of probation may in
some cases be for a fixed period, e.g., for six months or for
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                      Page 26 of 32

one year or it may be expressed simply as “on probation”
without any specification of any period. Such an employment
on probation, under the ordinary law of master and servant,
comes to an end if during or at the end of the probation the
servant so appointed on trial is found unsuitable and his
service is terminated by a notice.
62.     An appointment to officiate in a permanent post is
usually made when the incumbent substantively holding that
post is on leave or when the permanent post is vacant and no
substantive appointment has yet been made to that post. Such
an officiating appointment comes to an end on the return of
the incumbent substantively holding the post from leave in the
former case or on a substantive appointment being made to
that permanent post in the latter case or on the service of a
notice of termination as agreed upon or as may be reasonable
under the ordinary law.
63.     It is, therefore, quite clear that appointment to a
permanent post in a government service, either on probation
or on an officiating basis, is, from the very nature of such
employment, itself of a transitory character and, in the
absence of any special contract or specific rule regulating the
conditions       of   the     service, the implied term of    such
appointment, under the ordinary law of master and servant, is
that it is terminable at any time. In short, in the case of an
appointment to a permanent post in a government service on
probation or on an officiating basis, the servant so appointed
does not acquire any substantive right to the post and
consequently cannot complain, any more than a private
servant employed on probation or on an officiating basis can
do, if his service is terminated at any time.
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                      Page 27 of 32

64.     Likewise an appointment to a temporary post in a
government service may be substantive or on probation or on
an officiating basis. Here also, in the absence of any special
stipulation or any specific service rule, the servant so
appointed acquires no right to the post and his service can be
terminated at any time except in one case, namely, when the
appointment to a temporary post is for a definite period. In
such a case the servant so appointed acquires a right to his
tenure for that period which cannot be put an end to unless
there is a special contract entitling the employer to do so on
giving the requisite notice or the person so appointed is, on
enquiry held on due notice to the servant and after giving him
a reasonable opportunity to defend himself, found guilty of
misconduct,          negligence,   inefficiency  or    any     other
disqualification.
65.     To put it simply, the principle is that when a servant has
right to a post either under the terms of the contract of
employment, express or implied, or under the rules governing
the conditions of his service, the termination of the service of
such a servant is by itself and prima facie a punishment, for it
operates as a forfeiture of his right to hold that post or that
rank and to get the emoluments and other benefits attached
thereto. But if the servant has no right to the post, as where he
is appointed to a post, permanent or temporary either on
probation or on officiating basis, the termination of his
employment does not deprive him of any right and cannot,
therefore, by itself be a punishment.
66.     It does not, however, follow that, except in the two cases
mentioned above, in all other cases, termination of service of a
government servant who has no right to his post. e.g., where
he was appointed to a post, temporary or permanent, either on
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                        Page 28 of 32

probation or on officiating basis, the termination cannot, in any
circumstance, be a dismissal or removal from service by way
of punishment. Cases may arise where the government may
find    a servant        unsuitable for the post on account of
misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or other disqualification. If
such a servant was appointed to a post, permanent or
temporary, either on probation or on officiating basis, then the
very transitory character of the employment implies that the
employment was terminable at any time on reasonable notice
given by the Government. In such cases the Government may
proceed to take action against the servant in exercise of its
powers under the terms of the contract of employment,
express or implied, or under the rules regulating the conditions
of service, if any be applicable, and ordinarily in such a
situation the Government will take this course. But the
Government may take the view that a simpliciter termination
of service is not enough and that the conduct of the servant
has been such that he deserves a punishment entailing penal
consequences. In such a case the Government may choose to
proceed against the servant on the basis of his misconduct,
negligence, inefficiency or the like and inflict on him the
punishment of dismissal or removal carrying with it the penal
consequences. In such a case the servant will be entitled to
the protection of Article 311 of Constitution of India for the
reason the same puts an indelible stigma on the officer
affecting his future career.
67.     In order to determine whether an order terminating the
service of a government servant amounts to punishment
following two tests needs to be applied namely, (1) whether
the servant had a right to the post, or (2) whether he has been
visited with penal consequences of the kind hereinbefore
referred to? If the case satisfies either of the two tests then it
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                      Page 29 of 32

must be held that the servant has been punished and the
termination of his service must be taken as a punishment.
68.     Sometimes due to rush of work or other exigencies of
service the government makes contractual appointments.
Such appointments are made in respect of non-sanctioned
posts and de-hors the recruitment rules. A person appointed
on contractual basis does not enjoy the protection of Article
311(2) for the simple reason he is not member of a civil
service of the Union or an all-India service or a civil service of a
State or holds a civil post under the Union or a State. (See the
decision of Supreme Court reported as Union Public Service
Commission v Girish Jayanti Lal Vaghela (2006) 2 SCC 482)
69.     But the „State‟ is expected to act fairly, reasonably and
non-arbitrarily even in contractual matters. (See the decision
of Supreme Court reported as Ramana Dayaram Shetty v
International Airport Authority of India (1979) 3 SCC 489).
Therefore, in the matters of termination of contractual
employment by the government, the courts are under a duty
to ensure that the government has not acted in an arbitrary
and whimsical manner.
70.     Whether MCD had acted fairly, reasonable and non-
arbitrarily      while    issuing  Office  Order   dated  03.07.2008
dispensing with the services of the petitioners?
71.     The facts noted by us in paras 3 to 21 are startling and
speaks       for   themselves.     The   aforesaid  facts show     that
petitioner Neena Shad was a nuisance at her workplace. She
was in the habit of leveling false charges of sexual harassment
against her colleagues as also seniors. As many as three
complaints leveling sexual harassment allegations were filed
by Neena Shad but not even an iota of truth was found in any
of the said complaints by the Committee. Such was the terror
of Neena Shad that no male pharmacist was ready to work
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                          Page 30 of 32

under her lest she would level sexual harassment allegations
against him. (See the report submitted by Dr. M.L. Khatri, DHO
(ISM), contents whereof have been noted in para 11 above).
72.     The aforesaid facts further show that the conduct of
petitioner at her workplace was not unsatisfactory. She used to
cry easily, unnecessarily pick up fights with people and trouble
her subordinates. Not only that, she was not punctual and
undisciplined. (See the depositions of Ms.Renu Gill and
Ms.Sudesh Kumari before the Committee, contents whereof
have been noted in para 16 and 17 above).
73.     The conduct of petitioner Neena Shad before the
Committee was deplorable. She adopted a most uncooperative
and obstructive attitude with the Committee.
74.     As regards petitioner Sunil Chaudhary, aforesaid facts
show that he actively assisted petitioner Neena Shad in
creating nuisance at her workplace. Petitioner Sunil Chaudhary
picked up a fight with Dr.Vidya Sagar Sharma and thereby he
and petitioner Neena Shad foisted a false case of sexual
harassment          against     him.   He    also  adopted    a    most
uncooperative and obstructive attitude with the Committee.
He terrorized Keshav Dass into stating lies before the
Committee. He along with petitioner Neena Shad misbehaved
with the dispatch rider.
75.     In view of aforesaid conduct of the petitioners, the
petitioners were perfectly justified in dispensing with the
services of the petitioners. No fault can be found in the
decision of MCD of issuing Office Order dated 03.07.2008 and
dispensing       with     the   services  of   the petitioners.     The
observations made by the Tribunal in the petition pertaining to
Neena Shad that there is prima facie proof of her being
discriminated are wrong and are the result of not perusing the
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                           Page 31 of 32

record maintained by the MCD in which decision was taken not
to extend the contractual appointment of the petitioners.
76.     As regards submission C advanced by the petitioners,
suffice would it be to state that it is no doubt true that the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi has not pleaded facts to justify
non-continuation of the contractual services of the petitioners,
but it is settled law that a writ court can call for the record and
treat the production of the record as the response to the Rule
when the action pertains to the issuance of a writ of certiorari.
77.     In view of above discussion, the above captioned writ
petitions are dismissed, but without any orders as to costs.
                                       PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
                                       MOOL CHAND GARG, J.
November 02, 2010
mm
 W.P.(C) Nos.6423/2010 & 6113/2010                         Page 32 of 32


