*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                     Date of Decision: October 09, 2015
+                               LPA 673/2015
      PUNJAB & SIND BANK                               ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:  Mr.Jagat Arora, Advocate with
                                     Mr.Rajat Arora, Advocate
                                     versus
      NAND LAL PHATNANI                                ..... Respondent
                    Represented by:  Mr.Vivek Singh, Advocate
                                LPA 674/2015
      PUNJAB & SIND BANK                               ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:  Mr.Jagat Arora, Advocate with
                                     Mr.Rajat Arora, Advocate
                                     versus
      HARVINDER PAL SINGH                              ..... Respondent
                    Represented by:  Mr.Vivek Singh, Advocate
                                LPA 675/2015
      PUNJAB & SIND BANK                               ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:  Mr.Jagat Arora, Advocate with
                                     Mr.Rajat Arora, Advocate
                                     versus
      PARAMJIT SINGH ANAND                             ..... Respondent
                    Represented by: Mr.Vivek Singh, Advocate
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                 Page 1 of 13

                                 LPA 676/2015
      PUNJAB & SIND BANK                                   ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:     Mr.Jagat Arora, Advocate with
                                        Mr.Rajat Arora, Advocate
                                        versus
      PARMINDER SINGH                                      ..... Respondent
                    Represented by:     Mr.Vivek Singh, Advocate
                                 LPA 677/2015
      PUNJAB & SIND BANK                                   ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:     Mr.Jagat Arora, Advocate with
                                        Mr.Rajat Arora, Advocate
                                        versus
      HARPREET SINGH MAKKAR                                ..... Respondent
                    Represented by: Mr.Vivek Singh, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
1.    Whether the learned Single Judge has correctly opined that the issue
raised in the five writ petitions filed by the five respondents in the above
captioned five appeals was covered in their favour as per the decision
reported as (1996) 9 SCC 395 State of UP & Anr. Vs. Shri Krishna Pandey
and that the decision reported as 2015 Lab. I.C. 685 State of West Bengal Vs.
Pronab Chakraborty was not applicable, is the question which arises for
consideration before this Bench in the five captioned appeals.
2.    The respondent in each appeal was an employee of the appellant bank.
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                     Page 2 of 13

Nand Lal Phatnani the respondent in LPA No.673/2015 superannuated on
May 31, 2010. Harvinder Pal Singh the respondent in LPA No.674/2015
superannuated on July 31, 2011. Paramjit Singh Anand the respondent in
LPA No.675/2015 superannuated on July 30, 2013. Parminder Singh the
respondent in LPA No.676/2015 superannuated on August 27, 2010 and
Harpreet Singh Makker the respondent in LPA No.677/2015 superannuated
on November 30, 2012. All of them were charge-sheeted under charge-
sheet(s) dated December 26, 2014. Whereas Nand Lal Phatnani, Harpreet
Singh Makker and Paramjit Singh Anand were charge-sheeted for the same
acts of omission and commission, being members of a loan committee,
pertaining to enhanced limits of a bank guarantee furnished by the bank at
the instance of M/s.Zoom Developers Pvt. Ltd.; Harvinder Pal Singh and
Parminder Singh were charge-sheeted concerning the enhancement of the
said bank guarantee in their capacity as a Branch Manager and the General
Manager.     Therefore, it is apparent that allegations in the charge-sheet
against Nand Lal Phatnani, Harpreet Singh Makker and Paramjit Singh
Anand were the same concerning acts of omission and commission and
against Harvinder Pal Singh and Parminder Singh were near identical,
bringing out the acts of omission and commission by the two. Concededly
the common ground of all parties i.e. the appellant bank and the respondents
in the five appeals is that the acts of omission and commission complained
of, preceded four years from the date when the charge-sheet was issued.
3.     The issue turned on the power of the competent authority to issue the
charge-sheet in light of the Punjab & Sind Bank (Employees) Pension
Regulations, 1995 (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations). As per the
five charge-sheeted employees, no departmental proceedings could be
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                  Page 3 of 13

instituted against them because the event(s) in respect of which they were
charge-sheeted took place more than 4 years before the initiation of the
disciplinary proceedings in view of Regulation 48(2) of the Regulations,
which reads : No departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the
employee was in service, shall be instituted in respect of an event which
took place more than four years before such institution. As per the appellant
the power to initiate disciplinary proceedings by issuing a charge-sheet with
respect to events which took place more than 4 years before initiation of the
disciplinary proceedings had to be found in Regulation 43 of the
Regulations.
4.     The arsenal for the debate between the parties were the two respective
decisions noted by us in paragraph one above.
5.     Holding in favour of the respondents, the learned Single Judge has
held that Regulation 43 and 45 no doubt empower the management of the
bank to withhold or withdraw pension for a grave misconduct but at the
same time Regulation 48 also contemplated withholding of withdrawal of
pension, whether permanently or for a specified period. The argument by
the bank that Regulation 48 would come into play if the bank intended to
recover a pecuniary loss to it has been rejected by the learned Single Judge,
and the reasoning is to be found in paragraph 9 of the impugned decision
which reads as under:-
       “9. A perusal of Regulations 43 and 45, no doubt, would
       reveal that they are related to withholding or withdrawal of
       pension for a grave misconduct.          In other words, the
       departmental proceedings can be initiated for the purpose of
       withholding or withdrawal of pension if the pensioners are
       convicted for a serious crime or criminal breach of trust or
       forgery or acting fraudulently or is found guilty of grave
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                   Page 4 of 13

      misconduct. At the same time, Regulation 48 also contemplates
      withholding or withdrawal of pension, whether permanently or
      for specified period, and order recovery from pension of the
      whole or part of pecuniary loss caused to a bank if in a
      departmental or judicial proceedings, the pensioner is found
      guilty of grave misconduct or negligence or criminal breach of
      trust or forgery or acts done fraudulently during the period of
      service. Regulation 43 stipulates, withholding or withdrawal of
      pension for the reasons stated therein.          Regulation 45
      prescribed the procedure to be followed before it is concluded
      that pensioner is guilty of grave misconduct. Regulation 48
      contemplates withholding or withdrawal of pension and
      additionally, order recovery from pension of the whole or part
      of pecuniary loss, in the eventuality, the pensioner is found
      guilty of grave negligence or a misconduct, or criminal breach
      of trust, or forgery or acts done fraudulently/done during the
      period of service. Proviso (3) thereto is a clause relating to
      limitation inasmuch it stipules for „no departmental
      proceedings for any event which took place more than four
      years before such institution‟. Regulations 43 and 45 have to
      be read in conjunction with Regulation 48. Regulation 48 is
      not specific for recovery of pecuniary loss as urged by
      Mr.Arora, counsel for the respondent. It also contemplates
      withholding or withdrawal of pension or a part thereof,
      whether permanently or for a specified period. I note, the
      charge-sheet issued to the petitioners is in terms of Regulation
      43 read with Regulations 45 and 48 of the Pension Regulations,
      1995, hence, the submission of Mr.Arora is not sustainable on
      the face of the provisions under which, the charge-sheets have
      been issued.”
6.    Thereafter the learned Single Judge has noted the Rule which was
considered by the Supreme Court in Pronab Chakraborty’s case and the
Regulation which was considered by the Supreme Court in Krishna
Pandey’s case and has concluded that the pari-materia regulation was the
one considered in Krishna Pandey’s case and thus has held that his decision
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                  Page 5 of 13

had to be guided by the decision in Krishna Pandey’s case.
7.    Since we are re-chartering the voyage undertaken by the learned
Single Judge we have to look at the same light houses which fell en-route
and guided the journey navigated by the learned Single Judge. They would
be the applicable Regulations of the appellant bank, the Rule considered by
the Supreme Court in Pronab Chakraborty’s case and the Regulation
considered by the Supreme Court in Krishna Pandey’s case.
8.    Regulations 43, 45 and 48 of the Punjab & Sind Bank (Employees’)
Pension Regulations, 1995 read as under:-
      “43. Withholding or withdrawal of pension:-
       The Competent Authority may, by order in writing,
      withhold or withdraw a pension or a part thereof, whether
      permanently or for a specified period, if the pensioner is
      convicted of a serious crime or criminal breach of trust or
      forgery or acting fraudulently or is found guilty of grave
      misconduct:
      Provident that where a part of pension is withheld or
      withdrawn, the amount of such pension shall not be
      reduced below the minimum pension per mensem payable
      under these regulations.
                            xxxxx
      45. Pensioner guilty of grave misconduct:-
       In a case not falling under regulation 44 if the Competent
      Authority considers that the pensioner is prima facie guilty
      of grave misconduct, it shall, before passing an order,
      follow the procedure specified in Punjab & Sind Bank
      Officer Employees‟ (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations,
      1982 or in Settlement as the case may be.
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                 Page 6 of 13

                            xxxxx
      48. Recovery of Pecuniary loss caused to the Bank:-
       (1) The Competent Authority may withhold or withdraw a
      pension or a part thereof, whether permanently or for a
      specified period, and order recovery from pension of the
      whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the bank if in
      any departmental or judicial proceedings the pensioner is
      found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence or criminal
      breach of trust or forgery or acts done fraudulently during
      the period of his service.
       Provided that the Board shall be consulted before any final
      orders are passed.
       Provided further that departmental proceedings, if
      instituted while the employee was in service, shall, after the
      retirement of the employee, be deemed to be proceedings
      under these regulations and shall be continued and
      concluded by the authority by which they were commenced
      in the same manner as if the employee has continued in
      service.
      (2) No departmental proceedings, if not instituted while
      the employee was in service, shall be instituted in respect of
      an event which took place more than four years before
      such institution;
      Provided that the disciplinary proceedings so instituted
      shall be in accordance with the procedure applicable to
      disciplinary proceedings in relation to the employee during
      the period of his service.
       (3) Where the Competent Authority orders recovery of
      pecuniary loss from the pension, the recovery shall not
      ordinarily be made at a rate exceeding one-third of the
      pension admissible on the date of retirement of the
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                    Page 7 of 13

      employee;
       Provided that where a part of pension is withheld or
      withdrawn, the amount of pension drawn by a pensioner
      shall not be less than the minimum pension payable under
      these regulations.”
9.    Rule 10 of the West Bengal Services (Death-cum-Retirement
Benefit) Rules, 1971 considered in Pronab Chakraborty’s case reads as
under:-
      “10. Right of the Governor to withhold pension in certain
      cases-
      (1) The Governor reserves to himself the right of
      withholding or withdrawing a pension or any part of it
      whether permanently or for a specified period, and the right
      of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part
      of any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if the
      pensioner is found in a departmental or judicial proceeding
      to have been guilty of grave misconduct or negligence,
      during the period of his service, including service rendered
      on re-employment after retirement:
      Provided that
      (a) such departmental proceeding if instituted while the
      officer was in service, whether before his retirement or
      during his re-employment, shall after the final retirement of
      the office, be deemed to be a proceeding under this article
      and shall be continued and concluded by the authority by
      which it was commenced in the same manner as if the officer
      had continued in service;
      (b) Such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while
      the office was in service, whether before his retirement or
      during his re-employment
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                 Page 8 of 13

      (i) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the
      Governor;
      (ii) shall not be in respect of any event which took place
      more than four years before such institution; and
       (iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such
      place as the Governor may direct and in accordance with
      the procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in
      which an order of dismissal from service could be made in
      relation to the officer during his service.”
10.   Regulation 351-A of the Civil Services Regulations considered in
Krishna Pandey’s case reads as under:-
      "The Governor reserves to himself the right of withholding
      or withdrawing a pension or any part of it, whether
      permanently or for a specified period and the right of
      ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole part of
      any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if the pensioner is
      found in departmental or judicial proceedings to have been
      guilty of grave mis-conduct, or to have caused pecuniary
      loss to Government by misconduct or negligence, during his
      service, including service rendered on re-employment after
      retirement:
      Provided that
      a)      Such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while
      the officer was on duty either before retirement or during re-
      employment-
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                   Page 9 of 13

      i)      shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the
      Governor,
      ii)     shall be in respect of an event which took place not
      more than four years before the institution of such
      proceedings, and
      iii) shall be conducted by such authority and in such
      place or places as the Governor may direct and in
      accordance with the procedure applicable to proceedings on
      which an order of dismissal from service may be made.
      b)       judicial proceedings, if not instituted while the officer
      was on duty either before retirement or during re-
      employment, shall have been instituted in accordance with
      sub-clause (ii) of clause (a) and
      c)       the Public Service Commission, U.P., shall be
      consulted before final orders are passed.
      Explanation - For the purpose of this article
      a)       departmental proceedings shall be deemed to have
      been instituted when the charges framed against the
      pensioner are issued to him, or if the officer has been placed
      under suspension from an earlier date, on such date; and
      i)       in the case of criminal proceedings, on the date on
      which a complaint is made, or a charge-sheet is submitted,
      to a criminal court; and
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                       Page 10 of 13

       ii)     in the case of civil proceedings, on the date on which
       the plaint is presented or, as the case may be, an application
       is made, to a civil court.
        Note:- As soon as proceedings of the nature referred to in
       this article are instituted the authority which institutes such
       proceedings shall without delay intimate the fact to the Audit
       Officer concerned."
11.    A perusal of Regulation 43 of the Punjab & Sind Bank (Employees)
Pension Regulations 1959 makes it clear that the competent authority may
withdraw or withhold full pension or part pension if the pensioner is
convicted of a serious crime or criminal breach of trust or forgery or acting
fraudulently. These grounds would relate to a conviction at a criminal trial.
It also empowers the competent authority to withdraw or withhold full
pension or part pension if the pensioner is found guilty of grave misconduct.
The said Regulation deals with the power of the competent authority to levy
the penalty on a pensioner.        Regulation 48 deals with a different area
concerning departmental proceedings. Sub-Regulation 1 is a near verbatim
reproduction of Regulation 43. Sub-Regulation 2 of Regulation 48 curtails
the power of the competent authority to initiate departmental proceeding
against a pensioner.         As per the Sub-Regulation the departmental
proceedings against a pensioner cannot be instituted in respect of an event
which took place more than four years before such institution.
12.    The argument of learned counsel for the appellant that the source of
power to initiate departmental proceedings against pensioners is to be found
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                     Page 11 of 13

in Regulation 43 is neither here nor there for the reason the bar created by
Sub-Regulation 2 of Regulation 48 is a limitation regarding point of time
within which the power to initiate departmental proceedings against a
pensioner has to be commenced.
13.    The reasoning of the learned Single Judge in para 9 of the impugned
decision is sound.
14.    In Pronab Chakraborty’s case (supra) the admitted fact was that
Pronab Chakraborty was served with a charge-sheet on July 31, 2007 and he
attained the age of superannuation on January 31, 2008. He challenged the
continuation of the departmental proceedings against him and had relied
upon Rule 10 of the West Bengal Services (Death-cum-Retirement Benefit)
Rules, 1971. The observations of the Supreme Court that Sub-Rule 1 of
Rule 10 contemplates two different kinds of punishments have to be
understood in said context, of the charge-sheet being issued before Pronab
Chakraborty superannuated. Reliance by Pronab Chakraborty on sub-para
(b) of Sub-Rule 1 of Rule 10 was clearly misplaced because it comes into
operation if departmental proceedings were initiated after the superannuation
of the employee.
15.    Regulation 351A of the Central Civil Service Regulations are pari-
materia with Regulation 48A of the Punjab & Sind Bank (Employees)
Pension Regulations, 1995 and thus the learned Single Judge has correctly
held that the law declared by the Supreme Court in Krishna Pandey’s case
(supra) was applicable.
16.    The position therefore would be that against serving employees of the
appellant bank disciplinary proceedings can be initiated for acts of omission
and commission if they constitute a misconduct irrespective of limitation,
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                   Page 12 of 13

but with respect to employees who have superannuated from service the
disciplinary proceedings cannot be initiated if they relate to events which
took place more than 4 years before the institution of the disciplinary
proceedings.
17.    The feeble attempt made by learned counsel for the appellant that
Courts do not interfere with charge-sheets, is noted and rejected because it is
settled law that a jurisdictional issue concerning a charge-sheet can be the
subject matter of a challenge to the very initiation of the departmental
proceedings. It is trite that issues concerning limitation go to the root of the
jurisdiction.
18.    The appeals are accordingly dismissed but without any orders as to
costs.
                                                 (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                                         JUDGE
                                                     (MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                            JUDGE
OCTOBER 09, 2015
mamta
LPA No.673/2015 & Conn.Matters                                     Page 13 of 13


