*        IN    THE   HIGH   COURT     OF   DELHI   AT   NEW   DELHI
+                          W.P(C) No. 19541/2004
%                       Date of Decision: 05.07.2010
      DR.MANBIR S. SACHDEV                               …. PETITIONER
                        Through Petitioner in person
                                  Versus
      INDIAN COUNCIL OF AGRICULATURAL                  ….RESPONDENTS
      RESEARCH & ORS.
                        Through Mr.G.C. Nagar, Advocate
       CORAM:
       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MOOL CHAND GARG
1.     Whether reporters of Local papers may be
       allowed to see the judgment?
2.     To be referred to the reporter or not?
3.     Whether the judgment should be reported in
       the Digest?
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (ORAL)
1.      ICAR invited applications to fill up the post of Project
Director       (Nuclear  Research    Laboratory)    IAR,  New    Delhi.
Amongst others, it was stipulated that a doctorial degree in any
field of Agricultural Science was a must.
2.      The petitioner applied and         so did    respondent    No.4
Dr.P.S.Datta.
3.      Respondent No.4 has a doctorial degree in Isotope
Hydrology.
4.      The petitioner took a stand that respondent No.4 did not
possess the requisite doctorial degree and since the employer
did not agree, he filed a petition which stands disposed of by the
Central Administrative Tribunal. Needless to state the petitioner
has not met with success. The petition filed before the Central
Administrative Tribunal stands dismissed vide order dated
06.05.2004. Review sought of the said order stands dismissed
W.P.(C)19541/2004                                              Page 1 of 4

vide order dated 27.07.2004.
5.      In rejecting the claim of the petitioner, the Tribunal has
held that the available literature in the field, acceptable to the
peers in the field, shows that a doctorial degree in Nuclear
Hydrology is an Agricultural Science degree. It has been held
that the degree concerns Water and Soil Science.
6.      The Tribunal has referred to Encyclopedia Britanacia on
the subject “MACROPAEDIA”. It has been held as under:-
        “MAJOR DIVISIONS OF AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES
        The agricultural Sciences are normally subdivided into
        five groups:
        1.     Soil Science, which deals with the geological
               generation of soil, with soil physics, and soil
               chemistry, as they pertain to agriculture, and
               with all other factors relevant to soil fertility.
        2.     Plant production, which comprises applied plant
               physiology, plant nutrition, plant breeding
               (including    genetics),    weed    control,       plant
               diseases, and pest control.
        3.     Animal production, comprising animal breeding
               and genetics, animal nutrition, and animal
               husbandry, (in most countries the science of
               animal diseases is not counted among the
               agricultural sciences).
        4.     Economics and management science, including
               behavioural science, agricultural policy, market
               research, and rural sociology.
        5.     Agricultural engineering, including appropriate
               areas of mechanical engineering, construction,
               hydraulics and soil mechanics.
               From the above it is clear that appropriate areas
        of hydraulics and soil mechanics forms part of the
W.P.(C)19541/2004                                                   Page 2 of 4

        Agricultural Sciences. The thesis of Respondent No.4
        for his Ph.D. was on “Estimation of Ground water
        Recharge in the Indo-Gangetic Alluvial Plains Using
        Tritium Tracer”. Thus clearly the thesis pertains to
        hydraulics and soil mechanics using the techniques of
        nuclear science. The qualifications of Respondent
        No.4 were accepted by ASRB for appointment to the
        ARS of ICAR.      Currently he is Prof. and Principal
        Scientist in the NRL of IARI and has been selected in
        the same laboratory as Project Director. His selection
        as Project Director has been challenged in this OA by
        the applicant. We find no reason to differ with the
        assessment of the respondents regarding the
        qualifications of Respondent No.4 for selection to this
        post.
        8.     In view of the foregoing, we find that the
        respondent No.4 was appointed against one of the
        disciplines recognized by the ARS and his Ph.D. thesis
        was related to an area of Hydrology and Soil
        Mechanics which forms part of the major divisions of
        the agricultural sciences, as such he fulfils the
        prescribed qualification for the post. Therefore OA
        having no merit is accordingly dismissed. No costs.”
7.      Since the issue of the classification of a degree or
equivalence thereof requires expert evaluation, vide order dated
10.07.2008 passed in the instant petition, it was directed that
the thesis submitted by respondent No.4 which was accepted
and pursuant thereto the doctorial degree was awarded to
respondent No.4 should be evaluated by experts in the field i.e.
a reference was made to IIT Kanpur as also the University
Grants Commission to look into the doctorial thesis and inform
this Court whether the same related to a field of Agricultural
Science.
8.      Both organizations have opined in favour of respondent
W.P.(C)19541/2004                                           Page 3 of 4

No.4.
9.      In this view of the matter, nothing survives for adjudication
by this Court.
10.     Suffice   it  to  state that  experts   in  the   field   have
conclusively opined that the research work of respondent No.4
resulting in the award of a doctorial degree to him is in the field
of Agricultural Science. Even the available literature, referred to
by the Tribunal, so opines.
11.     We would be failing not to note that the submission urged
by the petitioner is that while rendering opinion, UGC as also IIT
Kanpur       have    used   the expression   “may    be   considered
equivalent to a thesis in Agricultural Science.”          Submission
urged is that it is not equivalence which entails a candidate to
become eligible for the post in question, but the actual.
12.     This is nothing but quibbling with words.       The existing
literature, noted by the Tribunal, clearly shows that the subject
matter of research and thesis resulting in respondent No.4
acquiring a doctorial degree relates to Agricultural science.
Hydrology and Soil Mechanics clearly form part of Agricultural
Science and the thesis submitted by respondent No. 4 clearly
relates to this subject.
13.     Whether somebody uses the expression that the work is
equivalent or uses the expression that the research work relates
to a field of Agricultural Science, is a matter of choice of words.
14.     We find no merit in the writ petition, which is dismissed.
But we refrain from imposing any costs.
                                       PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
JULY 05, 2010                          MOOL CHAND GARG, J.
„dc‟
W.P.(C)19541/2004                                              Page 4 of 4


