$~5 & 6
*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                Date of Decision: October 19,2015
+                         LPA 435/2015
      UNION OF INDIA & ORS                                ..... Appellants
                          Represented by:    Mr.Ruchir Mishra, Advocate
                          versus
      CPWD MAZDOOR UNION (REGD)                           ..... Respondent
                          Represented by: Mr.Varun Prasad, Advocate
+                         LPA 439/2015
      DIRECTOR GENERAL OF WORKS CPWD                      ..... Appellant
                          Represented by: Mr.S.K.Tripathi, Advocate
                          versus
      SUSHIL KUMAR & ORS                                  ..... Respondents
                          Represented by:    Mr.R.K.Kapoor, Advocate
                                             with Ms.Astha Nigam,
                                             Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)
CM No.11956/2015 in LPA No.435/2015
CM No.12020/2015 in LPA No.439/2015
      For the reasons stated in the applications delay of 104 days in filing
the appeals is condoned.
      Applications are allowed.
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                         Page 1 of 10

LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015
1.     The issue raised in WP(C) No.14846/2004 filed by the Union of the
workmen and WP(C) No.7219/2012 filed by the appellant was the same;
concerning overtime wages and the rate thereof to be paid to the workmen
engaged by the Director General, CPWD. Concerning WP(C)No.7219/2012,
it was filed by the appellants in the backdrop of a series of past litigation. It
began by some workmen filing a claim before the Regional Labour
Commissioner for overtime wages at double the rate of ordinary wages
which was dismissed by the Regional Labour Commissioner in view of the
decision of the Supreme Court reported as (1998) 2 SCC 443 Municipal
Council Hatta vs. Bhagat Singh & Ors. The decision was challenged by the
workmen under WP(C)5743/2001 which was dismissed in limine against
which LPA No.13/2003 filed by the workmen was also dismissed in limine.
SLP(C)No.7420/2004 filed by the workmen challenging the order dated
December 03, 2003 dismissing the LPA resulted in the Supreme Court
remanding the matter to this Court. On January 24, 2012 the LPA was
disposed of remanding the matter back to the Regional Labour
Commissioner, who passed an order on June 25, 2012 allowing the claim
filed by the workmen.           This order was challenged by CPWD in
WP(C)No.7219.2012.
2.     It is not in dispute that pursuant to a settlement dated September 05,
1986 between the Director General, CPWD and the Union of the workmen it
was agreed that for working over time the workers would be paid wages at
double the wage payable for normal duty hours working.                 This was
withdrawn by CPWD when a two Judge Bench of the Supreme Court gave
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                           Page 2 of 10

a decision reported as (1998) 2 SCC 443 Municipal Council Hatta vs.
Bhagat Singh & Ors.
3.     The issue which was debated before the learned Single Judge centred
on whether in view of a three Judge Bench decision pronounced by the
Supreme Court on April 12, 1972, reported as (1972) 2 SCC 108
Y.A.Mamarde & Nine Ors. and Ghanshyam & Eight Ors. Vs. Authority
Under the Minimum Wages Act, the decision in Municipal Corporation
Hatta’s case had to be ignored as a precedent. The impugned decision
would show that the case of the appellant was that there was no repugnancy
in two decisions because as per the appellants if wages were being paid to
the workmen as per the Minimum Wages Act, alone then could the law
declared in Y.A.Mamarde’s case be applicable and if wages were paid as per
a scale of pay the decision in Municipal Council Hatta’s case would apply.
4.     Section 14 of the Minimum Wages Act 1948 reads as under:-
          “14. Overtime – (1) Where an employees, whose minimum
          rate of wages is fixed under this Act by the hour, by the day or
          by such a longer wage period as may be prescribed, works on
          any day in excess of the number of hours constituting a
          normal working day, the employer shall pay him for every
          hour or for part of an hour so worked in excess at the
          overtime rate fixed under this Act or under any law of the
          appropriate Government for the time being in force,
          whichever is higher.”
5.     In Y.A.Mamarde’s case (supra) said Section came up for consideration
and the Supreme Court noted that as per the mandate of the Section for
overtime the workmen were entitled to payment at a rate fixed under the Act
or under any law framed by the appropriate Government. The Supreme
Court noted that the appropriate Government had notified the M.P.
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                          Page 3 of 10

Minimum Wage Rules 1951, Rule 25 whereof read as under:-
      “Extra Wages for overtime. – (1) When a worker works in an
      employment for more than nine hours on any day or for more
      than fifty-four hours in any week, he shall, in respect of overtime
      work, be entitled to wages –
        (a) In the case of employment in agriculture, at one and a half
            time the ordinary rate of wages;
        (b) In the case of any other scheduled employment, at double
            the ordinary rate of wages.
      (2) A register showing overtime payments shall be kept in Form
      IV.
      (3) Nothing in this rule shall be deemed to affect the provisions of
      the Factories Act, 1948.”
6.    The argument of the authorities was that since it was paying wages to
its employees more than the minimum wages notified under the Minimum
Wages Act the employees were not entitled to wages for extra work done
with reference to the wages received by them. The rival arguments were
noted by the Supreme Court in para 12 which reads as under:-
      “12. It is common ground between the parties that Sunday has
      been declared to be a day of rest and the normal working hours
      per day are 9 hours a day or 54 hours a week. According to Shri
      Dhabe the appellants' learned counsel the words "at double the
      ordinary rate of wages" used in clause (b) of Rule 25 mean
      double the rate of wages which are actually being paid to the
      employees concerned and not double the rate of wages fixed
      under the Act as minimum wages, whereas according to Dr.
      Barlingay, learned counsel for the respondent, the Act is only
      concerned with providing for minimum wages and if an employee
      is being paid more, than minimum wages so provided, the Act
      does not operate and the employer cannot be compelled to pay
      higher wages. The employees of the corporation are already
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                          Page 4 of 10

     being paid much higher wages than those fixed under the Act as
     minimum wages and, therefore, so contended Dr. Barlingay,
     there is no legal obligation on the employer to pay higher wages.
     The provision requiring payment at double the ordinary rate of
     wages contained in Rule 25, must, according to the respondent's
     argument, be read as "the ordinary rate of minimum wages
     fixed."
     The Supreme Court answered as under:-
     “Let us first deal with this question. The Act which was enacted,
     in 1948 has its roots in the recommendation adopted by the
     International Labour Conference in 1928. The object of the Act
     as stated in the preamble is to provide for fixing minimum rates
     of wages in certain employments and this seems to us to be,
     clearly directed against exploitation of the ignorant, less
     organised and less privileged members of the society by the
     capitalist class. This anxiety on the part of the society for
     improving the general economic condition of some of its less
     favoured members appears to be in supersession of the old
     principle of absolute freedom of contract and the doctrine of
     laissez faire and in recognition of the new principles of social
     welfare and common good. Prior to our Constitution this
     principle was advocated by the movement for liberal employment
     in civilised countries and the Act which is a pre-Constitution
     measure was the offspring of that movement. Under our present
     Constitution the State is now expressly directed to endeavour to
     secure to all workers (whether agricultural, industrial or
     otherwise) not only bare physical subsistence but a living wage
     and conditions of work ensuring a decent standard of life and full
     enjoyment of leisure. This Directive Principle of State Policy
     being conducive to the general interest of the public and,
     therefore, to the healthy progress of the nation as a whole,
     merely lays down the foundation for appropriate, social structure
     in which the labour will find its place of dignity, legitimately due
     to it in lieu of its contribution to the progress of national
     economic prosperity. The Act has since its enactment been
     amended on several occasions apparently to make it more and
     more effective in achieving its object which has since secured
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                          Page 5 of 10

     more firm support from the Constitution. The present rules
     under Section 30, it may be pointed out, were made in October,
     1950, when the State was under a duty to apply the Directive
     Principles in making laws. No doubt the Act, according to its
     preamble, was enacted to provide for fixing minimum rates of
     wages, but that does not necessarily mean that the language of
     Rule 25 should not be construed according to its ordinary, plain
     meaning, provided of course, such construction is not
     inconsistent with the provisions of the Act and there is no other
     compelling reason for adopting a different construction. A
     preamble though a key to open the mind of the Legislature,
     cannot be used to control or qualify the precise and unambiguous
     language of the enactment. It is only in case of doubt or
     ambiguity that recourse may be had to the preamble to ascertain
     the reason for the enactment in order to discover the true
     legislative intendment. By using the phrase "double the ordinary
     rate of wages" the rule-making authority seems to us to have
     intended that the worker should be the recipient of double the
     remuneration which he, in fact, ordinarily receives and not
     double the rate of minimum wages fixed for him under the Act.
     Had it been intended to provide for merely double the minimum
     rate of wages fixed under the Act the rulemaking authority could
     have so expressed its intention in clear and explicit words like
     "double the minimum rate of wages fixed under the Act". This
     intendment would certainly have been stated in the explanation
     added to Rule 25(1 ) in which the expression "ordinary rate of
     wages" has been explained. The word "ordinary" used in Rule 25
     reflects the actuality rather than the worker's minimum
     entitlement under the Act. To accept Dr.Barlingay's suggestion
     would virtually amount to recasting this phrase in Rule 25 for
     which we find no justification. This rule calls for practical
     construction which should ensure to the worker an actual
     increase in the wages which come into his hands for his use and
     not increase calculated in terms of the amount assured to him as
     a minimum wage under the Act. The interpretation suggested on
     behalf of the respondents would have the effect of depriving most
     of the workers who are actually getting more than the minimum
     wages fixed under the Act of the full benefit of the plain language
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                          Page 6 of 10

     of Rule 25 and in case those workers are actually getting more
     than or equal to double the minimum wages fixed, this provision
     would be of no benefit at all. This construction not only creates a
     mere illusory benefit but would also deprive the workers of all
     inducement to willingly undertake overtime work with the result
     that it would to that extent fail to advance and promote the cause
     of increased production. We are, therefore, clearly of the view
     that Rule 25 contemplates for overtime work double the rate of
     wages which the worker actually receives, including the casual
     requisites and other advantages mentioned in the explanation.
     This rate, in our opinion, is intended to be the minimum rate for
     wages for overtime work. The extra strain on the health of the
     worker for doing overtime work may well have weighed with the
     rule making authority to assure to the worker as minimum wages
     double the ordinary wage received by him so as to enable him to
     maintain proper standard of health and stamina. Nothing
     rational or convincing was said at the bar why fixing the
     minimum wages for overtime work at double the rate of wages
     actually, received by the workmen should be considered to be
     outside the purpose and object of the Act. Keeping in view the
     overall purpose and object of the Act and viewing it
     harmoniously with the general scheme of industrial legislation in
     the country in the background of the Directive Principles
     contained in our Constitution the minimum rates of wages for
     overtime work need not as a matter of law be confined to double
     the minimum wages fixed but may justly be fixed at double the
     wages ordinarily received by that workmen as a fact. The
     Bombay High Court has no doubt held in Union of India v. B. D.
     Rathi (Supra) that "ordinary rate of wages" in Rule 25 means the
     minimum rate for normal work fixed under the Act. The learned
     Judges sought support for this view from Section 14 of the Act
     and Rule 5 of the Railway Servants (Hours of Employment)
     Rules, 1951. The workers there were employees of the Central
     Railway. With all respect we are unable to agree with the
     approach of the Bombay High Court. Section 14 of the Act
     merely lays down that when the employee, whose minimum rate
     of wages is fixed by a prescribed wage period, works in excess of
     that period the employer shall pay him for the period so worked
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                         Page 7 of 10

      in excess at the overtime rate fixed under the Act. This section
      does not militate against the view taken by us. Nor does a
      provision like Rule 5 of the Railway Rules which merely provides
      for 54 hours employment in a week on the average in any month
      go against our view. The question is not so much of minimum
      rate as contrasted with the contract rate of wages as it is of how
      much actual benefit in the form of receipt of wages has been
      intended to be assured to the workman for doing overtime work
      so as to provide adequate inducement to them willingly to do
      overtime work for increasing production in a peaceful
      atmosphere in the industry. The problem demands a liberal and
      rational approach rather than a doctrinaire or technical
      legalistic approach. The contract rate is not being touched by
      holding that Rule 25 contemplates double the rate of wages
      which actually come into the workman's hands any more than it
      is touched by fixing the minimum rate of wages under Section
      3,4 and 5 of the Act. The decision of the Mysore High Court
      in Municipal Borough, Bijapur v. Gundawan (M.N.) & ors. and
      of the Madras High Court in Chairman of the Madras Port Trust
      v. Claims Authority & ors., also take the same view as the
      Bombay High Court does. We need not, therefore, deal with them
      separately.”
8.    It is apparent that the Supreme Court took note of the fact that the
Minimum Wages Act 1948 was intended to fix minimum wages for different
categories of workmen but held that in harmony with the general scheme of
industrial legislation in India it could not be said that the expression ‘at
double the ordinary rate of wages’ in Rule 25 of the M.P.Minimum Wages
Rules 1951 would mean at double the minimum wages. Thus, the claim of
the workmen that for extra work they should be paid double wages with
reference to the wages received by them, notwithstanding the same being
more than the minimum wages notified under the Minimum Wages Act was
upheld.
9.    In Municipal Council Hatta’s case (supra) noting that wages received
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                         Page 8 of 10

by the workmen were as per a scale of pay notified under M.P.Municipal
Services (Scale of Pay and Allowances) Rules, 1967 and not under the
Minimum Wages Act 1948 the Supreme Court held that the workmen could
not claim benefit under Section 14 of the Minimum Wages Act 1948 for
overtime work.
10.    In Municipal Council Hatta’s case authored by a two Judge bench, the
three Judge bench decision in Y.A.Mamarde’s case was not noted.
11.    The learned Single Judge has held that the law declared in
Y.A.Mamarde’s case would bring out that the law declared by the Supreme
Court was that because of Rule 25 of M.P.Minimum Wage Rules 1951 the
employees of the municipality would be entitled to overtime wages at
double the rate of the existing wages and thus it was fallacious to argue that
the Supreme Court in said decision was not concerned with the linkage of
overtime wages to the minimum wages notified under the Minimum Wages
Act. The learned Single Judge has held that the decision would show that
even if wages higher than the minimum wages were being paid to the
employees in a scheduled employment, the employees would be entitled to
overtime as per Rule 25 of the 1951 Rules and further the doubling of the
rate had to be with reference to the wages received. In that view of the
matter the learned Single Judge had held that he would be bound by the law
declared by the three Judge bench in Y.A.Mamarde’s case.
12.    The facts noted by us would evince that the Director General, CPWD
and the employees of the Union had entered into an agreement which was
notified on September 05, 1986 that for overtime work the employees would
be paid double wages with reference to wages received for normal work.
Though the entitlement of the workmen of CPWD may not be under any
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                          Page 9 of 10

statutory rules framed under Section 14 of the Minimum Wages Act, but
would be certainly flowing out of the agreement. The reason to resile from
the agreement given by the Director General, CPWD is the subsequent
decision of the Supreme Court in Municipal Council Hatta’s case, which to
our mind, as rightly held by the learned Single Judge, would not be the
precedent to be followed because it has been rendered ignoring the three
Judge bench decision in Y.A.Mamarde’s case and we find that the ratio is in
direct conflict with that in Mamarde’s case because in Mamarde’s case it
has been categorically held by the Supreme Court that entitlement to
overtime wages cannot be linked to the minimum wages as per the
Minimum Wages Act 1948. Thus and it hardly matters whether the wages,
more than the minimum wages, are paid under any standing orders issued
pursuant to a settlement or as per a scale of pay notified by Pay Rules.
13.    The appeals are accordingly dismissed but without any order as to
costs.
CM No.11955/2015 In LPA No.435/2015 & CM No.12019/2015 in LPA
No.439/2015
       Dismissed as infructuous.
                                               (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                                        JUDGE
                                                   (MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                         JUDGE
OCTOBER 19, 2015
rk
LPA No.435/2015 & LPA No.439/2015                           Page 10 of 10


