*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                               Judgment Reserved on : June 30, 2015
                                Judgment Delivered on : July 14, 2015
+                               LPA 269/2015
      NORTH DELHI MUNICIPAL
      CORPORATIN & ORS                                  ..... Appellants
                    Represented by: Mr.Gaurang Kanth, Advocate with
                                     Ms.Biji Rajesh, Advocate
                                     versus
      ONIKA MEHROTRA & ORS                              ..... Respondents
                    Represented by: Mr.A.S.Chandhiok,
                                     Sr.Advocate instructed by
                                     Mr.N.Tripathi, Advocate for
                                     R-1 to 3
                                     Mr.Subodh Kumar, Mr.Anil
                                     Kumar, Advocates for
                                     R-4
                                LPA 283/2015
      EAST DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION                    ..... Appellant
                    Represented by: Mr.Gaurang Kanth, Advocate with
                                     Ms.Biji Rajesh, Advocate
                                     versus
      SHRI NARENDER JAIN & ORS                          ..... Respondent
                    Represented by: Mr.A.S.Chandhiok,
                                     Sr.Advocate instructed by
                                     Mr.N.Tripathi, Advocate for
                                     R-1 to 9
                                     Mr.Raman Duggal, Advocate for R-
                                     10
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                              Page 1 of 19

                                 LPA 284/2015
       SOUTH DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ..... Appellant
                    Represented by: Mr.Gaurang Kanth, Advocate with
                                        Ms.Biji Rajesh, Advocate
                                        versus
       SH SURENDER SOLANKI & ORS                    ..... Respondents
                    Represented by: Mr.A.S.Chandhiok,
                                        Sr.Advocate instructed by
                                        Mr.N.Tripathi, Advocate for
                                        R-1 to 9
                                        Mr.Raman Duggal, Standing
                                        Counsel for R-10
       CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
        HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
1.     The respondents of the above captioned appeals, other than the
Government of NCT Delhi, are persons who have been nominated by the
Administrator of the Union Territory of Delhi to the South, North and East
Delhi Municipal Corporation, exercising his power under Section 3(3)(b)(i)
of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957, (hereinafter referred to, as
‘the Act’). Being denied the right to vote in the meeting of their respective
Wards Committee, to elect Chairperson/Deputy Chairperson as also being
denied the right to offer their candidature to be elected to the post of
Chairperson/Deputy Chairperson of their respective Standing Committee
and Wards Committee and/or as members of the Standing Committee, or as
Deputy Chairperson of the said Committee, the said respondents filed writ
petitions in this Court and the prayers made gave rise to the following issues
of law:
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                Page 2 of 19

(i)   Whether the persons nominated by the Administrator under Section
3(3)(b)(i) of the Act are disentitled to vote in the meetings of their respective
Wards Committee and Standing Committee?
(ii)  Whether the persons nominated by the Administrator under Section
3(3)(b)(i) of the Act are disentitled to offer their candidature to be elected as
members of Standing Committees?
(iii) Whether the persons nominated by the Administrator under Section
3(3)(b)(i) of the Act are disentitled to offer their candidature to be elected to
the post of Chairperson and/or Deputy Chairperson of their respective Wards
Committees and Standing Committees?
2.    The three questions have been answered by the learned Single
Judge as under:-
      “42. Thus, to summarize the above, the petitioners –
      being constituent members of Wards Committees, can
      participate and vote in any meeting of the respective
      Wards Committee. However, the petitioners cannot file
      their nomination or offer their candidature for being
      elected as Chairperson of the Wards Committee. The
      petitioners may also offer their candidature for being
      elected as member of the Standing Committee. In the
      event any of the petitioners are elected as member of
      the Standing Committee, they may vote at any meet ing
      of the Standing Committee and also offer their
      candidature for being elected as Deputy Chairperson of
      the Standing Committee; but, they cannot offer their
      candidature for being appointed as a Chairperson of
      the Standing Committee.‖
3.    Issue before the learned Single judge was debated with
reference to Article 243R and 243S of the Constitution of India,
which formed the backdrop of the reasoning given by the learned
Single Judge, as also Section 2(27), Section 3(3)(b)(i), Section 44,
Section 45, Section 47, Section 50 and Section 51 of the Act.
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                  Page 3 of 19

4.    It would thus be appropriate if we commence our journey,
which obviously would be to re-charter the Articles of the
Constitution and the Sections of the Act which have been
considered by the learned Single Judge, by noting the same.
      Article 243R : Composition of Municipalities.
      (1) Save as provided in clause (2), all the seats in a
      Municipality shall be filled by persons chosen by direct
      election from the territorial constituencies in the
      Municipal area and for this purpose each Municipal
      area shall be divided into territorial constituencies to
      be known as wards.
      (2)    The Legislature of a State may, by law, provide –
      (a)    for the representation in a Municipality of -
      (i)    persons having special knowledge or experience in
      Municipal administration;
      (ii) the members of the House of the People and the
      members of the Legislative Assembly of the State
      representing constituencies which comprise wholly or
      partly the Municipal area;
      (iii) the members of the Council of States and the
      members of the Legislative Council of the State
      registered as electors within the Municipal area;
      (iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees constituted
      under clause (5) of article 243S:
      Provided that the persons referred to in paragraph (i)
      shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the
      Municipality;
      (b) the manner of election of the Chairperson of a
      Municipality.
                                 xxxxx
      Article 243S : Constitution and composition of Wards
      Committees, etc.
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                          Page 4 of 19

      (1) There shall be constituted Wards Committees,
      consisting of one or more wards, within the territorial
      area of a Municipality having a population of three
      lakhs or more.
      (2) The Legislature of a State may, by law, make
      provision with respect to—
      (a) the composition and the territorial area of a
      Wards Committee;
      (b) the manner in which the seats in a Wards
      Committee shall be filled.
      (3) A member of a Municipality representing a ward
      within the territorial area of the Wards Committee shall
      be a member of that Committee.
      (4)    Where a Wards Committee consists of—
      (a) one ward, the member representing that ward in
      the Municipality; or
      (b) two or more wards, one of the members
      representing such wards in the Municipality elected by
      the members of the Wards Committee, shall be the
      Chairperson of that Committee.
      (5) Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent
      the Legislature of a State from making any provision for
      the constitution of Committees in addition to the Wards
      Committees.
                                   xxxxx
      Section 3 : Establishment of the Corporation
      (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
      may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall
      be a Corporation charged with the municipal Government of
      Delhi, to be known as the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                Page 5 of 19

      (2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate with the name
      aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal with
      power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and
      dispose of property and may by the said name sue and be sued.
      (3)(a) The Corporation shall be composed of the councillors;
      (b) the following persons shall be represented in a
      Corporation, namely:—
      (i)    ten persons, who are not less than 25 years of age and
      who have special knowledge or experience in municipal
      administration, to be nominated by the Administrator:
      Provided that the persons nominated under this sub-clause
      shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of a
      Corporation;
      (ii) members of the House of the People representing
      constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the area of a
      Corporation and the members of the Council of States
      registered as electors within the area of a Corporation;
      (iii) as nearly as possible one-fifth of the members of the
      Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi
      representing constituencies which comprise wholly or partly the
      area of a Corporation to be nominated by the Speaker of that
      Legislative Assembly, by rotation, every year:
      Provided that while nominating such members, by rotation, the
      Speaker shall ensure that as far as possible all the members are
      given an opportunity of being represented in a Corporation at
      least once during the duration of a Corporation;
      (iv) the Chairpersons of the Committees, if any, constituted
      under sections 39, 40 and 45, if they are not councillors.
      (4) Councillors shall be chosen by direct election on the
      basis of adult suffrage from various wards into which Delhi
      shall be divided in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
      (5) The total number of seats of councillors and the number
      of seats reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes in
      each Corporation, shall, at the time of establishment of such
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                Page 6 of 19

      Corporation, be as determined by the Government by
      notification in the Official Gazette.
      Provided that twelve out of the eighty seats of councillors shall
      be reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
      (6) Upon the completion of each census after the
      establishment of a Corporation the number of seats shall be on
      the basis of the population of the area of the Corporation as
      ascertained at that census and shall be determined by the
      Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette and
      the number of seats to be reserved for the members of the
      Scheduled Castes shall, as nearly as may be, bear the same
      ratio to the total number of seats as the population of Scheduled
      Castes bears to the total population of Delhi:
      Provided that the total number of seats in all the Corporations
      in Delhi shall in no case be more than two hundred and
      seventy-two and the number of seats in each Corporation shall
      be determined by the Government at the time of establishment
      of such Corporations.
      Provided further that the determination of seats as aforesaid
      shall not affect the then composition of a Corporation until the
      expiry of the duration of a Corporation:
      Provided also that for the first election to the Corporation to be
      held immediately after the commencement of the Delhi
      Municipal Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2011, the population
      figures of every such Corporation as published in relation to
      2001 census shall be deemed to be the population thereof as
      ascertained in that census:
      Provided also that the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes
      may be allotted by rotation to different wards in such manner
      as the Central Government may, by order published in the
      Official Gazette, direct.
      (7) Seats shall be reserved for women belonging to the
      Scheduled Castes, from among the seats reserved for the
      Scheduled Castes, the number of such seats being determined
      by the Government by order published in the Official Gazette
      which shall not be less than one-half of the total number of
      seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes.
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                Page 7 of 19

      (8) Seats shall be reserved for women, the number of such
      seats being determine by order published in the Official Gazette
      by the Government which shall not be less than the one-half of
      total number of seats other than those reserved for the
      Scheduled Castes.‖
5.     Section 2(27) of the Act reads as under:-
      ―2(27)        ―member‖ in relation to a Corporation means a
      councillor‖
6.    Section 44 of the Act reads as under:-
      ―44. Enumeration of municipal authorities –
       For the efficient performance of its functions, there shall be the
      following municipal authorities under each Corporation, namely:-
      (a) The Standing Committee;
      (b) The Wards Committee; and
      (c) The Commissioner
7.    Section 45 of the Act reads as under:-
      “45.Constitution of the Standing Committee-
      (1) The Standing Committee shall consists of -
          (i) Six members elected by the councilors from among
          themselves at the first meeting of a Corporation;
          (ii) One member each elected by the members of each Wards
          Committee from among themselves at the first meeting of the
          Wards Committee;
          after each general election or as soon as possible at any
          other meeting subsequent thereto.
      (2) On and from such date as may be determined by a
          Corporation by resolution the Standing Committee shall be
          deemed to have been constituted.
      (3) One-half of the members referred to in clause (i) of sub-
          section (1) and one-half of the members referred to in
          clause (ii) of that sub-section shall retire on the expiration
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                Page 8 of 19

          of one year from the date of the constitution of the Standing
          Committee after the commencement of the Delhi Municipal
          Corporation (Amendment) Act, 19993, and for that purpose
          they shall be selected by lot from amongst their respective
          categories before the said expiration in such manner as the
          Chairman of the Standing Committee may determine.
      (4) During each succeeding year the members who have been
          longest in office shall retire therefrom:
          Provided that in the case of a member who has been re-
          elected the term of his office shall for the purpose of this
          sub-section be computed from the date of his re-election.
      (5) A Corporation or the concerned Wards Committee, as the
          case may be, shall in a meeting held immediately before the
          occurrence of the vacancies, caused by the retirement of the
          members under sub-section (3) of sub-section (4) elect the
          requisite member or members from amongst the councilors
          or from amongst members of the Wards Committee, as the
          case may be, to fill up those vacancies.
      (6) Any councillor who ceases to be a member of the Standing
          Committee shall be eligible for re-election.‖
8.    Section 47 of the Act reads as under:-
      ―47. Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Standing Committee-
      (1) The Standing Committee shall at its first meeting in each
          year elect one of its members who is a Councillor to be the
          Chairman and another member to be the Deputy Chairman.
      (2) The Chairman or the Deputy Chairman of the Standing
          Committee shall hold office from the date of his election
          until the election of his successor in office unless in the
          meantime he resigns his office as Chairman or Deputy
          Chairman or his term of office as member of the Standing
          Committee is in any manner determined or unless in the
          case of the Deputy Chairman he is elected as Chairman.
      (3) On the concurrence of any casual vacancy in the office of
          the Chairman or the Deputy Chairman, the Standing
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                Page 9 of 19

           Committee shall within one month of the occurrence of such
           vacancy elect one of its members who is a Councillor as
           Chairman or Deputy Chairman and the Chairman or
           Deputy Chairman, as the case may be, and the Chairman or
           the Deputy Chairman so elected shall hold office for the
           remainder of his predecessor‘s term.
9.     Section 50 of the Act reads as under:-
       “ 50. Constitution of the Wards Committee-
       (1) For each Zone there shall be a Wards Committee which
           shall consist of, -
       (a) All the councillors elected from the wards comprised in that
           Zone; and
       (b) The person, if any, nominated by the Administrator under
           sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (3) of Section 3 if
           his name is registered as an elector within the territorial
           limits of the Zone concerned.
       (2) The Wards Committee shall be deemed to have been
           constituted from the date on which a Corporation is
           constituted after each general election.‖
10.    Section 51 of the Act reads as under:-
       ―51. Application of section 47 and 48 -
       The provisions of section 47 and 48 shall apply in relation to a
       Wards Committee as they apply in relation to the Standing
       Committee.‖
11.    Succinctly stated the reasoning of the learned Single Judge is that the
constitutional scheme revealed by Article 243R and Article 243S of the
Constitution is that persons nominated in the Municipalities would not have
a right to vote in the meetings of the Municipality (expressly prohibited by
the proviso to Article 243R (2) of the Constitution of India. If these persons
become members of the Wards Committees, the Constitution does not
prohibit their powers and functions and it is left to the legislature of each
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                 Page 10 of 19

State to regulate the powers and functions of these persons when they
become the members of either a Municipality or a Ward Committee. The
proviso to Section 3(3)(b)(i) of the Act mirrors         the proviso to Article
243R(2) of the Constitution of India and expressly states that members
nominated to the Corporations in the Union Territory of Delhi do not have
the right to vote in the meetings of the Corporations. Though not expressly
stated by the learned Single Judge the reasoning is that persons nominated to
the Municipalities would have all the rights in relation to the Municipalities
save and except what is/are expressly taken away. Since the Constitution
empowers the legislature of each State to make laws in conformity with the
constitutional scheme, it would be open to the legislature of a State to
curtail the rights of these nominated members in relation to the working of
the Municipalities and Section 45 of the Act is clear that any member of the
Wards Committee can be represented on the Standing Committee.
Concerning the election of the Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the
Standing Committee, vide sub-section (1) of Section 47 mandates that the
Standing Committee has to elect from one of its members a Chairman, who
is a councillor. Therefrom the learned Single Judge has concluded that the
clear legislative intent is that, of the members of the Standing Committee,
only those who are councillors can be elected as a Chairman. There being
no such stipulation in the statute for being elected as a Deputy Chairman, the
learned Single Judge has held that these nominated persons can offer their
candidature to be elected as a Deputy Chairman of the Standing Committee.
Because Section 51 of the Act makes applicable Section 47, as it applies in
relation to Standing Committees to Wards Committee, the learned Single
Judge has held that this would mean that these nominated persons cannot
offer their candidature to be elected as the Chairman of the Wards
Committee but can offer their candidature to be elected as a Deputy
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                 Page 11 of 19

Chairman of the Wards Committee. Since there is no embargo either under
the Constitution or under the Act to these nominated persons voting at the
meetings of the Standing Committee or the Wards Committee, the learned
Single Judge has held that these nominated persons have a right to vote at
the meetings of the two Committees when voting takes place to elect a
Chairman and a Deputy Chairman. In the analysis of the law the learned
Single Judge has taken note of the fact that Section 2(27) of the Act defines
the word ‗Member‘ only in relation to a Corporation; and has highlighted
that the word would mean ‗a councillor‘. Though not expressly stated,
implicit in the reasoning of the learned Single Judge is that the Act uses two
expressions : (i) ‗councillor‘ and (ii) ‗member‘. The two would have
different meanings and since Section 2(27) of the Act defines a member
only in relation to a Corporation to mean a councillor, it would mean that in
relation to not the Corporation, the expression member would be given its
natural meaning which would mean councillors as well as nominated
persons. The learned Single Judge has fortified his reasoning with reference
to Section 44 of the Act by highlighting that Standing Committees and
Wards Committee are Municipal Authorities under the Corporation and are
bodies under the Corporation i.e. the Corporation is a body distinct, being
the larger body and the Standing Committees and Wards Committee are the
authorities under it.
12.    Both parties were not at variance, either before the learned Single
Judge nor in the appeal, that by virtue of the 74th Amendment to the
Constitution of India, Part-IXA was inserted in the Constitution of India
containing Articles 243P to 243Z, 243ZA to 243ZG with effect from June
01, 1993, necessitating corresponding amendments to be made in the Act
and that the Administrator of the Union Territory of Delhi could nominate,
to the three Corporations which exist in Delhi, ten persons not less than
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                 Page 12 of 19

twenty five years of age who had special knowledge or experience in
municipal administration, and that by virtue of Section 50 of the Act these
nominated persons would become members of the Wards Committee if the
name of the person is registered as an elector within the territorial limit of
the Zone concerned. The parties were not at variance that for the different
Zones contemplated by the Act there shall be a Wards Committee. The
parties were not at variance that each of the Municipal Corporation in Delhi
would have a Standing Committee.
13.    Meaningfully understood, the contention of the appellants before the
learned Single Judge which was repeated in the three appeals was that since
Section 2(27) of the Act defines a member to be a councillor, may be in
relation to a Corporation,      the tag to the persons nominated to the
Corporation would be ‗nominated member‘ and thus the scheme of the Act
has to be understood as limiting the powers of the nominated members to
either vote or offer their candidature to be elected as Chairman or Deputy
Chairman of the Standing Committee or the Wards Committee. Learned
counsel for the appellant was at pains to argue that these nominated persons
could not be equated as members of either the Corporation or of the
Standing Committee or the Wards Committee. Learned counsel argued that
these persons were nominated to the Corporations because of their special
knowledge in municipal administration and the purpose of their appointment
was to assist the elected members of the Corporation for a better functioning
of the   municipal affairs.    Learned counsel relied upon the authorities
reported as AIR 2004 SC 2258 Ramesh Mehta vs. Sanwal Singh, 2015 (1)
RCR (civil) 991 Sanjeev Kumar Verma vs. The Director, Urban Local
Bodies & Ors., (2006) 1 GLR 382 Batou & Ors. State of Nagaland, AIR
2003 Raj.128 Prem Raj Bohra vs. Jairoopa & Ors., AIR 2007 Gau 98
Miehlo Manasia vs. State of Mizoram.       Learned counsel for the appellant
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                               Page 13 of 19

urged that the language of Section 2(27) of the Act was clear and
unambiguous and clearly defined a member in relation to a Corporation to
mean the councillor and thus urged that the literal rule of construction as
enunciated in the decisions reported as (2005) 2 SCC 271 Nathi Devi vs.
Radha Devi Gupta, (2006) 5 SCC 745 A.N.Roy, Commissioner of Police vs.
Suresh Sham Singh, (2009) 9 SCC 92 Vijay Narayan Thatte vs. State of
Maharashtra, (2010) 10 SCC 744 Competition Commission of India vs.
Steel Authority of India, (2013) 10 SCC 772 Union of Indis vs. National
Federation of Blind, (2004) 9 SCC 686 Prakash Nath Khanna vs.
Commissioner of Income should be applied.         Referring to the decision
reported as AIR 1976 SC 888         Executive Committee of Vaish Degree
College, Shamli vs. Lakshmi Narain & Ors. learned counsel argued that
where a statutory authority which is sui generic is constituted by a
legislation it would be all embracive body/authority and bodies under the
authority cannot be termed as separate authority. Learned counsel urged that
since the right of the nominated persons to vote at the meetings of the
Corporation is specifically barred under Article 243R and Section 3(3)(b)(i)
of the Act these persons cannot vote at the meeting of anybody under the
Corporation. Learned counsel relied upon the decisions reported as 2014
(141) DRJ 157 Manohar Lal Sharma vs. Union of India and ILR 1998
Karnataka 1005 Jayashankara Gowda vs. Chief Secretary.
14.    Per contra, learned senior counsel for the respondents urged that the
view taken by the learned Single Judge is correct and the reasoning of the
learned Single Judge which encapsulates the arguments of the respondents
may be adopted as the arguments of the respondents and that they had
nothing more to urge.
15.    At the hearts of the argument advanced by the parties lies the basic
issue, determination whereof would take us to the destination. The basic
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                              Page 14 of 19

issue would be whether the definition of the word ‘member‘ as per Section
2(27) of the Act, which means a councillor, but only in relation to the
meetings of the Corporation, would colour the word member used in Section
45 of the Act as also Section 47 of the Act and thereby in Section 51 of the
Act.
16.     A perusal of the constitutional scheme and in particular Article 243R
of the Constitution of India would evince that seats in a municipality shall be
filled by persons chosen by direct       election by electors residing in the
territorial constituencies in the municipal area and for this purpose each
municipal area shall be divided into Wards. Thus, every voter in a Ward
would elect, by direct election, a person to the Ward. It may be called a seat.
In addition it is permissible for the legislature of a State, by law, to provide
for representation in a municipality of persons having special knowledge or
experience in municipal administration. In other words, the executive body
of a municipality would be composed of two kinds of persons : (i) directly
elected by voters to the Wards; and (ii) nominated to the municipality as per
law made by a State. Article 243R does not use the expression member in
relation to the said two categories of persons. A plain reading of Article
243R would show that it draws no distinction between these two category of
persons who compose the executive body of a municipality, save and except
by virtue of the proviso to Article 243R(2), which carves out an exception
under the proviso by expressly excluding the right to vote in the meetings of
the municipality of the persons represented in a municipality as per law
made by the legislature of a State i.e. persons having special knowledge or
experience in municipal administration.
17.    A perusal of Section 3 of the Act makes it evident that for the
municipal governance of Delhi three corporations have to be established
having named and limits as per the 14th Schedule to the Act in terms of sub-
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                  Page 15 of 19

Section 1(A) of Section 3 of the Act. By virtue of sub-Section 2 of Section 3
of the Act each Corporation so established is a body corporate with the name
duly notified by the Government having perpetual succession and a common
seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and may by the
said name sue and be sued. Clause (a) of sub-Section 3 of Section 3 of the
Act, reads : ‗A corporation shall be composed of the councillors.‘ Clause (b)
of sub-Section 3 of Section 3 of the Act makes provisions for, by virtue of
clause (i) representation in each Corporation of ten persons by the
Administrator having special knowledge or experience in municipal
administration.        Section 44 of the Act enumerates three municipal
authorities : (i) Standing Committee; (ii) Wards Committee; and (iii) The
Commissioner. Thus the Corporation as a body corporate is not the same as
its executive body consisting of humans.
18.     It is apparent that the juristic entity would be the Corporation because
of sub-Section 2 of Section 3 of the Act. The juristic entity would not be the
councillors.     Section 3(3)(a), when it refers to a Corporation as being
composed of the councillors, simply means that councillors shall compose
the Corporation and does not mean that the composition of councillors is the
juristic entity called the Corporation.          The scheme of the Act is in
conformity with the scheme of the Constitution : to give two sources of
persons who would discharge the functions of the juristic body called the
Corporation.      The two sources would be : directly elected persons and
nominated persons. By whatever nomenclature the directly elected persons
may be called and by whatever nomenclature the nominated persons may be
called, their rights would be governed by specific legislation framed by the
legislature of each State, subject of course to the constitutional limitation by
virtue of the proviso to Article 243R(2) of the Constitution of India.
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                  Page 16 of 19

19.    Since the language of the Municipal statutes framed by the respective
legislature which was under consideration in the decisions reported as AIR
2004 SC 2258 Ramesh Mehta vs. Sanwal Singh, 2015 (1) RCR (civil) 991
Sanjeev Kumar Verma vs. The Director, Urban Local Bodies & Ors., (2006)
1 GLR 382 Batou & Ors. State of Nagaland, AIR 2003 Raj.128 Prem Raj
Bohra vs. Jairoopa & Ors., AIR 2007 Gau 98 Miehlo Manasia vs. State of
Mizoram are concededly not pari materia with the provisions with which we
are concerned of the Act, it would be of no use for us to go about
distinguishing said decisions by noting the provision of the statute
considered therein and it would be sufficient for us to record that unless it
was shown that a pari materia provision was interpreted in the manner as
alleged by learned counsel for the appellant, neither decision would either be
a precedent or have any persuasive value. It being trite that a decision is an
authority on the point which directly arose for consideration. If a decision
concerns interpretation of a statute it would have relevance to interpret a
statute which is pari materia. The decision in Vaish Degree College‘s case
cited by learned counsel for the appellant is equally inapplicable because it
concerns the law as to when can a private body be treated as a State.
20.    The decisions cited by learned counsel for the appellants pertaining to
the rule of literal interpretation, far from helping the appellants cut the very
argument of the appellants for the reason the appellants themselves argue
that an extended meaning be given to Section 2(27) of the Act which defines
a member only in relation to a Corporation to apply to the authorities under
the Corporation i.e. the Standing Committee and the Wards Committee. The
rule of literal interpretation warrants to hold, that being aware of the fact that
the legislature has used the word member in relation to the Corporation as
also in relation to the Standing Committee and the Wards Committee, the
legislature made it clear that only when the word member was used by it in
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                  Page 17 of 19

relation to a Corporation, the legislature meant a councillor. The legislature
thus itself guides that the word member wherever used, other than in relation
to a Corporation, would take its natural grammatical meaning.
21.    After referring to the corporation being composed of councillors, the
Act provides for representation in a Corporation by ten persons to be
nominated by the Administrator. Enumerating the municipal authorities
under Section 44, providing for the constitution of the Standing Committee,
Section 45 guides that the Committee shall consists of six members elected
by the councillors, one member each elected by members of each Wards
Committee. The legislature has obviously used the word members for these
two streams. It would be impermissible to make any distinction in the
reservoir so constituted after the water from the two streams has merged into
a single entity.     Conscious of the fact that these members would be
constituting the Standing Committee and the Wards Committee, which
would have to elect a Chairman as also a Deputy Chairman, the legislature
was conscious of the fact that any one of these members can offer their
candidature to be elected as a Chairman as also a Deputy Chairman and thus
expressly provided that only a councillor can be the Chairman of the
Standing Committee. The rule of exclusion by the legislature would lead us
to the conclusion reached by the learned Single Judge that be it a councillor
or be it a person nominated, since both form the homogenous category of a
member of the Standing Committee, any one of them could be elected as a
Deputy Chairman. Inherent would be the right to vote at the meeting of the
Standing Committee to elect a Chairman and a Deputy Chairman. Since
Section 51 makes applicable Section 47 in relation to a Wards Committee as
it applies in relation to a Standing Committee, it would mean that the
Chairman of a Ward Committee has to be a councillor and no more.
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                                Page 18 of 19

22.    As regards the rights of persons nominated, to be appointed as
members of the Standing Committee, the constitution of the Standing
Committee, as provided in Section 45, is to consist of (a) six members
elected by the councillors from among themselves, and (b) one member
each, elected by the members of each Wards Committee, from among
themselves at the first meeting of the Wards Committee. It is thus clear that
the section provides for the composition of Standing Committees to
specifically include councillors (to be elected from among themselves), as
well as members (who need not necessarily be councillors, as stated above)
elected from Wards Committees. The language of the Section does not
provide any ambiguity meriting the Court’s interpretation of the Section, and
the plain reading of the statute makes it clear that the Standing Committee
would comprise of elected councillors, as well as members of the Wards
Committee (which includes nominated members). Thus, in the absence of
any constitutional or statutory restriction on the inclusion of nominated
members into the Standing Committee, it may be stated that the Act permits
nominated members to be members of the Standing Committee, if they are
so elected in their respective Wards Committee.
23.    We concur with the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
24.    The appeals are dismissed but without any order as to costs.
                                             (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                                       JUDGE
                                                  (MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                      JUDGE
JULY 14, 2015
Mamta/skb
LPA No.269/2015 & conn.matters                               Page 19 of 19


