*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                   Date of Decision : 20th September, 2011
+                        W.P.(C) 2475/2011
       DR.(MRS.) RADHIKA BAHL                     ..... Petitioner
              Through: Mr.Sanjeev Sachdeva, Senior Advocate
                         with Mr.Preet Pal Singh, Mr.Priyam
                         Mehta and Mr.Abhimanyu Chopra,
                         Advocates.
                    versus
       UNION OF INDIA & ANR.                      ..... Respondents
              Through: Ms.Barkha Babbar, Advocate with
                         Dy.Comdt.Bhupinder Sharma
                         (Law Office), BSF
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUNIL GAUR
   1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed
       to see the judgment?
   2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
   3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J. (Oral)
1.      On 13.4.2002 petitioner submitted an application to the
Director     General    BSF   expressing    her    wish     to    resign
immediately from the post of Chief Medical Officer citing
urgent     and    grave  domestic   problem     of   education      and
accommodation of her only son causing severe mental stress
WP(C) No.2475/2011                                    Page 1 of 6

to her. It was expressly stated that the notice for resignation
be treated as petitioner resigning w.e.f. 13.4.2002.
2.     It is apparent that the petitioner could not resign in this
manner. She was bound to give due timely intimation. In any
case, no government servant can unilaterally severe the
relationship with the Government. It is settled law that unless
accepted,      a   resignation   by    a  Government       servant   is
meaningless.
3.     But that is not the issue.
4.     After    a   protracted    exchange      of   correspondence,
petitioner’s resignation was approved on 5.8.2003 and since
she    had    stopped    reporting   for  duties   w.e.f.   13.4.2002,
sanctioning various kinds of leave due to the petitioner
including extra ordinary leave without pay it was found that
the petitioner owed to the department `50,584/- and thus
intimating her of various kinds of leave sanctioned to her, post
13.4.2002 till order dated 5.8.2003 was passed, as also that
she should deposit `50,584/- with PAD BSF New Delhi.
5.     The    petitioner   did   not    deposit   the   amount     and
immediately had a re-thought on the subject. On 19.10.2003
she withdrew her resignation and requested the Competent
Authority to permit her to withdraw the resignation in public
interest.
6.     Rule 26 of the CCS Pension Rules is the source of the
power of the Competent Authority to permit a person to
withdraw his/her resignation in public interest, but on certain
conditions. Clause (iii) of sub-rule 4 of Rule 26 is relevant to be
noted and we do so. It reads as under:-
WP(C) No.2475/2011                                    Page 2 of 6

       “26. Forfeiture of service on resignation
       (1) ………….
       (2) ………….
       (3) ………….
       (4) The Appointing Authority may permit a person
       to withdraw his resignation in the public interest on
       the following conditions, namely:-
              (i)    …….
              (ii) …….
              (iii) that the period of absence from duty
                     between the date on which the
                     resignation became effective and the date
                     on which the person is allowed to resume
                     duty as a result of permission to withdraw
                     the resignation is not more than ninety
                     days;
              (iv) ………”
7.     After initially rejecting request made by the petitioner on
19.10.2003,        but   continuing   to    keep    the   channel      of
communication         open,    the  Competent      Authority       of the
respondent        permitted     the  petitioner   to   withdraw       her
resignation.       She was permitted to resume duty but it was
observed that the period from 5.8.2003 till petitioner resumed
duties would not be counted as qualifying service for purposes
of  seniority/promotion/pensionary         benefits   and    would     be
treated as dies non.         It was clarified that for purposes of
computing pension with respect to her past service, said period
was being condoned under the proviso to Rule 27 of the CCS
Pension Rules and FR-54.
8.     Petitioner has since re-joined duty but urges that since
the department took unduly long time in deciding her request
to withdraw her resignation, she should not be penalized by
WP(C) No.2475/2011                                     Page 3 of 6

being denuded of seniority and pensionary benefits for the
period interregnum 5.8.2003 till she rejoined.
9.     Now, sub-rule 6 of Rule 26, reads as under:-
       “When an order is passed by the Appointing Authority
       allowing a person to withdraw his resignation and to
       resume duty, the order shall be deemed to include
       the condonation of interruption in service but the
       period in interruption shall not count as qualifying
       service.”
10.    Thus, in the teeth of a statutory rule, we cannot direct
that the period in question should be counted as qualifying
service for the reason any such direction by us would be in the
teeth of a statutory rule and we would be breaching the
boundaries of our jurisdiction.
11.    But, we find a solution to the problem, being the power
vested under Rule 88 of the CCS Pension Rules. It is the power
to relax. The rule reads as under:-
       “88. Power to relax
              Where any Ministry or Department of the
       Government is satisfied that the operation of any of
       these rules, cause undue hardship in any particular
       case, the Ministry or Department, as the case may be,
       may, by order for reasons to be recorded in writing,
       dispense with or relax the requirement of that rule to
       such extent and subject to such exceptions and
       conditions as it may consider necessary for dealing
       with the case in a just and equitable manner:
              Provided that no such order shall be made
       except with the concurrence of the Department of
       Personnel and Administrative Reforms.”
WP(C) No.2475/2011                               Page 4 of 6

12.    Rule 3(1)(q) of the CCS Pension Rules defines qualifying
service to mean service rendered while on duty or otherwise
which shall be taken into account for the purpose of pensions
and gratuities admissible under these rules.
13.    Thus, there is no bar for the government to consider on a
case to case basis to relax the requirement of the CCS Pension
Rules so that an individual could be dealt with justly and
equitably.
14.    On the issue of seniority, nothing has been shown to us
to deny benefit to the petitioner of her original seniority, even
if there is a break in service. It is not that the petitioner has
been re-inducted as a fresh appointee. What happens to her
past service?      Certainly, it cannot be washed away in its
entirety.
15.    We accordingly hold that as far as seniority is concerned,
the petitioner would be entitled to have her seniority reckoned
from the date she was initially appointed and to said extent we
set aside the contrary direction in the order dated 5.8.2003.
16.    Learned counsel for the respondent says that the
petitioner never deposited `50,584/- and apart from other
reasons, this led to her representation being considered
belatedly.
17.    This fact is being brought to our notice with respect to
the issue whether benefit of rules being relaxed in favour of
the petitioner needs to be resorted to.
18.    Since we are not deciding the issue for the reason the
petitioner never moved an application praying that power
under Rule 88 be exercised, we leave it open to the Competent
WP(C) No.2475/2011                                Page 5 of 6

Authority to take into account all relevant facts and thereafter
decide whether the rigour of sub-rule 6 of Rule 26 of the CCS
Pension Rules needs to be relaxed in favour of the petitioner in
the peculiar circumstance of the instant case where we find
that petitioner’s request to withdraw resignation which was
submitted on 19.10.2003 which was ultimately acceded to on
16.2.2006 i.e. after nearly 2 years and 4 months as against the
period of 90 days from the date of resignation by which time
permission to withdraw the resignation needed to be accorded
to.
19.    We issue a mandamus to the Competent Authority to
treat    the    writ petition filed   by  the   petitioner    as a
representation praying that power be exercised under Rule 88
of the CCS Pension Rules and applicability of sub-rule 6 of Rule
26 of the CCS Pension Rules be waived qua her.
20.    Necessary decision would be taken within a period of 16
weeks from date of receipt of certified copy of this decision
and would be communicated to the petitioner.
                                    (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                            JUDGE
                                       (SUNIL GAUR)
                                            JUDGE
SEPTEMBER 20, 2011
dk
WP(C) No.2475/2011                                Page 6 of 6


