$~
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                    Judgment reserved on : 15th December, 2010
                   Judgment pronounced on : 20th December, 2010
+                         W.P.(C) 1157/2010
        GOVT.OF NCT OF DELHI & ORS.                   ..... Petitioner
                     Through: Ms.Jyoti Singh, Advocate.
                     versus
       DR.DEEPAK KUMAR                           ..... Respondent
                     Through:  Mr.P.P.Khurana, Senior Advocate
                               with Ms.Tamali Wad, Advocate.
       CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL
   1. Whether the Reporters of local papers may be allowed
       to see the judgment?
   2. To be referred to Reporter or not?
   3. Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest?
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
1.     Undisputably, we say so for the reason, learned senior
counsel for the respondent conceded during arguments that
the respondent Dr.Deepak Kumar was appointed on contract
basis as a Medical Officer by the Government of NCT Delhi and
was assigned to perform work at the Tihar Jail Complex. Initial
contractual engagement was with effect from 16.1.2004 and
the duration for which services had to be rendered was 6
months.      Needless to state, a fixed monthly payment was
made to Dr.Deepak Kumar as consideration for contractual
service rendered by him.
2.     It may be highlighted that no permanent, temporary or
ad-hoc post was available and further it needs to be noted that
the engagement was purely on contractual basis.
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                        Page 1 of 23

3.     From time to time the tenure of the contract was
extended by 6 months each and the contract for employment
was valid up to 30.9.2006 but was terminated vide a
communication dated 3.7.2006 which reads as under:-
       “No./70/34/2005/H&FW/2053-55            Dated:3.7.2006
                                ORDER
       The Lt.Governor, of NCT of Delhi is pleased to
       terminate the services of Dr. R.K.Govila & Dr.Deepak
       Kumar, Medical Officer, on contract basis working in
       Central Jail Hospital with immediate effect.
                                                               Sd/-
                                          (DEVENDRA SHARMA)
                                              SUPDT.(HEALTH)”
4.     It is apparent to the reader that the order terminating the
contract of service is non-stigmatic and casts no aspersion
upon Dr.Deepak Kumar.         It may be noted that the order is
composite qua two doctors i.e. Dr.R.K.Govila and Dr.Deepak
Kumar, but we are concerned only with Dr.Deepak Kumar in
the instant writ petition.
5.     Being given contractual employment on 21.1.2004 for a
period of 6 months, as noted herein above, the term of the
contract was extended for a duration of 6 months each;
relevant would it be to state that reason why term of the
contract was extended was the fact that Dr.Deepak Kumar was
rendering service to the satisfaction of his superiors evidenced
by the fact that not only was the tenure of the contract
periodically extended but also the fact certificates were issued
certifying that services rendered by Dr.Deepak Kumar were
„Very Good‟.
6.     It    is  apparent   that   something    happened        which
necessitated the order dated 3.7.2006 to be issued.            Was it
that there was no requirement to continue with the services of
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                   Page 2 of 23

Dr.Deepak Kumar or was it something else?              Nobody acts
without a cause or a reason.
7.     The pleadings of the parties show that the reason which
led to Dr.Deepak Kumar‟s contractual engagement being
terminated prematurely was an incident which took place in
Jail No.3 of the Central Jail Tihar and not the reason that there
was no work to be performed.
8.     The incident was dated 13.2.2006 when Dr.Deepak
Kumar was deputed to medically examine a convict named
„Kamran‟ who was feeling unwell. The convict was not taken
to the jail hospital within the premises of the Central Prison
Tihar. Dr.Deepak Kumar was deputed to visit the cell in which
Kamran was lodged.
9.     As per the pleadings of the parties it is not in dispute that
various convicts in Tihar Jail, commensurate with their
educational or technical qualifications, are assigned various
jobs to be performed by the convicts in Tihar Jail and the
convicts who are deputed to render services for the benefit of
other convicts and under-trial prisoners are called „Sewadars‟.
One Dr.Vipin holding a MBBS degree was lodged in Central Jail
Tihar on being convicted for an offence punishable under
Section 498-A IPC.     It is apparent that the services of the
convict Dr.Vipin, as a sewadar, would be best utilized to serve
such convicts or under-trials who became sick at the Tihar Jail
Prison Complex and thus on the day in question i.e. 13.2.2006,
convict Dr.Vipin was placed at the disposal of Dr.Deepak
Kumar, to function as a sewadar and assist Dr.Deepak Kumar.
10.    Both of them, in their respective capacity as the Jail
Visiting Doctor and the Sewadar respectively, reached the cell
where Kamran was lodged.            Dr.Deepak Kumar examined
Kamran but found no apparent manifestation which could be
clinically diagnosed as the cause of the stated chest pain
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                     Page 3 of 23

which Kamran complained of being felt by him.              As per
Dr.Deepak Kumar, he formed an opinion that Kamran could be
given a „Voveron‟ injection. Relevant would it be to note that
voveron is an analgesic, anti-inflammatory and pain-relieving
medicine.
11.    Kamran developed fever and complained of extreme pain
after he was given the injection of voveron and this he claimed
lasted for 2 days.        As per Kamran the injection was
administered to him in a manner which could be best
described by him as the manner in which beasts are injected.
He complained to the jail authorities that it was convict
Dr.Vipin who administered the injection to him and further did
not even take the basic precaution of using a cotton swab
while injecting him. Though not expressly stated by Kamran
as to what he intended to convey by saying that a cotton swab
was not used, commonsense guides us that what Kamran
intended to convey was that the place where injection was
administered to him was not cleaned with cotton dabbed in
spirit, a phenomenon we all are familiar with when an injection
is administered. Further, the complaint of Kamran suggests
that the needle of the syringe was jabbed inside his muscles
and not with the deftness of the fingers as is usually to be
observed when an injection is administered to a patient.
12.    Kamran‟s complaint was taken seriously on the issue of
Dr.Deepak Kumar delegating the function of an injection being
administered by a sewadar.
13.    To comply with the minimum requirements of natural
justice, Dr.Deepak Kumar as also convict Dr.Vipin were called
upon to submit, in writing, their explanation pertaining to the
incident in question.   Dr.Deepak Kumar gave his version, in
writing, under his signatures as under:-
       “To
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                Page 4 of 23

       The Petition Officer
       Central Jail
       Tihar
       Subject:     Medical treatment of Kamran S/o Md.Shafi
                    As per telephonic message from petition
                    Officer on 13.2.2006.
       Respected Sir,
       It is to inform you that on 13.2.2006, there was a call
       to attend High Security Ward. I went to attend the
       call.
       As per record, the above patient Kamran S/o Md.Shafi
       presented to me with body-ache and diffuse chest
       pain with no history of Hypertension, Diabetes or
       pulmonary tuberculosis. On examination his vitals
       was within normal limit.
       For the above complaint he was advised inject
       voveron 100 im. stat along with other required
       medicines which was advised by the undersigned and
       given to him by the undersigned. However, I was
       being assisted by Vipin (who has been deployed in CJ
       30P5 as sewadar of the assistance) in giving medicine.
       Vipin (sewadar) possess the degree of MBBS as per his
       C.T Card.
       It is repeated that the above patient was given the
       above injection by the undersigned under the proper
       aseptic condition and by the convict (Vipin).
       This is for your kind information.”
14.    The response of convict Dr.Vipin was as under:-
       “I, Dr.Vipin Kumar (convict) working as Sewadar in
       OPD. During the visits to the High Security Ward
       under the Advise of Doctor I also visit the HSW along
       them. I carry out instructions like Dressing, injections,
       under their supervision.
       I have given Inj. to Mr.Kamran Gohar under the
       supervisions of Dr.Deepak on 13th Feb 2006.”
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                   Page 5 of 23

15.    Juxtaposing the response by Dr.Deepak Kumar and
convict Dr.Vipin Kumar, with reference to the complaint of the
convict Kamran; as per Dr.Deepak Kumar the sewadar convict
Dr.Vipin Kumar made Kamran‟s condition aseptic meaning
thereby, the place where the injection was administered was
cleaned with spirit dabbed on a cotton swab, and thereafter he
i.e. Dr.Deepak Kumar administered the injection. But as per
convict Dr.Vipin Kumar, it was he i.e. Dr.Vipin Kumar who
administered the injection.      Further, it would be relevant to
note that as per convict Dr.Vipin Kumar, he had been doing
likewise even in the past while working as a sewadar under
instructions of the jail doctor.
16.    It is thus apparent that with respect to one facet of the
complaint made by Kamran the same found corroboration in
the written response of convict Dr.Vipin Kumar i.e. it was
Dr.Vipin Kumar who administered the injection to Kamran and
not Dr.Deepak Kumar.        Further relevant would it be to note
that on the issue of Dr.Deepak Kumar taking the assistance of
convict Dr.Vipin Kumar to make the condition of Kamran
aseptic he highlighted that though a sewadar, the medical
qualification of Dr.Vipin Kumar had to be kept in mind.
17.    Taking a serious view of Dr.Deepak Kumar permitting a
sewadar to administer a voveron injection to a convict, the file
was processed with a note penned for consideration by the
Competent Authority i.e. the Lt.Governor of the Union Territory
of Delhi. The note placed for consideration before the Hon‟ble
Lt.Governor reads as under:-
       “Matter in brief is that 2 orders were received in this
       office from the Prison Headquarters, in which it was
       ordered that Dr.R.K.Govila, and Dr.Deepak Kumar,
       both Medical Officers are surrendered and relieved of
       their duties with the direction to report to the
       Department of Health & Family Welfare. A letter
       dated 26.4.06, was written in this regard to DIG
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                  Page 6 of 23

       (Prisons) in which the reasons for surrendering these
       doctors was sought.
       A letter dated 24.4.06, in this regard was also received
       from the Prison Headquarters in which it was stated
       that Dr. R.K.Govila, M.O., while going inside District
       Jail, Rohini, for his duties, was searched by security
       personnel, and was found carrying Swagat brand
       tobacco 03 packets (60 gms.), Rajdarbar Gutka 01
       packet (10 gms.) and empty syringe 01 from inside his
       shoe bottom and the same was seized vide seizure
       memo No.1185121 dated 5.4.06. It has also been
       stated that the aforesaid act of Dr.Govila is in
       contravention of the provisions of Delhi Jail Manual,
       and instructions issued by the Prison Department from
       time to time. It has also been stated that Dr.Govila
       has admitted his guilt and a copy of his confessional
       statement has also been enclosed with the above said
       letter.
       Further in response to this office letter dated 26.4.06,
       another letter dated 23.5.06, was received in this
       office in which the above said facts were mentioned in
       respect of Dr.R.K.Govila.      As regards the case of
       Dr.Deepak Kumar it has been mentioned that while
       working as Medical Officer in Central Jail No.3, he was
       giving work of dressing and injection to the convict
       sewadar in High Security Ward which is against the
       norms of medical profession and security reasons.
       In this regard it is submitted that these doctors were
       appointed by this Department in the year 2000 and
       2004 respectively on contract basis, and their contract
       has been extended from time to time. However from
       the above said report from the Prison Headquarters it
       is evident that their conduct has not been up to the
       mark. Therefore we may if so approved place the
       matter before Hon‟ble L.G., Delhi, termination of their
       services.
       Submitted please.            Sd/- (23.6.2006)
                                    O.S.(H).”
18.    The file shows that the note was thereafter approved by
4 other officers and finally by the Hon‟ble Lt.Governor and
pursuant thereto the order dated 3.7.2006 was issued.
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                   Page 7 of 23

19.    If true, qua Dr.Govila, the charge is fairly serious, but we
need not ponder on the same inasmuch as we are not
concerned        with   the   alleged    misdemeanor     of   Dr.Govila.
Pertaining to Dr.Deepak Kumar, he questioned his contractual
service being terminated alleging that he was penalized and
since the order is by way of penalty the safeguard envisaged
by the Constitution of India of an inquiry preceding the verdict
of guilt being not held, the order dated 3.7.2006 was vitiated
in law.
20.    He     filed    a    writ   petition   registered    as      WP(C)
No.11872/2006 in this Court in which he relied upon various
decisions of the Supreme Court commencing from the locus
classicus reported as 1958 SCR 828 Purushottam Lal Dhingra
vs. UOI where even a temporarily appointed government
servant was entitled to the constitutional protection afforded
by Article 311 of the Constitution of India if the termination
order was found to be stigmatic or if the order was innocuous
on its face, upon lifting the veil it could be detected that the
order was by way of penalty.
21.    The learned Single Judge held that this protection would
not be available to a contractual appointee and de-hors the
same,      noting    the   distinction   between    an  act    allegedly
committed being treated as a motive or foundation for an
action,     held    that   the    instant   case   showed     that    the
misdemeanor of Dr.Deepak Kumar was the motive and not the
foundation to terminate the contractual employment.                   The
result was the writ petition being dismissed vide judgment and
order dated 13.5.2008.
22.    Dr.Deepak Kumar questioned the decision of the learned
Single Judge by filing LPA No.352/2008 which was disposed of
vide order dated 15.7.2008. The order reads as under:-
       “Learned counsel appearing for the Appellant seeks
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                       Page 8 of 23

       leave to withdraw the appeal with liberty to apply to
       the learned Single Judge to permit him to withdraw the
       writ petition on the ground that his remedy lies before
       the Central Administrative Tribunal. Liberty granted.
       The appeal is dismissed as withdrawn.”
23.    Thereafter, an application was moved before the learned
Single Judge, who vide order dated 19.9.2008 recalled his
order dated 13.5.2008 and permitted the writ petition to be
withdrawn with liberty to approach the Central Administrative
Tribunal.
24.    Dr.Deepak Kumar thereafter filed OA No.2503/2008
which has been allowed by the Tribunal vide impugned
judgment and order dated 8.12.2009. The Tribunal held that
in   view     of   a   decision dated   27.7.2007    deciding     OA
No.2663/2006 Des Raj vs. Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors., where
services of a temporary employee were terminated under Rule
5(1)    of  CCS     (Temporary  Service)  Rules   1965     and    the
termination being founded on an alleged misconduct and
being punitive was set aside as the termination was not
preceded by an inquiry, relief had to be granted to Dr.Deepak
Kumar, in respect of whom the Tribunal likewise held that
services were terminated by way of penalty and were founded
on a misdemeanor.
25.    The Tribunal set aside the order dated 3.7.2006 but
granted liberty to initiate an inquiry as also to place Dr.Deepak
Kumar under suspension and for which it was held that
subsistence allowance should be paid. Back-wages were paid
limited from 6.11.2008 till Dr.Deepak Kumar was suspended.
26.    The instant writ petition challenges the order dated
8.12.2009.
27.    At the outset it may be noted that the Tribunal has
skirted the basic issue before it, being whether a contractual
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                   Page 9 of 23

employee could claim status at par with that of a temporarily
appointed employee. Suffice would it be to state that in Des
Raj’s case (supra), the Tribunal was concerned with the
termination of an employee who was yet to be confirmed and
was working under the status of the temporary employee
during the period of training. Des Raj was issued a letter of
appointment after he was selected for a regular post and
status was that of a temporary employee inasmuch as Des Raj
had yet to successfully complete the probation. Unfortunately,
the Tribunal glossed over said relevant fact.
28.    Sh.P.P.Khurana, learned senior counsel for Dr.Deepak
Kumar cited the decision reported as (1979) 1 SCC 477 The
Manager, Government Branch Press & Anr. vs. D.B. Belliappa
to urge that Dr.Deepak Kumar would be entitled to the benefit
of an inquiry and notwithstanding his engagement being on
contractual      basis,  principles  enunciated      pertaining       to
temporary employees in government service would apply.
29.    We do not agree for the reason, the decision in
D.B.Belliappa’s case (supra) shows, vide para 1 thereof, that
D.B.Belliappa was appointed temporarily to a non-gazetted
Class-IV post as defined in Clause-IV of Sub-Rule (3) of Rule 5
of the Mysore Civil Services (Classification, Control & Appeal)
Rules 1957 and the appointment was till further orders. It was
for the reason D.B.Belliappa had the status of a temporary civil
servant and the statutory rules governed his service that the
Supreme       Court   extended    benefit of    the   Constitutional
protection envisaged by Article 311 of the Constitution to him.
30.    A   Co-ordinate    Division  Bench    of   this   Court       had
considered whether protection available to a government
servant under Article 311 of the Constitution would be
available to a contractual employee.          The decision dated
2.11.2010 decides WP(C) 6423/2010 Neena Shad vs. MCD and
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                     Page 10 of 23

a connected writ petition. The law was discussed in paras 50
to 70 of the said decision, which read as under:-
       “50. Whether MCD was required to hold an inquiry in
       terms of Article 311(2) of Constitution of India before
       issuing Office Order(s) dated 03.07.2008 dispensing
       with the services of the petitioners?
       51. Part XIV of Constitution of India deals with
       “Services under the Union & the States”. Articles 310
       and 311 contained under the said part read as under:-
           “310. Tenure of office of persons serving the
           Union or a State.—(1) Except as expressly
           provided by this Constitution, every person who is
           a member of a defence service or of a civil service
           of the Union or of an all-India service or holds any
           post connected with defence or any civil post
           under the Union, holds office during the pleasure of
           the President, and every person who is a member
           of a civil service of a State or holds any civil post
           under a State holds office during the pleasure of
           the Governor of the State.
           (2) Notwithstanding that a person holding a civil
           post under the Union or a State holds office during
           the pleasure of the President or, as the case may
           be, of the Governor of the State, any contract
           under which a person, not being a member of a
           defence service or of an all-India service or of a
           civil service of the Union or a State, is appointed
           under this Constitution to hold such a post may, if
           the President or the Governor , as the case may
           be, deems it necessary in order to secure the
           services of a person having special qualifications,
           provide for the payment to him of compensation, if
           before the expiration of an agreed period that post
           is abolished or he is, for reasons not connected
           with any misconduct on his part, required to vacate
           that post.”
           “311. Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank
           of persons employed in civil capacities under
           the Union or a State.—(1) No person who is a
           member of a civil service of the Union or an all-
           India service or a civil service of a State or holds a
           civil post under the Union or a State shall be
           dismissed or removed by an authority subordinate
           to that by which he was appointed.
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                    Page 11 of 23

           [(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed
           or removed or reduced in rank except after an
           inquiry in which he has been informed of the
           charges against him and given a reasonable
           opportunity of being heard in respect of those
           charges
           [Provided that where it is proposed after such
           inquiry, to impose upon him any such penalty, such
           penalty may be imposed on the basis of the
           evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall
           not be necessary to give such person any
           opportunity of making representation on the
           penalty proposed:
           Provided further that this clause shall not apply—
           (a)       where a person is dismissed or removed or
           reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which
           has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or
           (b)       where the authority empowered to dismiss
           or remove a person or to reduce him in rank is
           satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by
           that authority in writing, it is not reasonably
           practicable to hold such inquiry; or
           (c)       where the President or the Governor, as the
           case may be, is satisfied that in the interest of the
           security of the State it is not expedient to hold
           such inquiry.
           (3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a
           question arises whether it is reasonably practicable
           to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2),
           the decision thereon of the authority empowered
           to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him
           in rank shall be final.”
       52. What is the extent of protection available to the
       government servants under Article 311?
       53. Clause (1) of Article 311 is quite explicit and
       hardly requires any discussion. The scope and the
       ambit of clause (1) is that government servants are
       entitled to the judgment of the authority by which they
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                    Page 12 of 23

       were appointed or some authority superior to that
       authority and that they should not be dismissed or
       removed by a lesser authority in whose judgment they
       may not have the same faith. The underlying idea
       obviously is that a provision like this will ensure to
       them a certain amount of security of tenure. Clause
       (2) protects government servants against being
       dismissed or removed or reduced in rank without
       being given a reasonable opportunity of showing
       cause against the action proposed to be taken in
       regard to them. It is to be noted that in clause (1) the
       words “dismissed” and “removed” have been used
       while in clause (2) the words “dismissed” “removed”
       and “reduced in rank” have been used.
       54. What is meant by the expressions “dismissed”,
       “removed” and “reduced in rank” occurring in Article
       311(2)?
       55. This aspect of the matter was examined in great
       detail by Supreme Court in the decision reported as
       Parshotam Lal Dhingra v Union of India 1958 SCR 828.
       After tracing the history of service rules, Supreme
       Court observed as under:-
          “It follows from the above discussion that both at
          the date of the commencement of the 1935 Act and
          of our Constitution the words “dismissed”,
          “removed” and “reduced in rank”, as used in the
          service rules, were well understood as signifying or
          denoting the three major punishments which could
          be inflicted on government servants. The protection
          given by the rules to the government servants
          against dismissal, removal or reduction in rank,
          which could not be enforced by action, was
          incorporated in sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section
          240 to give them a statutory protection by
          indicating a procedure which had to be followed
          before the punishments of dismissal, removal or
          reduction in rank could be imposed on them and
          which could be enforced in law. These protections
          have now been incorporated in Article 311 of our
          Constitution. The effect of Section 240 of the 1935
          Act reproduced in Articles 310 and 311, as
          explained by this Court in S.A. Venkataraman v.
          Union of India 25 has been to impose a fetter on the
          right of the government to inflict the several
          punishments therein mentioned. Thus under Article
          311(1) the punishments of dismissal, or removal
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                  Page 13 of 23

          cannot be inflicted by an authority subordinate to
          that by which the servant was appointed and under
          Article 311(2) the punishments of dismissal,
          removal and reduction in rank cannot be meted out
          to the government servant without giving him a
          reasonable opportunity to defend himself. The
          principle embodied in Article 310(1) that the
          government servants hold office during the
          pleasure of the President or the Governor, as the
          case may be, is qualified by the provisions of Article
          311 which give protection to the government
          servants. The net result is that it is only in those
          cases where the government intends to inflict those
          three forms of punishments that the government
          servant must be given a reasonable opportunity of
          showing cause against the action proposed to be
          taken in regard to him. It follows, therefore, that if
          the termination of service is sought to be brought
          about otherwise than by way of punishment, then
          the government servant whose service is so
          terminated cannot claim the protection of Article
          311(2) and the decisions cited before us and
          referred to above, insofar as they lay down that
          principle, must be held to be rightly decided.”
          (Emphasis Supplied)
       56. There are different species of government
       service. The strength of a service or a part of a service
       sanctioned as a separate unit is, in the Fundamental
       Rules, Section 3, Chapter II, Rule 9(4), called the
       cadre. Each cadre consists of a certain number of
       posts. According to Rule 9(22) of the Fundamental
       Rules, a permanent post means a post carrying a
       definite rate of pay sanctioned without limit of time.
       Due to rush of work or other exigencies some
       “temporary posts” are often created. A temporary post
       is defined in Rule 9(30) to mean a post carrying a
       definite rate of pay sanctioned for a limited time.
       These temporary posts are very often outside the
       cadre and are usually for one year and are renewed
       from year to year, although some of them may be
       created for a certain specified period. The conditions
       of service of a government servant appointed to a
       post, permanent or temporary, are regulated by the
       terms of the contract of employment, express or
       implied, and subject thereto, by the rules applicable to
       the members of the particular service.
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                   Page 14 of 23

       57. Article 311 does not make any distinction
       between permanent and temporary members of
       service or between persons holding permanent or
       temporary posts in the matter of their tenure. The
       protection envisaged in Article 311 is equally available
       to both the classes of government servants.
       58. The appointment of a government servant to a
       permanent post may be substantive or on probation or
       on an officiating basis.
       59. A substantive appointment to a permanent post
       in public service confers normally on the servant so
       appointed a substantive right to the post and he
       becomes entitled to hold a “lien” on the post. This
       “lien” is defined in Fundamental Rule Section 3,
       Chapter II Rule 9(13) as the title of a government
       servant to hold substantively a permanent post,
       including a tenure post, to which he has been
       appointed substantively. The Government cannot
       terminate his service unless it is entitled to do so (1)
       by virtue of a special term of the contract of
       employment, e.g., by giving the requisite notice
       provided by the contract, or (2) by the rules governing
       the conditions of his service, e.g., on attainment of the
       age of superannuation prescribed by the rules, or on
       the fulfillment of the conditions for compulsory
       retirement or on abolition of post or on being found
       guilty of misconduct, inefficiency, indiscipline or any
       other disqualification.
       60. Termination of service of such a servant so
       appointed must per se be a punishment, for it
       operates as a forfeiture of the servant‟s rights and
       brings about a premature end of his employment.
       61. An appointment to a permanent post in
       government service on probation means, as in the
       case of a person appointed by a private employer, that
       the servant so appointed is taken on trial. The period
       of probation may in some cases be for a fixed period,
       e.g., for six months or for one year or it may be
       expressed simply as “on probation” without any
       specification of any period. Such an employment on
       probation, under the ordinary law of master and
       servant, comes to an end if during or at the end of the
       probation the servant so appointed on trial is found
       unsuitable and his service is terminated by a notice.
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                    Page 15 of 23

       62. An appointment to officiate in a permanent post
       is usually made when the incumbent substantively
       holding that post is on leave or when the permanent
       post is vacant and no substantive appointment has yet
       been made to that post. Such an officiating
       appointment comes to an end on the return of the
       incumbent substantively holding the post from leave
       in the former case or on a substantive appointment
       being made to that permanent post in the latter case
       or on the service of a notice of termination as agreed
       upon or as may be reasonable under the ordinary law.
       63. It is, therefore, quite clear that appointment to a
       permanent post in a government service, either on
       probation or on an officiating basis, is, from the very
       nature of such employment, itself of a transitory
       character and, in the absence of any special contract
       or specific rule regulating the conditions of the
       service, the implied term of such appointment, under
       the ordinary law of master and servant, is that it is
       terminable at any time. In short, in the case of an
       appointment to a permanent post in a government
       service on probation or on an officiating basis, the
       servant so appointed does not acquire any substantive
       right to the post and consequently cannot complain,
       any more than a private servant employed on
       probation or on an officiating basis can do, if his
       service is terminated at any time.
       64. Likewise an appointment to a temporary post in
       a government service may be substantive or on
       probation or on an officiating basis. Here also, in the
       absence of any special stipulation or any specific
       service rule, the servant so appointed acquires no
       right to the post and his service can be terminated at
       any time except in one case, namely, when the
       appointment to a temporary post is for a definite
       period. In such a case the servant so appointed
       acquires a right to his tenure for that period which
       cannot be put an end to unless there is a special
       contract entitling the employer to do so on giving the
       requisite notice or the person so appointed is, on
       enquiry held on due notice to the servant and after
       giving him a reasonable opportunity to defend himself,
       found guilty of misconduct, negligence, inefficiency or
       any other disqualification.
       65. To put it simply, the principle is that when a
       servant has right to a post either under the terms of
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                  Page 16 of 23

       the contract of employment, express or implied, or
       under the rules governing the conditions of his
       service, the termination of the service of such a
       servant is by itself and prima facie a punishment, for it
       operates as a forfeiture of his right to hold that post or
       that rank and to get the emoluments and other
       benefits attached thereto. But if the servant has no
       right to the post, as where he is appointed to a post,
       permanent or temporary either on probation or on
       officiating basis, the termination of his employment
       does not deprive him of any right and cannot,
       therefore, by itself be a punishment.
       66. It does not, however, follow that, except in the
       two cases mentioned above, in all other cases,
       termination of service of a government servant who
       has no right to his post. e.g., where he was appointed
       to a post, temporary or permanent, either on
       probation or on officiating basis, the termination
       cannot, in any circumstance, be a dismissal or removal
       from service by way of punishment. Cases may arise
       where the government may find a servant unsuitable
       for the post on account of misconduct, negligence,
       inefficiency or other disqualification. If such a servant
       was appointed to a post, permanent or temporary,
       either on probation or on officiating basis, then the
       very transitory character of the employment implies
       that the employment was terminable at any time on
       reasonable notice given by the Government. In such
       cases the Government may proceed to take action
       against the servant in exercise of its powers under the
       terms of the contract of employment, express or
       implied, or under the rules regulating the conditions of
       service, if any be applicable, and ordinarily in such a
       situation the Government will take this course. But the
       Government may take the view that a simpliciter
       termination of service is not enough and that the
       conduct of the servant has been such that he deserves
       a punishment entailing penal consequences. In such a
       case the Government may choose to proceed against
       the servant on the basis of his misconduct,
       negligence, inefficiency or the like and inflict on him
       the punishment of dismissal or removal carrying with
       it the penal consequences. In such a case the servant
       will be entitled to the protection of Article 311 of
       Constitution of India for the reason the same puts an
       indelible stigma on the officer affecting his future
       career.
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                    Page 17 of 23

       67. In order to determine whether an order
       terminating the service of a government servant
       amounts to punishment following two tests needs to
       be applied namely, (1) whether the servant had a right
       to the post, or (2) whether he has been visited with
       penal consequences of the kind hereinbefore referred
       to? If the case satisfies either of the two tests then it
       must be held that the servant has been punished and
       the termination of his service must be taken as a
       punishment.
       68. Sometimes due to rush of work or other
       exigencies of service the government makes
       contractual appointments. Such appointments are
       made in respect of non-sanctioned posts and de-hors
       the recruitment rules. A person appointed on
       contractual basis does not enjoy the protection of
       Article 311(2) for the simple reason he is not member
       of a civil service of the Union or an all-India service or
       a civil service of a State or holds a civil post under the
       Union or a State. (See the decision of Supreme Court
       reported as Union Public Service Commission v Girish
       Jayanti Lal Vaghela (2006) 2 SCC 482)
       69. But the „State‟ is expected to act fairly,
       reasonably and non-arbitrarily even in contractual
       matters. (See the decision of Supreme Court reported
       as Ramana Dayaram Shetty v International Airport
       Authority of India (1979) 3 SCC 489). Therefore, in the
       matters of termination of contractual employment by
       the government, the courts are under a duty to ensure
       that the government has not acted in an arbitrary and
       whimsical manner.
       70. Whether MCD had acted fairly, reasonable and
       non-arbitrarily while issuing Office Order dated
       03.07.2008 dispensing with the services of the
       petitioners?”
31.    Thereafter, the Division Bench discussed the fairness in
the action taken against Neena Shad and the second
respondent in the other writ petition which was decided.
32.    We may only state that the view taken by the Co-
ordinate Division Bench of this Court is premised on the
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                     Page 18 of 23

fairness    founded   on  reason   being   the  essence     of    the
guarantee      epitomized  in  Article  14   and  16(1)     of    the
Constitution of India.
33.    Reverting to the facts of this case we find that the
principles of natural justice were followed when the complaint
by Kamran was made known to Dr.Deepak Kumar and his
response was elicited.       Dr.Deepak Kumar gave a written
response in which he admitted having utilized the services of
the sewadar convict Dr.Vipin but limited the role to Dr.Vipin
making the patient aseptic and taking on the roll of the doctor
who administered the voveron injection to Kamran.           Convict
Dr.Vipin clearly corroborated Kamran when he responded by
informing that it was he who administered the injection, but
stated that it was under the supervision of Dr.Deepak Kumar.
34.    Now, if facts are admitted, where is the need for an
inquiry?     In the instant case the limited point of variance:
Whether after rendering Kamran aseptic, the injection was
administered by Dr.Deepak Kumar or convict Dr.Vipin Kumar
was the only area of dispute and for which we see no scope for
any inquiry to be held inasmuch as there was sufficient
material to hold that Dr.Deepak Kumar, after examining
Kamran, and advising voveron injection to be administered,
allowed the rest to be executed by Dr.Vipin.
35.    We disagree with the Tribunal that instant case attracted
Constitutional protections to be afforded to Dr.Deepak Kumar
and that a full-fledged inquiry after serving a charge-sheet was
required to be held.
36.    We hold that the minimum requirement of natural justice
was complied with.
37.    But, one important aspect needs to be highlighted and
for which we find an injury caused to Dr.Deepak Kumar.
38.    It is settled law that a subjective satisfaction of the
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                  Page 19 of 23

authority concerned is not wholly immune from judicial
reviewability. Under judicial decisions Courts have carved out
an area, limited though it be, within which the validity of the
subjective satisfaction can yet be subjected to judicial scrutiny.
One such area of judicial scrutiny is to consider whether the
satisfaction is grounded on materials which are of rationally
probative value and further whether the authority has taken
into account all relevant factors which it ought to have taken
into account.      It may even be that in spite of the best
intention, a relevant factor may not be properly taken into
account and if it is to be so found, corrective action has to be
taken by the Court.
39.    A perusal of the note sent for consideration by the
Lt.Governor refers to the fact that Dr.Deepak Kumar was
giving work of dressing and injection to a convict sewadar. We
have noted the entire extract of the note in para 17 above. It
strikes the reader at the outset that the Hon‟ble Lt.Governor
was not made aware of the fact that the sewadar was no
ordinary prisoner but was a doctor by profession having MBBS
degree.     Surely, this fact was relevant to be brought to the
notice of the decision making authority i.e. the Hon‟ble
Lt.Governor. Suffice would it be to state that reference to a
person as a convict has a demeaning effect on the mind of the
person to whom the convict is referred to as the subject
matter of an opinion formation for the reason the lay mind
tends to perceive a convict as a person who has committed a
misdemeanor or a felony requiring his incarceration in the
prison. It would be fairly horrifying to receive information that
a convict was found administering injections. But, the moment
it is informed that the convict is a doctor by profession, the
raised eye-brows would normally be expected to fall.
40.    Thus, we hold that the decision making process stands
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                  Page 20 of 23

vitiated on account of a relevant information not being
disclosed to the Hon‟ble Lt.Governor.
41.    There is yet another taint, though not of a great
magnitude, but nonetheless is sufficient to form an opinion of
a possible poisoning of the mind of the decision making
authority, or in the alternative, of a kind which gives rise to a
reasonable possibility of a bias in the mind of the decision
making authority.
42.    The note clubs a very severe misdemeanor of Dr. Govila,
who, if the contents of the note are true, had no business to
smuggle in intoxicating material inside the precincts of the jail.
The note highlights the serious misconduct of Dr. Govila and
thereafter clubs the misdemeanor of Dr.Deepak Kumar. The
possibility of the Hon‟ble Lt.Governor being swayed by the
gravity of the first misdemeanor and thus being insidiously
biased against Dr.Deepak Kumar can also not be ruled out.
43.    We need to deviate a little at this stage. We have our
doubts whether at all the instant dispute could be the subject
matter of adjudication before the Tribunal inasmuch as the
Administrative Tribunal‟s Act 1985 envisages a service dispute
between an employee and the Government to be the subject
matter of adjudication before the Tribunal and unless the
status acquired is that of a Government Servant, whether
permanent, temporary or ad-hoc, a service related dispute
which pertains to a contract of service or a contract for service
would not be within the domain of the Tribunal. Section 3(Q)
of the Act defines as to what would be „Service Matters‟. But,
we need not take the debate to the logical conclusion, in the
peculiar facts of this case, where Dr.Deepak Kumar filed a writ
petition in this Court and the learned Single Judge held his
status not that of a government servant, yet in spite thereof
the Letters Patent Bench permitted the Letters Patent Appeal
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                 Page 21 of 23

to be withdrawn with liberty granted to re-approach the
learned Single Judge with a prayer that the order dismissing
the writ petition be recalled and the writ petition be dismissed
as withdrawn with liberty granted to approach the Central
Administrative Tribunal. The learned Single Judge recalled his
decision and permitted the writ petition to be withdrawn with
liberty to approach the Central Administrative Tribunal and
thus we cannot leave Dr.Deepak Kumar without any remedy.
44.    Reverting back to the journey we must further complete,
holding that a very relevant aspect i.e. of convict Dr.Vipin
Kumar who was acting as a sewadar and was assigned to
assist Dr.Deepak Kumar being a qualified doctor having MBBS
degree not being brought to the notice of the Hon‟ble
Lt.Governor, fairness in action requires the matter to be
reconsidered by the Hon‟ble Lt.Governor and for which we
shall be passing an appropriate direction, but would be noting
that    the    directions given by  the   Tribunal    are     wholly
unsustainable.
45.    The Tribunal has required a contractual employee to be
placed under suspension. The concept of suspension is alien
to a contractual employment. In a contractual employment if
there is a fundamental breach of the condition of service to be
rendered by the contractual employee it justifies immediate
termination of the contract by the employer.       Assuming the
termination of the contract to be illegal the remedy of the
employee is to sue for damages. Under no circumstances can
a contract for employment or a contract of employment be
specifically enforced.
46.    We set aside the impugned decision passed by the
Tribunal and dispose of the Original Application filed by the
respondent as also the instant writ petition with a direction to
the petitioner that a note be re-prepared for consideration by
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                  Page 22 of 23

the Hon‟ble Lt.Governor and in the note it should be
highlighted with clarity that sewadar convict Dr.Vipin assigned
for help to Dr.Deepak Kumar was a qualified doctor having
MBBS degree.         It should be informed in the note to the
Lt.Governor that contractual service rendered by Dr.Deepak
Kumar was found to be „Very Good‟ commencing from the year
2004 till contractual employment was determined and that the
misdemeanor        alleged   against  Dr.Deepak     Kumar      was    of
permitting      Dr.Vipin  (a   sewadar    convict),  to   administer
injections.
47.    Fresh     decision  would    be   taken   by    the     Hon‟ble
Lt.Governor      and   the same     would   be communicated           to
Dr.Deepak Kumar and needless to state if the decision would
be to continue with the contractual employment the same
would be conditional upon requirement of a contractual doctor
at the Tihar Jail Complex or the Rohini Jail Complex at Delhi.
We clarify that Dr.Deepak Kumar would not be entitled to any
remuneration for the period he has not worked and if the
decision is favourable to him it would be treated as a case of
fresh contractual re-engagement of a person                 who had
rendered satisfactory contractual service in the past.               The
decision would be taken within 4 months from today and
communicated to Dr.Deepak Kumar.
48.    No costs.
                                     (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                              JUDGE
                                     (SIDDHARTH MRIDUL)
                                              JUDGE
DECEMBER 20, 2010
dk
WP(C) No.1157/2010                                     Page 23 of 23


