*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                     Judgment Reserved on: August 12, 2014
                                      Judgment Delivered on: August 26, 2014
+                            DEATH SENTENCE REF. 1/2014
       STATE                                                   ..... Petitioner
                      Represented by:       Mr.Varun Goswami, APP with Insp.
                                            Sandeep Gupta, Ranjeet Dhaka,
                                            SHO Bir Singh and ASI Nihal
                                            Singh, PS Chhawla
                                            versus
       RAVI KUMAR & ORS.                                       ..... Respondents
                      Represented by:       Mr.A.J.Bhambhani, Sr.Advocate
                                            instructed by Mr.S.B.Dandapani,
                                            Advocate/Amicus Curiae and
                                            Ms.Bhavita Modi, Advocate for
                                            Ravi
                                            Ms.Saahila Lamba, Amicus Curiae
                                            for Vinod @ Chottu
                                            Mr.Vikas Padora, Advocate with
                                            Mr.Chaman Lal, Advocate for
                                            Rahul
                             CRL.A. 563/2014
       RAHUL                                                   ..... Appellant
                      Represented by:       Mr.Vikas Padora, Advocate with
                                            Mr.Chaman Lal, Advocate
                                            versus
       STATE OF DELHI                                          ..... Respondent
                      Represented by:       Mr.Varun Goswami, APP with Insp.
                                            Sandeep Gupta, Ranjeet Dhaka,
                                            SHO Bir Singh and ASI Nihal
                                            Singh, PS Chhawla
  Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                      Page 1 of 97

                                 CRL.A. 726/2014
       RAVI                                              ..... Appellant
                      Represented by:       Mr.A.J.Bhambhani, Sr.Advocate
                                            instructed by Mr.S.B.Dandapani,
                                            Advocate/Amicus Curiae and
                                            Ms.Bhavita Modi, Advocate
                                            versus
       STATE                                             ..... Respondent
                      Represented by:       Mr.Varun Goswami, APP with Insp.
                                            Sandeep Gupta, Ranjeet Dhaka,
                                            SHO Bir Singh and ASI Nihal
                                            Singh, PS Chhawla
                             CRL.A. 1036/2014
       VINOD @ CHHOTU                                            ..... Appellant
                      Represented by:       Ms.Saahila Lamba,
                                            Advocate/Amicus Curiae
                                            versus
       STATE                                                     ..... Respondent
                      Represented by:       Mr.Varun Goswami, APP with Insp.
                                            Sandeep Gupta, Ranjeet Dhaka,
                                            SHO Bir Singh and ASI Nihal
                                            Singh, PS Chhawla
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA
PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
1.     Anamica‘s (name changed) life of 17 years had seen their moments
of drama and incidents. She had never before woken up in the knowledge
that on February 09, 2012 her life would have a horrific end. She awoke in
  Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                       Page 2 of 97

the morning of February 09, 2012, with the sun smiling on the
windowpane of her room. The yawns were as loud and deep as of all
inhabitants of spaceship earth. Finishing her daily chores and returning
home at about 8:45 PM in the company of her friends Pooja, Sangeeta and
Saraswati, chatting and gossiping, a red indica car screeched to a halt near
them and the door flew open. There was no near-miss. An unknown male
slammed into Anamica knocking her off her feet and catapulting her into
the car, arms windmilling, towards the void beyond life in a few hours
thereafter.
2.     So swift and furtive were the movements of the predators, like those
of a trained blood hound picking out a scent, Pooja, Sangeeta and
Saraswati, were left stunned and could not even note the number of the car.
They could only see that it was a red coloured indica and had probably
three or four boys inside.
3.     This was when members of the society last saw Anamica when she
was alive. She was seen by members of the society next on February 13,
2012. She was dead. But her dead body spoke. It was penned in the post-
mortem report. It told that when the weak and helpless, shaken in mind
and nerve, body of Anamica was snatched from the society, the hunter‘s
mind was that of a hard, unyielding nature, and the predominant idea of
finding a victim to rape and kill had taken such complete possession of the
mind of the hunter that there was no room for any emotion. As the hunters
satisfied their lust and executed their design to kill the helpless Anamica,
lest she survives to nail them, they left a record upon the body as a sign of
it not being a common rape followed by murder, whimsical and bizarre
conceits of which kind are not common in the annals of crime. They have
afforded valuable indications to us as to the criminals. The injuries on the
  Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 3 of 97

body as per post-mortem report Ex.PW-26/A, telling the story we have
profiled, are as under:-
       “1.     Swelling over Rt. Parietal region.
       2.      Lacerated wound of size 2 cm x 1 cm on Rt. Parietal
       region.
       3.      Lacerated wound of 1 x .5 cm on lateral angle of Rt
       eye.
       4.      Contusion & swelling over Rt side of face ĉ under
       lying acchymosis.
       5.      Contusion over right anterior side of neck, upper one
       third of size 10 cm in length and 5 cm in width on lateral side
       and 2 cm on medial aspect.
       6.      Superficial incised wound two in number extending
       from middle of neck going downwards laterally to the right
       (6 cm in length)
       7.      Bilateral swelling of eyes with congestion in right eye.
       8.      Superficial incised wound extending from middle of
       abdomen of size 12 cm going laterally to the right with
       tailing on right side (3 cm below umbilicus)
       9.      Superficial horizontal incised wound of size 11 cm on
       left side of abdomen (2 cm below umbilicus)
       10. Superficial horizontal incised wound of size 18 cm in
       length 4 cm in width above umbilicus.
       11.     Contusion on bilateral knees.
       12. Multiple contusion of various length on right leg
       anterior aspect.
       13.     Abrasion of 1cm x 1 cm on middle of the left leg.
       14.     Abrasion of 1cm x .5 cm on just above injury No.13.
       15. Two horizontal post mortem burns of size 10 cm x 2.5
       cm on right side of umbilicus and 9 cm x 2 cm on left side of
       umbilicus.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                   Page 4 of 97

       16. Reddish contusion around right nipple with post
       mortem burns on bilateral nipples.
       17. Circular post mortem burns 4 in number of size ½ cm
       in diameter, two on each side on both side of umbilicus.
       18. Dry and clotted blood present over the face and
       bilateral nostril. On dissection fracture of right maxilla
       present.
       19. Contusion over left clavicular area. On dissection
       underlined achymosis present with dislocation of sterno
       clavicular joint-rigor mortis present in lower limb in passing
       stage. Post mortem staining on dependent parts.
       20.    Small white eggs present in left eye.”
4.     As per the prosecution Rahul, Ravi and Vinod were the men who
had brutally extinguished the life of Anamica after raping her. They had
thereafter used the spanner of the car after heating it to burn the right
nipple of Anamica and brand her umbilicus, a fact evidenced from injuries
No.15 to 17 recorded in the post mortem report, all of which are post
mortem injuries. The three were sent for trial. Vide judgment dated
February 13, 2014 the learned Trial Judge has opined that the prosecution
has successfully established that :
       “(1) The deceased has been kidnapped in a red colour Tata
       Indica car.
       (2) The red colour Tata Indica car bearing registration
       No.DL 3C AF 4348 belonging to PW-10 was in the custody of
       accused Rahul from 07.45 am on 9.2.2012 till 9 a.m. on
       10.2.2012 and from 11.2.2012 to 13.2.2012.
       (3) The female hair strand was found on the rear seat of
       the aforesaid Tata Indica car and DNA generated from it was
       found similar to the DNA of the deceased implying that it was
       the hair of the deceased.
  Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 5 of 97

     (4) The DNA generated from the semen spots found on the
     seat covers of the aforesaid Tata Indica car was similar to
     that of accused Rahul.
     (5) The dead body of the deceased was recovered from the
     fields of village Rodai at the instance of accused Ravi and
     Vinod on 13.2.2012.
     (6) A red colour purse containing some cash, ATM cards
     as well as PAN card and driving license in the name of Rahul
     were found near the dead body of the deceased.
     (7) The three accused had pointed out the spot, on which
     they had smashed the head of the deceased with a „Matka‟ in
     order to kill her.
     (8) A Jack and pana were recovered from the boot of the
     aforesaid Tata Indica car bearing registration No.DL 3C AF
     4348, which was having blood spots and DNA generated from
     the blood spots was found similar to that of the deceased
     implying that deceased was hit by said Jack and Pana.
     (9) The autopsy doctor (PW26) opined that the injuries
     found on the dead body of „Anamica‟ could be possible by
     aforesaid Jack and Pana.
     (10) A broken piece of bumper of the aforesaid Tata Indica
     car bearing registration No.DL 3C AF 4348 was also
     recovered from near the dead body of the deceased in the
     fields of village Rodai.
     (11) The panty of the deceased was got recovered by
     accused Vinod from a vacant plot adjacent to house No.RZ-
     54, Palam Vihar, Sector-6, Dwarka, belonging to PW-11
     where the three accused were residing as a tenant.
     (12) Accused Rahul had got recovered the broken mobile
     phone of the deceased from amongst the bushes on the central
     verge in front of the road near Karnal Cinema Hall, near
     Rajinder Dhaba, Delhi.
     (13) The vaginal swab of the deceased was found to have
     mixed male DNA profile, which was similar to that of accused
     Vinod as well as accused Ravi.
Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters             Page 6 of 97

       (14) The location of mobile phones of the accused Rahul,
       accused Ravi and the deceased was around Jhajhar, Haryana
       in the night intervening between 09.2.2012 and 10.2.2012
       when the deceased was kidnapped, raped and murdered.”
(NB We note that two incriminating circumstances of the DNA of a
strand of hair recovered from Anamica’s dead body matching DNA of
Ravi and DNA generated from semen spots found on seat cover of the
Indica car matching DNA profile of Vinod have been overlooked by
the learned Trial Judge)
5.     The three have been convicted for offences punishable under
Sections 302, 376(2)(g), 365, 367 and 201 IPC read with Section 34 IPC.
6.     Vide order dated February 19, 2014 the three have been inflicted the
capital punishment of death for having murdered Anamica. For having
kidnapped Anamica they have been sentenced to undergo imprisonment
for five years for the offence of having raped Anamica they have been
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life for the offence of kidnapping
Anamica and subjecting her to grievous hurt they have been sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for five years.             For the offence of destroying
evidence pertaining to the offence they have been sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for three years.
7.     The record has been sent to this Court for confirmation of the death
sentence and the reference has been registered in this Court as Death
Sentence Reference No.1/2014. The three convicted accused Rahul, Ravi
and Vinod have filed the three above captioned appeals.
                                   PREFACE
8.     We commence our narratives from the beginning.
  Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 7 of 97

9.     Process of criminal law was set into motion when at around 09.18
P.M. on February 09, 2012, HC Omkar Singh PW-32 working as the duty
officer at PS Chhawla recorded DD No.27A, Ex.PW-32/A, noting therein
that the wireless operator from the police control room has informed that a
girl has been kidnapped by some persons in a red colour Indica car at
Hanuman Chowk, Qutub Vihar and had sped towards Shyam Vihar.
10.    Being entrusted with the investigation, armed with a copy of DD
No.27A, accompanied by Ct.Rakesh Kumar PW-9, SI Prakash Chand PW-
45 proceeded to Hanuman Chowk from where the girl was kidnapped.
He met Saraswati PW-9 and recorded her statement Ex.PW-29/A and
made an endorsement Ex.PW-32/C thereon, and at around 09.55 P.M. sent
Ct.Rakesh Kumar for FIR to be registered. Ct.Rakesh Kumar took the
rukka to the police station where HC Omkar Singh recorded the FIR
No.35/2012 Ex.PW-32/B.
11.    In her statement Ex.PW-29/A, Saraswati could only tell that she
resides at House No.323/1, Qutub Vihar Phase-II, Hanuman Chowk, New
Delhi with her family and works at DLF, Gurgaon. On February 09, 2012
at about 08.45 P.M. along with her friends Anamica, Pooja and Sangeeta
she was returning home. As they were walking towards Hanuman Chowk
suddenly a red colour Indica car having three or four boys inside came
from behind and stopped near them. A boy opened the door of the car and
caught Anamica by her arm and forcibly pulled Anamica inside the car.
The car sped away. The message was flashed over the wireless to all
police stations and the patrolling vans in Delhi in the hope that the red
indica car would be intercepted. But destiny had willed otherwise for
Anamica. No headway could be made. Public ire was targeted at the
police of PS Chhawla. Agitated neighbours of Anamica and other public
  Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 8 of 97

spirited members of the civil society held demonstrations. But the police
was clueless. Red colour indica cars plying in Delhi were obviously under
the scanner of the personnel of Delhi Police.
12.    ASI Rajinder Singh PW-12, was on patrolling duty at Sector-9,
Dwarka on February 13, 2012. At 12:00 Noon he stopped a red colour
Indica car bearing registration No.DL 3C AF 4348 near the metro station at
Sector-9, Dwarka. Rahul was driving the car. ASI Rajinder Singh sensed
that Rahul had got perplexed. He could not produce his driving license.
ASI Rajinder Singh took Rahul and the car to PS Chhawla and handed him
over to Insp.Sandeep Gupta PW-48. Upon interrogation Rahul confessed
to his involvement in the kidnapping, rape and murder of Anamica. He
named his brother Ravi and his friend Vinod as his accomplices. Rahul‘s
disclosure statement Ex.PW-39/B was recorded by Insp.Sandeep Gupta in
the presence of HC Kuldeep PW-39, SI Ashok Kumar PW-41 and SI
Jitender Dagar PW-47. In the same it is recorded that Rahul could show
the place where Anamica was murdered and get recovered her body. He
disclosed that he could get recovered the broken mobile phone of
Anamica. He disclosed that he could get recovered the clothes worn by
him, Ravi and Vinod which they were wearing when Anamica was
murdered as he had thrown the same.
13.    Rahul was arrested formally at 02:00 PM the same day.            His
personal search resulted in the recovery of a mobile phone having number
9968988533 which was seized vide memo Ex.PW-39/L.
14.    Inspector Sandeep Gupta searched the red coloured Indica car. A
jack and a spanner were found in the dickey of the car which were seized
vide memo Ex.PW-39/E. Inspector Sandeep Gupta then seized the car
along with its key vide memo Ex.PW-39/D. The seized articles except the
  Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters             Page 9 of 97

car were handed over to HC Bharat Lal PW-15, Malkhana Moharrar who
deposited the same in the Malkhana of PS Chhawla as recorded in the
entry Ex.PW-15/A in the Malkhana Register. The car was deposited at PS
Jafarpur Kalan as there was space constraint in PS Chhawla. But, the key
of the car was deposited in the Malkhana of PS Chhawla.
15.     The beat constables deployed at Beat No.3 Dwarka apprehended
Ravi and Vinod from their residence at Palam Vihar Dwarka and produced
them before Inspector Sandeep Gupta at PS Chhawla. The two were
formally arrested : Vinod at 2:45 PM and Ravi at 3:00 PM as recorded in
the arrest memos Ex.PW-41/B and Ex.PW-41/C.
16.     Interrogated by Inspector Sandeep Gupta in the presence of HC
Kuldeep, SI Ashok Kumar and SI Jitender Dagar, Vinod made a disclosure
statement Ex.PW-39/A wherein he disclosed that he along with Rahul and
Ravi had raped and murdered Anamica and had burnt the bag of Anamica
and the SIM card and memory card of the mobile phone of Anamica in a
parat (utensil). He said that he can get recovered the parat. He said that he
had thrown the undergarment (panty) of Anamica and volunteered to get
the same recovered. It is recorded in the statement that he can take the
police to the place where dead body of Anamica was lying. Likewise,
Ravi made a similar disclosure statement Ex.PW-39/C.
17.     Ravi‘s personal search resulted in recovery of a mobile phone
having number 8802090923 and the same was seized vide memo Ex.PW-
39/M.
18.     Leaving behind Rahul at the police station, taking along with them
Vinod and Ravi a police party consisting of Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-
48, SI Ashok Kumar PW-41, SI Jitender Dagar PW-47, Ct.Arun Kumar
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 10 of 97

PW-30, ASI Attar Singh PW-36, Ct.Ramesh Chand PW-37, Ct.Vinod PW-
38 and HC Kuldeep PW-39 proceeded to village Rodai, District Rewari,
Haryana because this was the place disclosed where Anamica‘s dead body
was left. For identification of the dead body, if discovered and recovered,
they took along with them Kunwar Singh Negi PW-8 the father of
Anamica and his friend Laxman Rawat PW-7. On the way a PCR van of
Haryana Police was spotted and through the van a wireless message was
got sent by Inspector Sandeep Gupta to PS Rodai informing that officers of
Delhi Police are proceeding to village Rodai since they have information
of Anamica‘s dead body lying hidden in the mustard fields. Therefore
three officers from PS Rodai, ASI Balwan Singh PW-36, HC Vinod PW-
34 and HC Aman Prakash PW-35 proceeded to the spot disclosed, the
mustard fields near Karawara Phatak (rail crossing). The team of Delhi
Police also reached the spot, which was the field of one Rohtash. Mahavir
Singh PW-14 the brother of Rohtash was present for the obvious reason he
and his family members were surprised that a large number of police
contingent had come to their field. As per pointing out memo Ex.PW-
14/B, Vinod, and as per pointing out memo Ex.PW-14/C, Ravi, pointed out
the place where Anamica was murdered. Indeed, the dead body of a girl
identified at the spot by Kunwar Singh Negi and Laxman Rawat as that of
Anamica was recovered. Ct.Arun Kumar PW-30, a photographer took 18
photographs Ex.PW-30/A1 to Ex.PW-30/A18, negatives whereof are
Ex.PW-30/B1 to Ex.PW-30/B18.               Ct.Vinod PW-38 videographed the
entire proceedings.       ASI Balwan Singh of Haryana Police had also
summoned a photographer Rajbir PW-31 who took six photographs
Ex.PW-31/A1 to Ex.PW-31/A6. He had also summoned a forensic team
which found a short strand of hair on Anamica‘s dead body which was
seized by ASI Balwan Singh as recorded in the memo Ex.PW-34/A.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 11 of 97

19.      A thorough search of the field from where Anamica‘s dead body
was recovered resulted in recovery of two plastic tumblers, an empty
pouch of snack (namkeen), broken pieces of an earthen pitcher (matka), a
broken piece of a bumper of a car, a red coloured wallet containing two
ATM cards issued by Syndicate Bank and State Bank of India in name of
Rahul, photocopy of PAN card of Rahul, original driving license of Rahul,
photocopy of school leaving certificate of Rahul, several visiting cards, a
receipt issued by Vishal Pharmacy and a cutting of newspaper on which
some mobile numbers were written by hand which were seized as recorded
in the memo Ex.PW-34/A. ASI Balwan Singh also lifted control earth and
blood stained earth from the field and recorded even said fact in the memo
Ex.PW-34/A. Of course, all exhibits seized were safely placed in different
parcels.
20.     The seizure memo Ex.PW-34/A reads as under:-
        “In the presence of following witnesses the following articles
        have lifted from the place of occurrence and converted into
        separate parcels, sealed with seal of B. The memo is as under:
        1.      One parcel containing blood stained earth and earth
        near the place of occurrence.
        2.      Two plastic tumblers along with one empty pouch of
        namkeen.
        3.      One parcel containing broken pieces of water pitcher.
        4.      One parcel containing black coloured plastic bumper
        having scratch.
        5.      One parcel containing red coloured wallet having
        `365/- and articles as per the list.
        6.      One parcel containing hair of deceased which were
        lifted by the forensic team from the dead body of Anamica and
        the same was handed over to me, the ASI.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 12 of 97

               The same were taken into police possession by means of
        this memo, as a piece of evidence.” (Translated Version)
        (Emphasis Supplied)
21.     We simply highlight that at serial No.5 ASI Balwan Singh has
clearly recorded that the articles recovered from the wallet were as per a
list, which we find remains an unexhibited document at page No.315 of the
Trial Court Record.
22.     The body of Anamica was sent to the mortuary of Civil Hospital,
Rewari, where on February 14, 2012 at about 12.30 P.M. Dr.Shivangi
Parashar PW-26, Dr.Sandeep Yadav and Dr.Archana Yadav conducted the
post-mortem and prepared the post-mortem report Ex.PW-26/A, recording
the external injuries noted on Anamica‘s dead body, which we have
reproduced in paragraph 3 above. The following is further noted in the
post-mortem report:-
        “Organs of generation        Intact. 2 vaginal and 2 rectal swab
                                     taken & sent
        External and internal        for FSL examination. Hymen
                                     ruptured (admit 2 finger easily).
                                     Bleeding present on vaginal
                                     examination.”
23.     As regards the opinion formed by the doctors regarding the cause of
Anamica‘s death, and the probable time of death, it was recorded:-
        “Opinion:- In our opinion, the cause of death in this case is
        due to head injury as described in PMR, which is ante
        mortem in nature and sufficient to cause death in normal
        course of life. However opinion regarding rape and sodomy
        is given after FSL report.
        Probable time that elapsed.
        (a)    between injury and death
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                    Page 13 of 97

               Variable
        (b)    between death & PM (72 Hr – 96 Hr).”
24.     Dr.Shivangi Prashar PW-26, handed over the clothes, nails, hairs,
visera, vaginal and anal swabs and clothes of Anamica along with a phial
containing her blood to HC Vinod PW-34, who in turn handed over the
same to ASI Balwan Singh PW-46, vide memo Ex.PW-34/B. ASI Balwan
Singh deposited the aforesaid articles in the malkhana of PS Rodai.
25.     On February 14, 2012, Ct.Ramesh PW-37, Ct.Vinod PW-38 and HC
Kuldeep PW-39, took Vinod, Rahul and Ravi respectively to Rao Tula
Marg Hospital for a medical examination. The MLCs Ex.PW-5/A to
Ex.PW-5/C of Vinod, Rahul and Ravi respectively prepared by
Dr.Yogender Kumar Sharma PW-5, record that they are capable of
performing sexual intercourse.
26.     Dr.Yogender Kumar Sharma handed over the undergarments, blood
sample, hair, pubic hair and semen sample of Ravi to HC Kuldeep PW-39
who in turn handed over the same to Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, as
recorded in the memo Ex.PW-39/F. Likewise, Dr.Yogender Kumar
Sharma handed over undergarments, blood sample, semen sample, nail
sample and hair of head of Vinod to Ct.Ramesh PW-37, who in turn
handed over the same to Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, recorded in the
memo Ex.PW-37/B. Likewise, he handed over undergarments, blood
sample, semen sample, nail sample and hair of head of Rahul to Ct.Vinod
PW-38, who in turn handed over the same to Inspector Sandeep Gupta
PW-48, recorded in the memo Ex.PW-38/A. On the same day Inspector
Sandeep Gupta PW-48, deposited the aforesaid articles with HC Bharat Lal
PW-15, Malkhana Moharrar, who kept the same in Malkhana of PS
Chhawla as recorded in the entry Ex.PW-15/B in Malkhana register.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 14 of 97

27.     After sometime Ravi, Rahul and Vinod led the police party
consisting of Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, SI Jitender Dagar PW-47
and HC Kuldeep PW-39 to a vacant plot of land adjacent to their rented
accommodation in Palam Vihar, Dwarka, wherefrom Rahul got recovered
a polythene bag containing ashes which were seized as recorded in the
memo Ex.PW-39/G. From the same vacant plot of land Vinod recovered a
torn panty which was seized as recorded in the memo Ex.PW-39/H.
Thereafter the three led the police party to their rented accommodation
wherefrom Ravi got recovered utensil (parat) which was seized as recorded
in the memo Ex.PW-39/I. Thereafter the three led the police party to the
bank of a drain in Madhu Vihar wherefrom Rahul got recovered a T-shirt,
sweater, jersey and jeans which were seized as recorded in the memo
Ex.PW-39/J.       Lastly, the three led the police party to a spot near a
restaurant in Safdarjung Enclave wherefrom Rahul got recovered a broken
mobile phone having IEMI Nos.910040992852058 and 910040992852066
which was seized as recorded in the memo Ex.PW-39/K. Pertinently, no
SIM card was found in the mobile phone got recovered at the instance of
Rahul.
28.     On February 15, 2012 the investigation of the case was entrusted to
Inspector Ranjeet Singh PW-49 who summoned a team from CFSL to
inspect the red coloured Indica car bearing registration No. DL-3C-AF
4348 lying parked at PS Jafarpur Kalan.             The team headed by
Dr.A.K.Singla inspected the car in the presence of Inspector Ranjeet Singh
PW-49 and ASI Hari Kishan PW-44. Dr.A.K.Singla lifted few strands of
hair from the rear seat of the car which were seized vide memo Ex.PW-
44/A. Thereafter Inspector Ranjeet Singh PW-49 seized ten seat covers
and four footmats from the car as entered in the memo Ex.PW-44/B.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 15 of 97

29.     Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 went to PS Rodai and collected the
post-mortem report of Anamica and the articles seized as per memos
Ex.PW-34/A and Ex.PW-34/B from ASI Balwan Singh PW-36. Upon his
return Inspector Sandeep Gupta handed over the seized articles recorded in
the memos Ex.PW-34/A and Ex.PW-34/B to HC Bharat Lal PW-15,
Malkhana Moharrar, who deposited the same in Malkhana of PS Chhawla
as recorded in the entry Ex.PW-15/E of the Malkhana Register.
30.     On the same day i.e. February 16, 2012, a police party consisting of
Inspector Ranjeet Singh PW-49, HC Govind PW-40 and HC Mohan
Kumar PW-43 took accused Rahul to the fields of Rohtash in village Rodai
where mustard was in full bloom and as recorded in the pointing out memo
Ex.PW-40/A, Rahul pointed out the spot where he, Rahul and Vinod had
murdered Anamica.
31.     On February 23, 2012, Inspector Ranjeet Singh PW-49, took the
jack and spanner recovered from the dickey of the red coloured Indica car
bearing registration No.DL-3C-AF 4348 to Dr.Shivangi Prashar PW-26,
Dr.Sandeep Yadav and Dr.Archana Yadav i.e. the doctors who had
conducted the post-mortem of Anamica for their opinion regarding weapon
of offence. Vide their opinion Ex.PW-26/B the three doctors opined that
the injuries found on the person of Anamica were possible to have been
inflicted by the jack and spanner found in the dickey of the car.
32.     On February 27, 2012 all the articles seized during the investigation
of the case were sent to the CFSL for forensic examination. The relevant
findings     contained      in    the    report    Ex.PW-23/A prepared      by
Dr.B.K.Mohapatra PW-23, Senior Scientific Officer, Biology Division,
CFSL are being tabulated herein under:-
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 16 of 97

S. No. Description of the article        Finding contained in the CFSL report
         during investigation            Ex.PW-23/A
1.       Jack seized from red            Blood is detected on jack. DNA profile
         coloured Indica car             generated from jack and female
         bearing registration No.        fraction DNA obtained from vaginal
         DL-3C-AF 4348.                  and anal swabs of Anamica is found to
                                         be female in origin and consistent with
                                         each other.
2.       Tenth seat cover seized         Blood is detected on seat cover. DNA
         from red coloured Indica        profile generated from seat cover and
         car bearing registration        female fraction DNA obtained from
         No. DL-3C-AF 4348.              vaginal and anal swabs of Anamica is
                                         found to be female in origin and
                                         consistent with each other.
3.       Earth seized from the           Blood is detected on earth. DNA
         spot where body of              Profile generated from earth and
         Anamica was recovered.          female fraction DNA obtained from
                                         vaginal and anal swabs of Anamica is
                                         found to be female in origin and
                                         consistent with each other.
4.       Eighth seat cover seized        DNA profile generated from the Male
         from red coloured Indica        Fraction DNA obtained from seat
         car bearing registration        cover is consistent with the DNA
         No. DL-3C-AF 4348.              profile of Rahul obtained from
                                         underwear, blood and semen sample
                                         and pubic hair of Rahul.
5.       Ninth seat cover seized         DNA profile generated from the Male
         from red coloured Indica        Fraction DNA obtained from seat
         car bearing registration        cover is consistent with the DNA
         No. DL-3C-AF 4348.              profile of Vinod obtained from blood
                                         and semen sample, hair and pubic hair
                                         of Vinod.
6.       Vaginal swab of Anamica         A mixed DNA profile was generated
                                         from the male fraction DNA obtained
                                         from vaginal swab of Anamica. The
                                         mixed profile so generated could have
                                         been developed by mixture of alleles
                                         contributed by Ravi obtained from his
                                         blood sample and Vinod obtained from
                                         his blood sample.
7.       Hair found on body of           DNA profile generated from hair was
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                   Page 17 of 97

         Anamica                         found to be male in origin and
                                         consistent with the DNA profile of
                                         Ravi obtained from his blood sample.
33.     On April 20, 2012 another CFSL team headed by Subrat Kumar
Chaudhary, Senior Scientific Officer-II (Physics), Physics Division, CFSL
examined the red coloured Indica car bearing registration No.DL-3C-AF
4348. The report Ex.PA prepared by Subrat Kumar Chaudhary records that
the broken bumper seized from the spot wherefrom body of Anamica was
recovered is of the red coloured Indica car bearing registration No.DL-3C-
AF 4348 for the reasons:- (i) the broken edges of the bumper seized from
the spot wherefrom body of Anamica was recovered matched with the
broken edges of the front bumper of the red coloured Indica car bearing
registration No.DL-3C-AF 4348, and (ii) the scratches present along the
edge of bumper seized from the spot wherefrom body of Anamica was
recovered correspond to the scratches present along the edge of the front
bumper of the red coloured Indica car bearing registration No.DL-3C-AF
4348.
34.     The Investigating Officers recorded statements of various persons
and seized the call records of the two mobile phones recovered from the
personal search of Rahul and Ravi as also the call records of the telephone
which Anamica was carrying with her on the fateful day. A charge sheet
was filed against Rahul, Ravi and Vinod. Charges were framed against
them for having committed offences punishable under Sections 365, 367,
376(2)(g), 377 and 302 IPC read with Section 34 IPC.
 ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE LED BEFORE THE TRIAL COURT
35.     At the trial, the prosecution examined as many as 49 witnesses.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 18 of 97

36.     We need not note the testimony of the various police officers who
took part in the investigation for they have deposed facts regarding the
respective role played by them during investigation which have already
been succinctly stated by us in the preceding paragraphs and in respect
whereof not much submission was made during arguments. However,
whenever necessary, to deal with the submissions made by the counsel for
the State and the accused persons, such part of the testimony of the
relevant witness would be noted. We would also be splitting, while noting,
the testimonies of the witnesses, whenever required pertaining to the
evidence throwing light on different facets/stages of the case of the
prosecution.
37.     With a view to have clarity in the analysis of the evidence led by the
prosecution, we segregate the relevant witnesses into seven categories,
clubbing in one category witnesses who have thrown light on the same
issue.
38.     But before we do that, to focus the attention of the reader of our
opinion, we would highlight a fact evident from the incriminating
circumstances found proved by the learned Trial Judge, that counsel for the
three accused were conscious of the fact that DNA analysis was linking the
three accused to the crime in the form of DNA profile of the semen sample
from the vagina of Anamica matching that of Vinod and Ravi and DNA
profile of the semen sample from the seat of the car matching that of Vinod
and Rahul and additionally the strand of hair lifted from the dead body of
Anamica matching DNA profile of Ravi. The report of the expert was not
shaken by the counsel. The entire edifice of the defence was built on false
implication and planting of the samples wherefrom DNA of the three was
extracted and the lynch pin of the argument was a statement made by
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 19 of 97

Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 when he was being cross examined by
learned counsel for Rahul and Ravi. He said : -
        “Accused Rahul was not taken to Rodai village as he needed
        to be further interrogated and for this reason he was
        detained in the police station. On 13.02.2012 I was the
        Investigating Officer of this case. No other person except the
        Investigating Officer or the team prepared for said purpose
        can interrogate an accused. Till my return from village
        Rodai, no disclosure statement of accused Rahul has been
        recorded.”
        The argument was that if Rahul‘s disclosure statement was not
recorded, as deposed to by Inspector Sandeep Gupta till he and the other
police officers returned from village Rodai after recovering Anamica‘s dead
body and after various exhibits were seized by the Haryana Police Officer,
the entire edifice of the case of the prosecution fell because as per the
prosecution Rahul‘s disclosure statement disclosed to the police the
contours of the crime and the place where Anamica‘s body was thrown.
        Witnesses who deposed regarding the incident of kidnapping of
Anamica : Pooja Rawat PW-1, Vikas Singh Rawat PW-2, Vikas PW-4,
Saraswati PW-29 and Sangeeta PW-42.
39.     Pooja Rawat PW-1, deposed that on February 09, 2012 at about 8.45
PM when she was walking along with her friends Sangeeta, Saraswati and
Anamica towards their house, suddenly a red coloured Indica car stopped
near them and a boy dragged Anamica inside the car which sped away
towards Hanuman Chowk and she could not see the face of the boy nor of
other persons in the car. She immediately made a call to her brother Vikas
but the call got disconnected and thus he made a call to her in return when
she informed her brother of Anamica being kidnapped.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 20 of 97

40.     Pooja Rawat was not cross-examined on the aspect of Anamica
being kidnapped in a red coloured Indica car.
41.     Vikas Singh Rawat PW-2, brother of Pooja Rawat, deposed that on
February 09, 2012 he had spoken to his sister Pooja on her mobile phone
and she had informed him that she had left Chhawla and was returning
home along with her three friends. After sometime he received a call from
his sister but the same got disconnected. He then made a call to Pooja who
informed him that her friend Anamica had been kidnapped in a red
coloured Indica car. He immediately came out of his house situated very
near to Hanuman Chowk. He saw a red coloured Indica car coming from
Chhawla and turning towards Tajpur at a very high speed. He could not
note the registration number of the car. He raised an alarm but the car
raced away.
42.     Vikas PW-4, deposed that on February 09, 2012 at about 08.30 P.M.
he got down at the bus stand at Chhawla and was proceeding towards his
house at Qutub Vihar. Near Chhawla temple he saw a red coloured Indica
car going towards Chhawla. Three-four girls were walking ahead of the
car. Three boys were sitting in the car. The car stopped near the girls and
one girl was dragged inside the car. He rushed there and saw a boy
amongst three boys sitting in the car standing on the road. He tried to
intervene but was not successful. The boys managed to flee in the car with
the girl inside. It being dark he could not recognize the boys.
43.     We note that Vikas PW-4, was not cross-examined.
44.     Saraswati PW-29, deposed in harmony with her statement Ex.PW-
29/A. Additionally, she stated that she could not identify the boy who had
dragged Anamica inside the car because it was dark. Since an argument
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 21 of 97

was advanced with respect to what Saraswati said during cross-
examination, we note the relevant part. It reads:-
        “I did not see that car properly and I cannot say with
        certainty that it was an Indica car but the people had seen the
        Indica car and people were saying that the girl had been
        kidnapped in Indica car…
        Deceased (name deleted) did not have any boyfriend and she
        had not spoken about it to me. She used to share some of her
        intimate talks with me. She had never told me that any boy is
        offering friendship to her or that she has developed friendship
        with any boy.”
45.     Sangita PW-42, deposed in sync with Pooja Rawat and Saraswati.
        Witnesses who deposed regarding ownership of red coloured
Indica car bearing registration No.DL-3C-AF-4348 and employment
of accused Rahul as driver: Birender Singh PW-6, Hari Om PW-10
and Raj Singh PW-13.
46.     Birender Singh PW-6, Record Keeper, Transport Department, South
Zone, Sheikh Sarai, New Delhi, with reference to the official record
proved that a red coloured Indica car bearing registration No.DL 3C AF
4348 was registered in the name of Raj Singh. Raj Singh PW-13 deposed
that he had purchased the car in the year 2005 and had sold it to Hari Om
on December 25, 2011. Hari Om PW-10, deposed that he was running a
travel agency in the name and style Om Tours & Travels and that he
owned three vehicles including the red coloured Indica car having
registration No.DL 3C AF 4348 which he had purchased from one Raj
Singh in the month of December, 2011. The ownership of the car was not
transferred in his name till the time the same was seized by the police. He
deposed that accused Rahul was employed by him as a driver to drive the
said red coloured Indica car since February 01, 2012. On February 09,
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 22 of 97

2012 at about 07.45 A.M. Rahul had taken the car to pick up one
S.N.Gupta from Vikas Puri to drop him at the airport at about 04.30 P.M.,
during which time the car remained with Rahul. Thereafter Rahul went to
his house in the car. On February 10, 2012 at about 09.00-10.00 A.M.
Rahul met him and handed over the car to him. The car was not in a
position to be sent for ferrying passengers since it was untidy from inside
and outside and therefore he gave another Indica car to Rahul to ferry
passengers.     In the night of February 11, 2012 he had given the red
coloured Indica car No. DL 3C AF 4348 to Rahul near MTNL Office,
Sector-6, Dwarka. The car remained in Rahul‘s custody from the night of
February 11, 2012 to February 13, 2012. During the investigation of the
case he had handed over the booking/duty register Ex.PX to the police.
The entry contained in page No.50 of the booking/duty register Ex.PX
records that he had handed over the red coloured Indica car to Rahul on
February 09, 2012. For the purposes of dealing with the submissions
advanced by the accused, we note the following portion of the cross-
examination of Hari Om:-
        “I had seen the Indica car from outside only when accused
        Rahul brought the same to the office on 10.2.2012. It is
        correct that as a matter of routine, every car was cleaned and
        washed in the morning, if required, before sending it for
        booking.
        It is incorrect that the aforesaid Tata Indica car was also
        cleaned and washed in the morning of 10.2.2012. I had not
        seen the vehicle from inside on 10.2.2012. The said car was
        not sent for booking on that day because it was not clean. It
        was not got cleaned and washed as no driver was available.
        On that day, the car remained in my office till 3 p.m.
        Thereafter I took it home and I alongwith my wife went to
        Talkatora Stadium in the same to watch a function organized
        by the school of my children. We did not notice any blood
        stains or any other articles in the car. The said car was not
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 23 of 97

        sent any repairs between 10.2.2012 and 13.2.2012 as no
        repair was required. Its front Bumper had become loose
        which I had myself tightened. I had myself cleaned the car on
        11.2.2012 and thereafter I had taken the same for a booking
        also…
        The register Ex.PX is maintained by me for my own personal
        record. I do not obtain signatures of the drivers on it. There is
        no entry in the register showing that the aforesaid Indica car
        was with accused Rahul on 13.2.2012.”
        Witness who deposed regarding arrest of accused Rahul, Ravi
and Vinod: ASI Rajender Singh PW-12, HC Kuldeep PW-39, ASI
Ashok Kumar PW-41, SI Jitender Dagar PW-47 and Inspector
Sandeep Gupta PW-48.
47.     Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, deposed the facts relating to
investigation conducted by him, which have already been stated by us in
the factual narratives noted in the preceding paragraphs. Required to be
noted to deal with the arguments advanced by the accused, we note the
following portion of the cross-examination of the witness:-
        “The Tata Indica car as well as its keys were seized by me….
        It is correct that I had not prepared a separate pulinda of the
        key of the car. It is correct that I had not sealed the key hole
        of the car…
        It is correct that on the day when the accused were arrested,
        the dead body had not been discovered. In this case, the FIR
        had initially been registered u/s. 363 IPC. On the basis of oral
        interrogation of accused Rahul, I mentioned sections
        365/302/376(2)(g)/34 IPC on the arrest memo of the accused.
        It is correct that accused Rahul had not mentioned in his
        disclosure statement that he has forgotten his wallet near the
        dead body. I had found the wallet of accused Rahul near the
        dead body when the same was pointed out by accused Ravi
        and Vinod. Accused Rahul was not taken to Rodai village as
        he needed to be further interrogated and for this reason he
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 24 of 97

        was detained in the police station. On 13.2.2012 I was the
        Investigating Officer of this case. No other person except the
        Investigating Officer or the team prepared for the said
        purpose can interrogate an accused. Till my return from
        village Rodai, no disclosure statement of accused Rahul had
        been recorded.
        X X X by Sh. S.S. Haider, Advocate for accused Vinod.
        I had conducted a cursory examination of the Tata Indica car
        on 13.2.2012. I did not notice any blood spot on the interiors
        of the car. There were certain spots on the rear seat cover and
        front seat cover but I cannot say whether these were blood
        spot or any other spot.
        I do not recollect the name of the Beat Constables who had
        brought accused Ravi and Vinod to the police station. I did
        not record statement of that Beat Constables….
        It is correct that on 13.2.2012 accused Vinod was sent for
        hospital for medical examination. It is wrong to suggest that
        at that time semen sample of accused Vinod was obtained,
        kept without seal and was handed over to me by HC Kuldeep
        on return to the police station. It is wrong to suggest that
        blood sample, semen sample and pubic hair sample of all the
        three accused were obtained and kept without seal.
        Volunteered: on that day the three accused were got formally
        examined in the hospital before keeping them in the Lock-
        Up.”
48.     ASI Rajender Singh PW-12, deposed the facts relating to the
apprehension of accused Rahul by him, which have already been stated by
us in the factual narratives noted in the preceding paragraphs. Pertinently,
the red coloured Indica car bearing registration No.DL 3C AF 4348 stated
to have been seized by ASI Rajender Singh was not shown to him since the
counsel appearing for the accused did not dispute the identity of the car
seized by him. Since argument was advanced by learned counsel for the
accused, we note the following portion of the cross-examination of ASI
Rajender Singh by accused Rahul:-
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 25 of 97

        “Accused did not produce any document to prove his identity
        but he only disclosed his name as Rahul and parentage. I did
        not take search of the car. It is wrong to suggest that accused
        Rahul was not apprehended by me in the manner as stated
        above.” (Emphasis Supplied)
49.     HC Kuldeep PW-39, deposed that on February 13, 2012 accused
Rahul was brought to PS Chhawla by an officer of PS Dwarka North.
Inspector Sandeep Gupta interrogated Rahul and arrested him. After
sometime, beat staff brought accused Ravi and Vinod to PS Chhawla.
Inspector Sandeep Gupta interrogated Ravi and Vinod and arrested them.
Being relevant to deal with an argument advanced by learned counsel for
the accused, we note the following portion of his cross-examination:-
        “First arrest memo of accused Rahul was prepared, then his
        personal search memo and lastly his disclosure statement was
        recorded. The arrest memo of accused Rahul was prepared at
        about 2 p.m. the disclosure statement of accused Rahul was
        noted down on his dictation. It took about 30 to 40 minutes to
        record the disclosure statement of accused Rahul. It may be
        that the disclosure statement of accused Rahul was ready by
        2.30 p.m. It is correct that the same is in the handwriting of SI
        Jitender Dagar. It is also correct that the disclosure
        statements of accused Ravi and Vinod are also in the
        handwriting of SI Jitender Dagar.
        I am aware that the time of arrest of accused Ravi and Vinod
        mentioned in their arrest memo is 3 p.m. Their disclosure
        statements were recorded around the same time i.e. 3 p.m. I
        cannot tell when the arrest memos and personal search
        memos of accused Ravi and Vinod were prepared. Only there
        disclosure statements were recorded in my presence. Their
        disclosure statements were ready by 3.15 p.m. It is correct
        that all the paper work regarding all the three accused had
        been done by 3.15 p.m. The seizure memo of Indica car, Jack
        and Pana were also prepared before 3.15 p.m. No other
        memo was prepared in my presence after 3.15 p.m. Thereafter
        we had left for village Rodai at about 3.30 p.m.
        X X X by Sh. S.S. Haider, Advocate for accused Vinod.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 26 of 97

        Accused Ravi and accused Vinod were produced in the police
        station by Beat Staff on 13.2.2012 at about 2 p.m. I do not
        know whether any DD entry had been recorded in this
        regard.”
50.     ASI Ashok Kumar PW-41, deposed that on February 13, 2012
accused Rahul was brought to PS Chhawla by an officer of PS Sector 23,
Dwarka. Inspector Sandeep Gupta interrogated Rahul and arrested him.
After sometime, beat staff brought accused Ravi and Vinod to PS
Chhawla. Inspector Sandeep Gupta interrogated Ravi and Vinod and
arrested them. Being relevant to deal with an argument advanced by
learned counsel for the accused, we note the following portion of his cross-
examination:-
        “The disclosure statements of the accused are in the
        handwriting of SI Jitender Dagar. I do not recollect in whose
        handwriting are the other memos. I do not recollect whether
        any other police official had prepared memos at that time.
        First of all, arrest memo and disclosure statement of accused
        Rahul was prepared. First arrest memo was prepared at 2
        p.m. After that, personal search memo was prepared. It took
        five minutes to prepare arrest memo and personal search
        memo and thereafter recording of disclosure statement was
        started.
        It took about 25 minutes to record the disclosure statement of
        accused Rahul. The arrest memo of accused Vinod was
        prepared at about 2.45 p.m. and that of accused Ravi at 3
        p.m. The recording of their disclosure statement was started
        after preparation of their arrest memo and personal search
        memo. The recording of disclosure statement of accused Ravi
        was started after 3 p.m. It took about 20 to 25 minutes to
        record the same. The recording of disclosure statement of
        accused Vinod was started at about 2.45 p.m. It took 20 to 25
        minutes to record the same. The recording of disclosure
        statement of all the accused was completed by 3.30 p.m. No
        other document was prepared in the police station in my
        presence.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 27 of 97

        We left the police station at about 3.30 p.m. It took us about
        ten minutes to reach the spot wherefrom the victim girl had
        been kidnapped. The pointing out memo was prepared at the
        spot. It is correct that the paper work at the spot was
        completed by 4 p.m.
        Inspector Sandeep Gupta did not disclose any reason to me
        as to why accused Rahul was not taken to village Rodai.
        X X X by Sh. S.S. Haider, Advocate for accused Vinod.
        The accused Rahul was brought to the PS Chhawla on
        13.2.2012 at about 1.30 p.m. Accused Ravi and Vinod were
        brought to the police station at about 2.30 p.m. I cannot tell
        the name of the Beat Staff who brought them. I do not know
        by what mode of conveyance had Beat Staff reached the
        police station. I do not know whether any DD entry had been
        recorded in the police station in this regard. Two Beat police
        officials had brought accused Ravi and Vinod to the police
        station.”
51.     SI Jitender Dagar PW-47, deposed that the accused persons were
arrested and interrogated by Inspector Sandeep Gupta in his presence.
Being relevant to deal with an argument advanced by learned counsel for
the accused, we note the following portion of his cross-examination:-
        “First of all disclosure statements of the accused were
        recorded. Thereafter pointing out memos in respect of spot
        where from the deceased was kidnapped were prepared and
        lastly pointing out memos of the spot where dead body was
        recovered were prepared. Arrest memos were prepared
        before the preparation of the aforesaid memos. Accused Ravi
        was arrested last of all at 3 pm. It is correct that all memos
        were prepared after 3 pm. About fifteen memos were
        prepared in this case after 3 pm. All pointing out memos
        were prepared at their respective spots.
        The disclosure statements of all the three accused are in my
        handwriting. It took me about one hour or 75 minutes to take
        down these disclosure statements. Immediately thereafter the
        accused was taken for pointing out the spot of kidnapping. It
        is correct that we may have left the police station at about
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 28 of 97

        4.30 pm. It may have taken about 10 to 15 minutes to prepare
        these memos. The distance between the spot of kidnapping
        and our police station was about 1.5 to 2 km. We left that
        place at about 4.45 pm.
        We had gone to Rodai via Pataudi village. The road was
        almost without traffic. We had gone to Rodai in police
        vehicle. It took us about one hour to reach there. We may
        have reached there at about 6 pm.
        X X X by Sh. S.S. Haider, Advocate for accused Vinod.
        On 13.2.2012 when I reached PS Chhawla all the three
        accused were present there. First disclosure statement of
        accused Rahul was recorded, thereafter that of Vinod and
        lastly of Ravi.”
        Witnesses who participated in the recovery of the dead body of
Anamica and seizure of articles from the place where body of Anamica
was recovered on February 13, 2012 : Laxman Rawat PW-7, Kunwar
Singh Negi PW-8, Mahavir Singh PW-14, Const.Arun Kumar PW-30,
HC Vinod PW-34 and HC Aman Prakash PW-35, ASI Attar Singh
PW-36, Const.Ramesh Chand PW-37, Const.Vinod PW-38, HC
Kuldeep PW-39 and ASI Balwan Singh PW-46.
52.     Laxman Rawat PW-7, the friend of the father of Anamica deposed
that on February 13, 2012 he came to know that the dead body of Anamica
is lying near Karawara Phatak whereupon accompanied by Anamica‘s
father and some other persons and police personnel he went there and saw
Anamica‘s body lying in the fields.            Being relevant to deal with an
argument advanced by learned counsel for the accused, we note the
following portion of his cross-examination:-
        “It is correct that no one else other than stated above, had
        gone with us. Nothing was seized in my presence”
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 29 of 97

53.     Kunwar Singh Negi PW-8, father of Anamica deposed that on
February 13, 2012 he came to know that the dead body of his daughter is
lying near Karawara Phatak whereupon along with Prem Singh Negi and
Umed Singh and the police went there and saw the body of Anamica lying
in the mustard fields. He had identified the body of Anamica. Being
relevant to deal with an argument advanced by learned counsel for the
accused, we note the following portion of his cross-examination:-
        “It is correct that no one else other than stated above, had
        gone with us. Nothing was seized in my presence”
54.     It may be noted that the panty got recovered by Vinod and the
broken mobile phone got recovered by Rahul was not put to Kunwar Singh
Negi for dock identification, for the obvious reason a father would hardly
be a witness for the purpose.
55.     Mahavir Singh PW-14, deposed that on February 13, 2012 Delhi
Police along with two persons informed him that one dead body is lying in
the fields of his brother whereupon he went to the fields and saw the dead
body of a female lying there. Being relevant to deal with an argument
advanced by learned counsel for the accused, we note the following
portion of his cross-examination:-
        “I had gone to the fields but near the dead body so I cannot
        say what articles were lying around the body.”
56.     Ct.Arun Kumar PW-30, deposed that on February 13, 2012 he had
taken eighteen photographs Ex.PW-30/A1 to Ex.PW-30/A18 of the dead
body of Anamica as also of the accused Ravi and Vinod pointing out the
body of Anamica at Village Rodai, Haryana; negatives whereof are
Ex.PW-30/B1 to Ex.PW-30/B18. The police team had reached the fields
from where the body of Anamica was recovered at about 05.00 P.M. on
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 30 of 97

February 13, 2012 and remained there till about 06.30 P.M. On being
cross-examined regarding the presence of the family members of Anamica
when her dead body was recovered, he said : „It is correct that no public
person other than the accused was seated in our vehicle when we went to
village Rodai. I do not know whether the father of victim girl and his two
friends Prem Singh and Laxman were present in other two police vehicles.‟
On being cross-examined as to the time when he took the photographs he
said : „I took the photographs between 6 pm to 6.30 pm and it was dark by
that time. We had reached there at about 5 pm.‟
57.     HC Vinod PW-34 and HC Aman Prakash PW-35, officials from
Haryana Police deposed that on February 13, 2012 at about 05.30
P.M./06.00 P.M. along with ASI Balwan Singh they had gone to the fields
from where body of Anamica was recovered. ASI Balwan Singh had lifted
two plastic tumblers, an empty pouch of snack (namkeen), collectively
exhibited as Ex.X1, broken pieces of an earthen pitcher (matka),
collectively exhibited as Ex.X-2, a piece Ex.X-3 of bumper of a car, a red
coloured purse, earth/soil near the spot from where Anamica‘s body was
recovered. The body was stained with blood. The earth control and hair
found on the body of Anamica were seized.          All exhibits seized were
recorded in the memo Ex.PW-34/A in their presence. That two ATM
cards issued by Syndicate Bank and State Bank of India in name of Rahul,
photocopy of PAN card of Rahul, original driving license of Rahul,
photocopy of the school leaving certificate of Rahul, several visiting cards,
a receipt issued by Vishal Pharmacy and a cutting of newspaper on which
some mobile numbers were written in hand, collectively exhibited as
Ex.X-4, were found in the purse seized by ASI Balwan Singh.
(Pertinently, the witnesses were shown the articles found in the purse and
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 31 of 97

they identified the same to be the articles which were found in the purse.
Be it noted here that the accused persons did not cross-examine the
witnesses with respect to the seizure of a red coloured purse near the dead
body of Anamica and the articles found in the said purse).
58.     On being questioned about the seizure of the articles found at the
place of recovery of Anamica‘s body, HC Vinod PW-34 and HC Aman
Prakash PW-35, stated that: „It is correct that Haryana Police had seized
the articles lifted from the spot in village Rodai. It is correct that no
official of Delhi Police had signed any memo prepared by Haryana
Police‟.
59.     ASI Attar Singh PW-36, an official of Delhi Police, deposed that on
February 13, 2012 accused Vinod and Ravi got recovered the dead body of
Anamica in his presence. A red coloured purse was lying near the body of
Anamica. On being questioned regarding the time he reached village
Rodai, he said: „We reached the spot at village Rodai at about 5 pm. A
PCR van of local police was parked at a turn about one kilometer before
the spot.‟ Be it noted here that the accused did not cross-examine the
witness regarding the presence of a red coloured purse near Anamica‘s
dead body.
60.     Ct.Ramesh Chand PW-37, Ct.Vinod PW-38 and HC Kuldeep PW-
39, officials of Delhi Police, deposed that on February 13, 2012 accused
Vinod and Ravi got recovered the dead body of Anamica in their presence.
On being questioned regarding the presence of family members of
Anamica when her dead body was recovered, Ct. Ramesh Chand said: „It
is wrong to suggest that the father of the deceased girl and his two friends
namely Laxman Singh and Prem Singh were present at the spot in village
Rodai on 13.2.2012. They had not accompanied us to village Rodai from
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 32 of 97

Delhi.‟ On being questioned as to when he had reached village Rodai, Ct.
Vinod PW-38, said: „I started taking video at about 5.45 pm or 6 pm. It is
correct that we had reached village Rodai at about 5 pm‟. On being
questioned as to when he had reached village Rodai, HC Kuldeep PW-39
said: „We reached village Rodai around 5 p.m.‟
61.     ASI Balwan Singh PW-46 deposed that on February 13, 2012 he
was posted at PS Rodai. On receipt of DD No.24 along with HC Vinod
and HC Amar Prakash he reached the fields near Karaura Railway Phatak,
Rewari where Inspector Sandeep Gupta from PS Chhawla, Delhi and his
staff were present. The dead body of Anamica was lying in the fields. He
lifted two plastic tumblers, an empty pouch of snack (namkeen), broken
pieces of an earthen pitcher (matka), a piece of bumper of a car, a red
coloured purse, earth/soil near the spot where body of Anamica was
recovered, along with blood stained earth and control earth as recorded in
the memo Ex.PW-34/A. A hair found on Anamica‘s body by the forensic
team was also seized by him as entered in the memo Ex.PW-34/A. Two
ATM cards issued by Syndicate Bank and State Bank of India in name of
Rahul, photocopy of PAN card of Rahul, original driving license of Rahul,
photocopy of school leaving certificate of Rahul, several visiting cards, a
receipt issued by Vishal Pharmacy and a cutting of newspaper on which
some mobile numbers were written by hand were found in the purse seized
by him. Being relevant to deal with an argument advanced by learned
counsel for the accused, we note the following portion of his cross-
examination:-
        “I received DD no.24 at about 11.30 AM or 12 Noon. I do
        not remember the contents of the DD. I had reached the spot
        where the dead body was lying at about 4.30 PM….
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 33 of 97

        It is wrong to suggest that dead body was first spotted by
        Haryana Police pursuant to DD no.24 and the purse of the
        dead girl was found near the dead body which contained the
        residential phone number of the girl and we contacted and
        called her parents. It is wrong to suggest that purse
        recovered from the spot belongs to dead girl and not to any
        of the accused.”
        Witnesses who proved the call details of accused Rahul, Ravi
and Anamica: Saraswati PW-29, Kunwar Singh Negi PW-8, Shishir
Malhotra PW-19, Deepak PW-20, Pawan Singh PW-21, Sandeep
Chaudhary PW-22, Kuldeep PW-24 and R.S. Yadav PW-28.
62.     Saraswati PW-29, the friend of Anamica, deposed that the mobile
number of Anamica was 9540594640, which was corroborated by Kunwar
Singh Negi PW-8, the father of Anamica.
63.     Kuldeep Singh PW-24, turned hostile and denied that he sold a
mobile phone with the sim card of the number 8802090923 to accused
Ravi. He resiled from his statement under Section 161 Cr.PC.
64.     Shishir Malhotra PW-19, Nodal Officer, Aircel Limited, produced
the record pertaining to mobile number 8802090923. On the basis of said
record he deposed that the number is registered in the name of one Urmila
Devi, R/O ND-73, Qutub Vihar, Goyola Dairy, New Delhi – 110 071. He
produced the call details record Ex.PW-19/B pertaining to said number for
the period from February 09, 2012 to February 13, 2012.            He also
produced Cell ID Chart Ex.PW-19/C, which indicates the location of
various towers installed by cellular company Aircel in Delhi and NCR.
65.     Deepak PW-20, Nodal Officer, Vodafone Mobile, deposed that Cell
ID address of Cell ID 40483 is Ward No.12, Main Chitarkund, VPO,
Jatauli, Tehsil Pataudi, District Gurgaon.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 34 of 97

66.     Pawan Singh PW-21, Nodal Officer, Idea Cellular Limited,
produced the record pertaining to mobile number 9540594640. On the
basis of said record, he deposed that the said number is registered in the
name of one Kunwar Singh. He produced the call details record Ex.PW-
21/A pertaining to mobile number 9540594640 for the period from
February 09, 2012 to February 10, 2012. He also produced Cell ID Chart
Ex.PW-21/C, which indicated the location of various towers installed by
cellular company Idea in Delhi and Haryana. He deposed that Cell ID
address of Cell ID 9043 is Jahangir Pur, Haryana.
67.     We note that a cumulative reading of the call details record Ex.PW-
19/A and testimonies of Deepak PW-20 and Pawan Singh PW-21 shows
that the mobile number 8802090923 was on roaming in Haryana on
22.00.36 hours on February 09, 2012 and 3.51.41 and 3.53.18 hours on
February 10, 2012.
68.     A cumulative reading of the call details record Ex.PW-21/A and cell
ID Chart Ex.PW-21/B shows the location(s) of the mobile number
9540594640 between the period from February 09, 2012 to February 10,
2012, which is being tabulated herein under:-
S. No.       Time                               Location
1.           20:44 hours on February 09,        Tajpur, Delhi
             2012
2.           20:55 hours on February 09,        Tajpur, Delhi
             2012
3.           22:39 hours on February 09,        Machharauli, Haryana
             2012
             22:40 hours on February 09,        Machharauli, Haryana
             2012
4.           22.44 hours on February 09,        Khudan, Haryana
             2012
5.           22.46 hours on February 09,        Patauda, Haryana
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 35 of 97

             2012
6.           22.49 hours on February 09,        Gorawara, Haryana
             2012
7.           22.50 hours on February 09,        Gorawara, Haryana
             2012
8.           22.54 hours on February 09,        Palwalhas, Haryana
             2012
9.           22.57 hours on February 09,        Palwalhas, Haryana
             2012
10.          23.00 hours on February 09,        Palwalhas, Haryana
             2012
11.          23.03 hours on February 09,        Roharai, Haryana
             2012
12.          23.06 hours on February 09,        Chillar, Haryana
             2012
13.          23.09 hours on February 09,        Mastpur, Haryana
             2012
14.          23.13 hours on February 09,        Mastpur, Haryana
             2012
15.          23.16 hours on February 09,        Roharai, Haryana
             2012
16.          23.20 hours on February 09,        Mastpur, Haryana
             2012
17.          01.16 hours on February 10,        Chillar, Haryana
             2012
18.          01.17 hours on February 10,        Chillar, Haryana
             2012
69.     Sandeep Chaudhary PW-22, JTO (MSC), Panipat, Haryana deposed
that on April 25, 2012 he had provided Cell ID for roaming CDRs of the
mobile number 9968988533 to MTNL.                  As per record of BSNL, the
location of mobile number 9968988533 was main Telephone Exchange
Machhrauli, Jhajhar, Haryana at 22.10, 22.26 and 22.27 hours on February
09, 2012 and Dadri Toye, Bahadurgarh, Haryana at 22.26 hours on
February 09, 2012. (Be it noted here that Cell ID stated to have been
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 36 of 97

provided by the witness to MTNL was neither produced nor proved
by the said witness.)
70.     R.S. Yadav PW-28, JTO MTNL, Tis Hazari Telephone Exchange,
Delhi produced the record pertaining to mobile number 9968988533. On
the basis of said record, the witness deposed that the said number is
registered in the name of accused Rahul. Additionally, he produced the call
details record Ex.PW-28/F pertaining to said number for the period from
February 09, 2012 to February 13, 2012. He also produced Cell ID Chart
Ex.PW-28/I, which indicated the location of various towers installed by
MTNL in Delhi. (Be it noted here that Cell ID Chart stated to have
been provided by Sandeep Chaudhary PW-22, to MTNL was neither
produced nor proved by the said witness. However, we find that the
same i.e. Cell ID Chart of towers of BSNL installed in Haryana is lying
in the Trial Court Record).
        Witnesses to prove the residence of the accused persons: Triloki
PW-11.
71.     Triloki PW-11, deposed that in the month of February, 2012 he had
let out one room in the first floor of his house bearing Municipal No.RZ-
54, Palam Village, Sector-6, Dwarka, Delhi to the accused. Three-four
days before February 14, 2012 the accused were burning clothes in the
room let out to them. When his wife objected to the smoke emanating
from their room the accused extinguished the fire and threw the ash in a
vacant plot near to his house. The accused got recovered a parat (utensil),
polythene containing ash and cloth in his presence.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 37 of 97

        Residual Witnesses: HC Bharat Lal PW-15, Dr.B.K. Mohapatra
PW-23, Dr.Shivangi Prashar PW-26, SI Madan Pal PW-33 and
Inspector Ranjeet Singh PW-49.
72.     HC Bharat Lal PW-15, Malkhana Moharrar, deposed the facts
regarding deposit/taking out of the exhibits seized by the police in the
present case in/from Malkhana of PS Chhawla, which have already been
stated by us in the factual narratives noted in the preceding paragraphs.
Additionally, he deposed that so long as the exhibits remained in his
custody the same were intact and nobody tampered with the same. He also
deposed that on February 16, 2012 Inspector Ranjeet Singh PW-49, along
with CFSL Team came to PS Chhawla.                 He accompanied Inspector
Ranjeet Singh and CFSL Team to PS Jafarpur where he handed over keys
of Indica car DL 3C AF 4348 (deposited in Malkhana of PS Chhawla) and
garage of PS Jafarpur where Indica car was lying parked to Inspector
Ranjeet Singh. After inspection of car was over, Inspector Ranjeet Singh
handed him back keys of car and garage and he deposited the same in
Malkhana of PS Chhawla. Most significantly, the witness was not cross-
examined by the accused persons.
73.     Dr.B.K.Mohapatra PW-23, Senior Scientific Officer, Biology
Division, CFSL proved the CFSL report Ex.PW-23/A. Additionally, he
deposed that on February 28, 2012 he received thirty-nine sealed parcels
relating to FIR No.35/2012 registered at PS Chhawla. The seals on parcels
were intact and tallied with the specimen seals. Most significantly, the
witness was not cross-examined by the accused persons.
74.     Dr.Shivangi Prashar PW-26, proved the post-mortem report Ex.PW-
26/A of Anamica and opinion Ex.PW-26/B regarding the weapon of
offence. Being relevant to deal with an argument advanced by learned
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 38 of 97

counsel for the accused, we note the following portion of his cross-
examination:-
        “It is correct that there was no injury present on the private
        part of the deceased. However, there were injuries on the
        middle of left leg as injury No.13 and 14 mentioned in the
        report and bleeding was present on vagina. It is possible that
        bleeding could have been due to menstruation.”
75.     SI Madan Pal PW-33, deposed that on February 27, 2012 he had
prepared the site plan Ex.PW-33/A to scale of the place from where
Anamica‘s body was recovered. He said that he had destroyed the rough
notes on the basis of which he had prepared the site plan Ex.PW-33/A.
76.     Inspector Ranjeet Singh PW-49, deposed the facts relating to
investigation conducted by him, which have been already stated by us in
the factual narratives noted by us in the preceding paragraphs. Being
relevant to deal with an argument advanced by learned counsel for the
accused, we note the following portion of his cross-examination:-
        “It is correct that accused Rahul was arrested on 13.2.2012.
        I cannot say why he was not taken to the spot where dead
        body of the deceased was found for pointing out the same till
        16.2.2012. Since the investigation of this case was entrusted
        to me on 15.2.2012, I noticed this fact from the file and
        accordingly took the accused Rahul to the said spot in village
        Rodai on 16.2.2012. Inspector Sandeep Gupta did not tell me
        any particular reason why accused Rahul was not taken to the
        aforesaid spot in village Rodai for pointing out the same.
        I cannot tell any particular reason why the seat covers were
        not sent to the CFSL before 27.2.2012….The pullindas could
        not be sent to CFSL before 27.2.2012 as the investigation of
        the case was in progress. Also for the reason that the
        subsequent opinion of the doctor had to be taken on the jack
        and pana, which I obtained on 23.2.2012.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 39 of 97

        It is correct that when I saw the tata indica car in PS Jafarpur
        Kalan, there was no seal on its door locks. It is also correct
        that the keys of the car produced by MHC (M) were not in any
        sealed pullinda. It is possible that the car could have been
        opened by those keys by any person who was in possession of
        the keys. It is correct that I also did not seal the keys as well
        as the door locks of the car after 16.2.2012.
        X X X by Sh. S.S. Haider, Advocate for accused Vinod.
        The motive for the accused in committing the crime, as
        mentioned by me in the charge sheet, was revealed from the
        disclosure statement of the accused. No other witness had
        stated anything about the friendship of the deceased and
        accused Vinod. I tried to verify each and every circumstance
        but I did not get hold of any evidence verifying the aforesaid
        fact. It is wrong to suggest that the motive of the crime as
        mentioned by me in the charge sheet has been manipulated
        and fabricated.”
77.     In the backdrop of aforesaid evidence led by the prosecution, the
accused were examined under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
78.     Rahul stated that he was innocent and had been falsely implicated.
He said that he never knew Anamica. He said that on February 09, 2012 at
about 04.30 P.M. he dropped one S.N.Gupta at the airport. Thereafter
various persons boarded his car and he dropped them at various places in
Dwarka and parked the car at about 09.00 P.M. at Taxi Stand, Sector-9,
Dwarka. Next day, at about 10.00 A.M. the police officials stopped the red
coloured Indica car being driven by him and took him to the police station.
On being questioned he informed the police officials that he and his
brother Ravi are involved in a criminal case. The police officials noted
down his name and other particulars as also inspected the car driven by
him and let him go. On February 13, 2012 he was beaten in the police
station and his thumb impression was taken on same papers. On February
14, 2012 he, Ravi and Vinod were taken to PS Rodai. On said day, media
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                   Page 40 of 97

was called at the police station and police officers claimed to have solved
the case. A police officer had taken their i.e. his, Ravi‘s and Vinod‘s blood
samples in the police station. Being relevant, we note following questions
put to Rahul in his statement under Section 313 Cr.PC. and the answers
given thereto:-
        “Q.22 It is in evidence against you that in the meanwhile a
        red colour Indica car bearing RC No.DL 3C AF 4348 stopped
        at the metro station. The driver of the said car i.e. you
        accused Rahul was appearing to be in perplexed condition
        and on seeing you ASI Rajinder Singh immediately went there
        and asked the documents of vehicle including the DL from the
        said person. However, you failed to produce any such
        document and told ASI Rajinder Singh that the documents
        were in other vehicle and you would bring the same. What
        have you to say?
        Ans: It is incorrect. On that day, my brother accused Ravi
        had been lifted by the police officials from our house during
        the day. In the evening, I reached the police station in the said
        Tata Indica car to enquire about Ravi. On reaching the police
        station, the Tata Indica car was seized by the police officials
        and I was arrested in the said case.
        Q.41 It is in evidence against you that from the spot ASI
        Balwan Singh lifted two plastic glasses, one earthenware pot
        (Matka), one empty pouch of Namkeen (snacks), one broken
        piece of a bumper of a vehicle and one red colour purse
        containing `365/- in cash. ASI Balwan Singh also lifted the
        blood stained soil, soil, hairs etc from the dead body of the
        deceased which were kept in separate six pullindas and were
        sealed with the seal of B and were seized vide memo Ex.PW-
        34/A. What have you to say?
        Ans: I do not know.
        Q.23 It is in evidence against you that an ATM card in name
        of you accused Rahul of SBI Dwarka, another ATM card, a
        photocopy of PAN card, original driving license in your
        name, an identity card issued in your name by Sen. Sec.
        School, a visiting card of Ramji Lal, receipt of some
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                   Page 41 of 97

        medicines and one news paper cutting on which two mobile
        phone numbers were written in pen were also found lying in
        the aforesaid purse. What have you to say?
        Ans: It is incorrect. These articles were taken away by the
        police officials in the police station at the time of my arrest.”
79.     In his examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C., Ravi stated that he
was innocent and had been falsely implicated.               He denied knowing
Anamica. He said that on February 13, 2012 the police officials lifted him
from his house and brought him to the police station and arrested him.
80.     In his examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C., Vinod stated that he
was innocent and had been falsely implicated.               He denied knowing
Anamica. He claimed that on February 09, 2012 he had gone to Jind,
Haryana to distribute invitation cards of the marriage of his cousin Appu.
He claimed to have stayed there in the night and returned to Delhi in the
afternoon of February 10, 2012.          He said that on February 13, 2012 the
police officers falsely arrested him.
81.     In defence, Vinod examined one Sri Bhagwan DW-1, Assistant
(Legal), Nav Bharat Times. He proved the report Ex.DW-1/A published in
page No.5 of Nav Bharat Times, Hindi Edition on February 15, 2012. The
report Ex.DW-1/A reports that the police had solved the case of Anamica
being kidnapped and raped and named Rahul, Ravi and Vinod as the
accused. With respect to which evidence, no arguments were advanced by
counsel for Vinod during arguments in the reference. That apart we may
note that in Newspaper report as to who solved a crime is neither here nor
there. Further, the report refers to the police solving the case and not that
Haryana Police solved the case.
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY THE COUNSEL FOR THE ACCUSED
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                    Page 42 of 97

82.     Learned counsel for the accused made wide and varied submissions
which can conveniently be divided into two broad categories:-
I       Arguments pertaining to the correctness of the finding of guilt
returned by the learned Trial Judge.
II      Arguments pertaining to the correctness of the punishment awarded
by the learned Trial Judge.
83.     Arguments pertaining to the correctness of the finding of guilt
returned by the learned Trial Judge: - Under this head, following 11
arguments were advanced by the learned counsel:-
A       The first submission advanced by the counsel for the accused related
to the arrest of accused Ravi and Vinod. It was argued that the case of
prosecution (as deposed by Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, SI Ashok
Kumar PW-41, SI Jitender Dagar PW-47 and HC Kuldeep PW-39) was
that firstly Rahul was arrested on February 13, 2012, who on interrogation
admitted to his guilt and disclosed regarding the involvement of Ravi and
Vinod in the crime, pursuant whereto Ravi and Vinod were arrested at
2.45/3.00 P.M. on February 13, 2012 and the two got recovered the dead
body of Anamica from village Rodai. Counsel argued that aforesaid case
of the prosecution is completely falsified from the fact that Inspector
Sandeep Gupta PW-34, during his cross-examination categorically
admitted : ‗Till my return from village Rodai, no disclosure statement of
accused Rahul had been recorded.‟ Counsel argued that when the
disclosure statement of Rahul was recorded after returning from village
Rodai i.e. much after 05.00 P.M. on February 13, 2012, then how come the
police came to know about the involvement of Ravi and Vinod and
arrested them at about 2.45 – 03.00 P.M. on February 13, 2012. According
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 43 of 97

to the learned counsel, the aforesaid circumstance is strongly indicative of
the false implication of Ravi and Vinod by the police since they happened
to be the brother and friend/roommate respectively of Rahul who was
already in the net of the police. The argument was dovetailed with the
submission that the possibility of not only Ravi and Vinod but even Rahul
being falsely implicated and everything planted on them thereafter cannot
be ruled out.
B       The second submission advanced by the counsel was that the beat
constables who are stated to have arrested Ravi and Vinod were material
witnesses for the reason only they could have thrown light on the
circumstance leading to the apprehension of Ravi and Vinod. Counsel
urged that an adverse inference needs to be drawn against the prosecution
on account of not examining the beat constables in terms of illustration (g)
to Section 114 of The Evidence Act on the reasoning, had the beat
constables been examined they would not have supported the case of
prosecution. Counsel further submitted that no details regarding the
identity of said beat constables has come on record. (In this regard, the
counsel had drawn our attention to the depositions of Inspector Sandeep
Gupta PW-48, SI Ashok Kumar PW-41 and HC Kuldeep PW-39, wherein
they failed to recall the names of the beat constables). Counsel argued that
the elusiveness of the beat constables who are stated to have apprehended
Ravi and Vinod is another pointer indicating the false implication of Ravi
and Vinod.
C       The third submission advanced by the counsel for the accused was
that the prosecution claims that Rahul, Vinod and Ravi were arrested at
02.00 P.M., 2.45 P.M. and 03.00 P.M. respectively on February 13, 2012.
Counsel pointed out that ASI Ashok Kumar PW-41 and HC Kuldeep PW-
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 44 of 97

39, deposed that it took 25 minutes (as per Ashok Kumar)/30-40 minutes
(as per HC Kuldeep) to record the disclosure statement of Rahul. Meaning
thereby, that the recording of the disclosure statement of Rahul concluded
only at about 2.25 P.M. or around 2.40 P.M. on February 13, 2012.
Counsel argued that the time gap of mere ten-fifteen minutes between the
conclusion of the disclosure statement of Rahul and arrest of Ravi and
Vinod belies the claim of the prosecution that the disclosure statement of
Rahul was recorded which disclosed the complicity of Ravi and Vinod
pursuant to which they were picked up from their house in Dwarka and
brought to PS Chhawla and arrested.
D       The fourth submission advanced by the counsel related to the arrest
of Rahul. Counsel appearing for Rahul argued that the defence taken by
Rahul in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. was that his brother Ravi
was arrested by the police on February 13, 2012 after which he had gone to
PS Chhawla in the evening of February 13, 2012 to enquire about his
brother when he too was arrested. Counsel argued that the defence of
Rahul that he was arrested subsequent to the arrest of his brother Ravi gets
probabilised by the facts that Ravi and Vinod were taken to Village Rodai
to recover the body of Anamica and Rahul was left in the police station
despite the fact that as per the prosecution Rahul was the first one to be
arrested and he disclosed the place where the dead body of Anamica could
be found, and that no explanation had been given by Inspector Sandeep
Gupta PW-48 for not taking Rahul to PS Rodai. In this regards, counsel
also pointed out that ASI Ashok Kumar PW-41 and Inspector Ranjeet
Singh PW-49, who were closely associated with the investigation of the
case, stated that Inspector Sandeep Gupta did not disclose to them the
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 45 of 97

reason as to why Rahul was not taken to village Rodai on February 13,
2012.
E       The fifth submission advanced by the counsel was that the recovery
of the dead body of Anamica from the fields in village Rodai cannot be
attributed to Ravi and Vinod because the dead body of Anamica had
already been recovered by Haryana Police before it was pointed out by
Ravi and Vinod. It was argued that the circumstances which have emerged
in the present case show that on February 13, 2012 at about 11.30 – 12.00
P.M. information was received at PS Rodai that a dead body is lying in a
field whereupon a police party from PS Rodai consisting of ASI Balwan
Singh PW-46 and two other police officers proceeded to the field and
found the dead body of Anamica lying there. The purse of Anamica and
not of Rahul, was lying near the dead body and in all probability contained
a document indicating her residence or the mobile number of her family
member, and thus ASI Balwan Singh was able to contact Anamica‘s father
and inform him about the recovery of Anamica‘s body. Thereupon
Anamica‘s father in turn informed Delhi Police regarding the recovery of
the body of Anamica. On receipt of said information the police officers of
PS Chhawla took Ravi and Vinod, who had been arrested by that time, to
the field and wrongly showed the recovery of the dead body of Anamica at
the instance of Ravi and Vinod. The circumstances, which according to
counsel, were indicative of the recovery of the body of Anamica by the
Haryana Police before it was pointed out by Ravi and Vinod are as
follows:- (i) ASI Balwan Singh PW-46, stated that he reached the field in
question when he received DD No.24 at about 11.30 – 12.00 P.M. on
February 13, 2012. Counsel pointed out that as per the case of the
prosecution Delhi Police came to know about the location of the dead body
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 46 of 97

of Anamica only after the arrest of Rahul at 02.00 P.M. on February 13,
2012. Meaning thereby, Haryana Police got information about the dead
body of Anamica at least two hours before Delhi Police learnt of said fact;
(ii) ASI Balwan Singh PW-46, stated that he reached the field in question
at about 04.30 P.M. on February 13, 2012. It is inconceivable that ASI
Balwan Singh who got information about the dead body of
Anamica at about 11.30 – 12.00 noon on February 13, 2012 would wait for
nearly four hours before going to the field in question; (iii) assuming ASI
Balwan Singh PW-46, is correct in stating that he reached the field in
question at about 04.30 P.M. on February 13, 2012, the fact remains that
all the officers of Delhi Police associated with the recovery of the dead
body of Anamica viz. Ct.Arun Kumar PW-30, ASI Attar Singh PW-36,
Ct.Ramesh Chand PW-37, Ct.Vinod PW-38, HC Kuldeep PW-39, SI
Ashok Kumar PW-44, Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 and SI Jitender
Dagar PW-49 claimed to have reached the field at about 05.00 P.M. on
February 13, 2012, by which time ASI Balwan Singh and his team would
have surely recovered the dead body of Anamica; (iv) the deposition of SI
Jitender Dagar PW-47 shows that the Delhi Police had not reached the
field at village Rodai at about 05.00 P.M. on February 13, 2012 as claimed
by the prosecution but much after 06.00 P.M.; (v) Haryana Police has
prepared the memo Ex.PW-34/A regarding seizure of the articles from the
field and the same does not contain signature(s) of even a single police
official from Delhi Police; (vi) Mahavir Singh PW-14, deposed that Delhi
Police had informed about the presence of the dead body of Anamica in the
fields of his brother, but Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, deposed that
Mahavir Singh along with other villagers reached the field in question on
coming to know about the arrival of Delhi Police in the field of his brother;
and (vii) the signature of Mahavir Singh PW-14 appears on various
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 47 of 97

pointing memos prepared at the field, but he stated in his cross-
examination that he cannot say whether any articles were lying near the
dead body of Anamica.
F       The sixth submission advanced by the learned counsel for Vinod
was that from evidence on record it emerges that Anamica‘s dead body
was recovered pursuant to the disclosure statements made by both Ravi
and Vinod and hence no reliance can be placed upon said recovery upon
them. In said regards, reliance was placed upon the decision of Supreme
Court reported as AIR 2005 SC 3820 State vs Navjot Sandhu.
G       The seventh submission advanced by the learned counsel was that
the seizure of articles from the car and place of recovery of Anamica‘s
dead body and lifting of samples of the accused is shrouded in suspicion,
for the reasons:- (i) there was a delay of 11/14 days in sending the seized
articles to CFSL, inasmuch as articles were seized on February 13/16, 2012
but the same were sent to the CSFL only on February 27, 2012; (ii) Tata
Indica car was got inspected by CFSL team only on February 16, 2012 i.e.
after the samples of the accused persons had been obtained by the Delhi
Police and after the exhibits lifted from the field and those lifted by the
doctors who conducted Anamica‘s post-mortem were taken possession of
by Delhi Police; (iii) the depositions of Hari Om PW-10, the owner of
Indica car, was that on February 10, 2012 he and his wife had travelled to
Talkatora stadium in said car but did not notice any blood stains or any
other articles in the car and that he had cleaned the car on February 11,
2012 and had made available the same for booking to ferry passengers is a
clear indication of planting of semen samples of accused persons and
Anamica‘s hair in the car by the police, particularly when seen in
conjunction with the deposition of Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 that he
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 48 of 97

had cursorily examined the Indica car on February 13, 2012 and that he did
not notice any blood spots in the interiors of the car; (iv) the key and key
holes of the car were not sealed by the police as admitted by Inspector
Sandeep Gupta PW-48 and Inspector Ranjeet Singh PW-49 meant that the
car was accessible to the police officers for anything to be planted therein;
and (v) the defence of Vinod that Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, got
him i.e. Vinod medically examined on February 13, 2012 and obtained his
semen sample and handed over the same to HC Kuldeep who then planted
it in the car and the vaginal swab of Anamica gets probabalized by the fact
that Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 had admitted in his cross-
examination that Vinod was medically examined on February 13, 2012
though the MLC prepared after the arrest of Vinod is dated February 14,
2012.
H       The eighth submission advanced by the counsel was that the list of
articles found in the purse recovered from near the dead body of Anamica
referred to in seizure memo Ex.PW-34/A has not been annexed/exhibited
along with said seizure memo and thus cannot be admitted into evidence;
nor its contents.
I       The ninth submission advanced by the counsel was that call details
record Ex.PW-28/F of the mobile number of Rahul shows that Rahul was
in Delhi at 10.30 P.M. on February 13, 2012 whereas at the same time
Anamica was present in Haryana, a fact evident from the call details record
Ex.21/A of the mobile number of Anamica. The aforesaid contradiction
demolishes the case set up by the prosecution against Rahul.
J       The tenth submission advanced by the counsel was that no injuries
were found on the private parts of Anamica which according to them a
clear pointer to the fact that Anamica was not raped.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 49 of 97

K       The last and the eleventh submission advanced by the counsel was
that the motive for the crime by the accused projected by the prosecution
was that Anamica had rejected Ravi‘s proposal for friendship and had
spurned Ravi and he decided to take revenge from Anamica and Rahul and
Vinod had helped him in taking revenge. No evidence whatsoever has
emerged on record to show that Ravi had proposed friendship to Anamica
and that she had rejected his proposal, meaning thereby, the police had
spun a false story against the accused.
84.     The first four submissions advanced by the learned counsel relating
to the arrest of the accused are being dealt together.
85.     It is claimed by the prosecution that Rahul was arrested first and
pursuant to his disclosure statement Ravi and Vinod were arrested.
Whether the statement of Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 during cross-
examination, that : „till my return from village Rodai, no disclosure
statement of accused Rahul had been recorded‟ and failure of Inspector
Sandeep Gupta PW-48, to take Rahul to village Rodai on February 13,
2012 belies the claim made by the prosecution?
86.     The learned counsel appearing for the State argued that Rahul, Ravi
and Vinod were arrested on February 13, 2012 and disclosed that they had
murdered and thrown the body of Anamica in the fields at village Rodai. It
was possible that the accused may not have correctly disclosed the location
of the dead body of Anamica. The police officers many a times experience
such a situation. Thus, a decision being taken to leave Rahul behind, to be
further interrogated, if the police could not locate Anamica‘s dead body in
the fields in village Rodai, on the belief that he would reveal the correct
spot cannot belie the claim of the prosecution.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 50 of 97

87.     The aforesaid explanation furnished by the counsel for the State for
not taking Rahul to village Rodai on February 13, 2012 is plausible,
particularly when we find that the police officers associated with the arrest
of accused viz. HC Kuldeep PW-39, SI Ashok Kumar PW-41 and SI
Jitender Dagar PW-47, were cross-examined at length by the learned
counsel for the accused but nothing tangible could be elicited therefrom
which could dent their testimonies that Rahul was arrested first on
February 13, 2012 and pursuant to his disclosure statement wherein he
disclosed about the involvement of Ravi and Vinod they too were arrested.
88.     As regards the submission predicated upon the statement of
Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 that : „till my return from village Rodai,
no disclosure statement of accused Rahul had been recorded‟, we again
note the following portion of the cross-examination of Inspector Sandeep
Gupta PW-48:-
        “It is correct that on the day when the accused were arrested,
        the dead body had not been discovered. In this case, the FIR
        had initially been registered u/s. 363 IPC. On the basis of oral
        interrogation of accused Rahul, I mentioned sections
        365/302/376(2)(g)/34 IPC on the arrest memo of the accused.
        It is correct that accused Rahul had not mentioned in his
        disclosure statement that he has forgotten his wallet near the
        dead body. I had found the wallet of accused Rahul near the
        dead body when the same was pointed out by accused Ravi
        and Vinod. Accused Rahul was not taken to Rodai village as
        he needed to be further interrogated and for this reason he
        was detained in the police station. On 13.2.2012 I was the
        Investigating Officer of this case. No other person except the
        Investigating Officer or the team prepared for the said
        purpose can interrogate an accused. Till my return from
        village Rodai, no disclosure statement of accused Rahul had
        been recorded.”
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 51 of 97

89.     A careful reading of the afore-noted portion of the cross-
examination of Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 shows that questions
regarding his omission to take Rahul to village Rodai on February 13,
2012 were being put to Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48 who answered
that he did not take Rahul to village Rodai and left him at the police station
as he was to be further interrogated.
90.     Let us pause here for a moment. Now and again a case turns up
before a Court which is a little more complex. Rules of deduction may be
invaluable, but observation is also important.
91.     The events which transpired on February 13, 2012 in the instant case
have been video-graphed and a CD thereof has been placed on record.
92.     During the course of arguments we had seen the CD in question.
The CD shows that in the morning of February 13, 2012 a large crowd had
gathered outside PS Chhawla and was protesting against the inaction of the
police in finding Anamica. The CD shows that the atmosphere outside PS
Chhawla at that time was highly tense and there was a lot of unrest
amongst the crowd.
93.     On February 13, 2012 the police officers associated with the
investigation, particularly Investigating Officer Inspector Sandeep Gupta
PW-48, must have been highly stressed on account of the unrest in the
crowd gathered at PS Chhawla.
94.     It is worth noting that Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, had stated
that no disclosure statement of Rahul was recorded till his return from
village Rodai while answering questions relating to his failure to take
Rahul to village Rodai on February 13, 2012. As already noted
hereinabove, Inspector Sandeep Gupta answered that Rahul was left in the
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 52 of 97

police station since he was required to be interrogated further. The next
question, contours whereof we can gather from the answer was obviously :
Was any further disclosure statement of Rahul recorded? And he answered
that no disclosure statement of Rahul was recorded. To appreciate our
reasoning we frame a question before each sentence for the reason each
sentence is an answer by itself. The position would be :
Q.      Why was Rahul not taken to Rodai village?
Ans. Accused Rahul was not taken to Rodai village as he was needed to
be further interrogated and for this reason he was detained in the police
station.
Q.      Who was the Investigating Officer of this case on February 13,
2012?
Ans. On February 13, 2012, I was the Investigating Officer of this case.
Q.      Who can interrogate an accused?
Ans. No other person except the Investigating Officer or the team
prepared for the said purpose can interrogate an accused.
Q.      Was any further disclosure statement of accused Rahul recorded till
you returned from village Rodai?
Ans. Till my return from village Rodai, no disclosure statement of
accused Rahul had been recorded.
95.     We terminate the discussion simply highlighting that the sentence
picked upon by learned counsel for Rahul relates to a paragraph of a
statement of Insp.Sandeep Gupta with the center of focus of the questions
and the answered being the reason for not taking Rahul to village Rodai
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 53 of 97

and whether during the interregnum period i.e. when the police team left
for village Rodai and returned back to the police station any disclosure
statement, which obviously had to be a further disclosure statement, of
Rahul was recorded.
96.     Whether non-examination of beat constables who apprehended Ravi
and Vinod is fatal to the case of prosecution?
97.     The answer to the above question lies in the undernoted observations
made by Supreme Court in the decision reported as AIR 2001 SC 2328
Takhaji Hiraji vs. Thakore Kubersing Chamansing:-
        “So is the case with the criticism leveled by the High Court on
        the prosecution case finding fault therewith for non-
        examination of independent witnesses. It is true that if a
        material witness, which would unfold the genesis of the
        incident or an essential part of the prosecution case, not
        convincingly brought to fore otherwise, or where there is a
        gap or infirmity in the prosecution case which could have
        been supplied or made good by examining a witness which
        though available is not examined, the prosecution case can be
        termed as suffering from a deficiency and withholding of such
        a material witness would oblige the Court to draw an adverse
        inference against the prosecution by holding that if the
        witness would have been examined it would not have
        supported the prosecution case. On the other hand if already
        overwhelming evidence is available and examination of other
        witnesses would only be a repetition or duplication of the
        evidence already adduced, non-examination of such other
        witnesses may not be material. In such a case the Court ought
        to scrutinise the worth of the evidence adduced.
        The Court of facts must ask itself -- whether in the facts and
        circumstances of the case, it was necessary to examine such
        other witness, and if so, whether such witness was available
        to be examined and yet was being withheld from the court. If
        the answer be positive then only a question of drawing an
        adverse inference may arise. If the witnesses already
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 54 of 97

        examined are reliable and the testimony coming from their
        mouth is unimpeachable the Court can safely act upon it
        uninfluenced by the factum of non-examination of other
        witnesses.”
98.     Merely because a witness is not examined by the prosecution, a
criminal court would not lean to draw an adverse inference that if he was
examined he would have given a contrary version. The illustration (g) to
Section 114 of The Evidence Act is only a permissible inference and not a
necessary inference. Unless there are other circumstances to facilitate the
drawing of an adverse inference it should not be a mechanical process to
draw an adverse inference merely on the strength of non-examination of a
witness, even if the witness is a material witness.
99.     In the instant case, even if it is assumed that beat constables who had
apprehended Ravi and Vinod from their house and had brought them to the
police station were material witnesses, the same would not be fatal to the
case of the prosecution if the prosecution has otherwise been able to
establish the apprehension of Ravi and Vinod followed by their arrest. We
reiterate that the police officers associated with the arrest of the accused
viz. HC Kuldeep PW-39, SI Ashok Kumar PW-41 and SI Jitender Dagar
PW-47, were cross-examined at length by learned counsel for the accused
but nothing tangible could be elicited therefrom which could dent their
testimonies that Rahul was arrested first on February 13, 2012 and
pursuant to his disclosure wherein he disclosed the involvement of Ravi
and Vinod they were also arrested.
100. As regards the argument relating to alleged elusiveness of the beat
constables who apprehended Ravi and Vinod, we again highlight that the
police officers associated with the arrest of Ravi and Vinod on February
13, 2012 were highly tense at the time of arrest of Ravi and Vinod on
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                   Page 55 of 97

account of unrest amongst the crowd gathered at the police station. In such
a situation, it is quite conceivable that the police officers associated with
the arrest of Ravi and Vinod viz. HC Kuldeep PW-39, SI Ashok Kumar
PW-41 and SI Jitender Dagar PW-47, Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48,
did not pay much attention to the beat constables who brought Ravi and
Vinod to the police station since their endeavour on said day i.e. February
13, 2012 was to find Anamica and thus were not able to recall the names of
the beat constables. Lastly merely because they could not remember the
names of the beat constables does not dent the creditworthiness of the four
police officers.
101. The third submission advanced by the counsel for the accused
proceeds on the premise that the beat constables were directed to
apprehend Ravi and Vinod only after conclusion of the recording of the
disclosure statement of Rahul. This would not be the correct position. The
correct sequence of events would be that on being interrogated Rahul
would have disclosed the complicity of Ravi and Vinod. The recording of
the disclosure statement of Rahul would have commenced after his
interrogation. The moment Rahul disclosed about the complicity of Ravi
and Vinod the police officers, who were interrogating Rahul, would have
flashed a wireless message which was obviously passed on to the beat
constables because they were the police personnel nearest to the place of
residence of Ravi and Vinod and hence the beat constables apprehended
the two and brought them to the police station.
102. The fifth submission relating to the recovery of Anamica‘s dead
body, we note that HC Vinod PW-34, HC Aman Prakash PW-35 and ASI
Balwan Singh PW-46, categorically deposed that a purse was found near
the dead body of Anamica and ATM cards, driving license, photocopies of
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 56 of 97

school leaving certificate and PAN card of Rahul were lying therein, which
depositions have not been seriously controverted by the accused. Not even
a single suggestion has been given to HC Vinod PW-34, HC Aman
Prakash PW-35, that the purse found near the dead body of Anamica was
not of Rahul but that of Anamica. The father of Anamica, Kunwar Singh
Negi PW-8 and his friend Laxman Rawat stepped into the witness box as
PW-8 and PW-7 respectively. The accused neither put any question nor
gave any suggestion to Anamica‘s father and his friend that Haryana Police
had informed them about the recovery of dead body of Anamica and in
turn had informed Delhi Police about the same. The basis of the argument
was a sequitur to the first four submissions. The argument was that if
Rahul‘s disclosure statement was recorded after the Delhi Police Personnel
had returned from village Rodai after recovering Anamica‘s dead body and
since it was their claim that Ravi‘s and Vinod‘s involvement was disclosed
to them by Rahul it has to necessarily follow that even Ravi and Vinod
were apprehended after Rahul was apprehended.             Thus, the only
conceivable manner in which Delhi Police could proceed to village Rodai
is information given to them by police personnel from Haryana that
Anamica‘s body was found by them and the source of knowledge to
Anamica‘s identity would be something recovered from the purse at the
spot. The first four submissions having been noted and rejected by us, the
substratum of the fifth submission obviously fall. Besides, it is settled law
that the prosecution has to establish its case and need not meet every
hypothesis put forward by the accused. We simply note the observations
of the Supreme Court in the decision reported as (1992) 2 SCC 86 State of
U.P. vs. Ashok Kumar Srivastava.
        “This Court has, time out of number, observed that while
        appreciating circumstantial evidence the Court must adopt a
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 57 of 97

        very cautious approach and should record a conviction only if
        all the links in the chain are complete pointing to the guilt of
        the accused and every hypothesis of innocence is capable of
        being negatived on evidence. Great care must be taken in
        evaluating circumstantial evidence and if the evidence relied
        on is reasonably capable of two inferences, the one in favour
        of the accused must be accepted. The circumstance relied
        upon must be found to have been fully established and the
        cumulative effect of all the facts so established must be
        consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt. But this is not to
        say that the prosecution must meet any and every hypothesis
        put forward by the accused however farfetched and fanciful it
        might be. Nor does it mean that prosecution evidence must be
        rejected on the slightest doubt because the law permits
        rejection if the doubt is reasonable and not otherwise.”
        (Emphasis Supplied)
103. It needs to be highlighted at this stage, and for which the eighth
submission advanced concerning the exhibits seized when dead body of
Anamica was recovered and as entered in the seizure memo Ex.PW-34/A,
could also be conveniently dealt with here and now. It was argued that the
list of articles found in the purse recovered from near dead body of
Anamica referred to in seizure memo Ex.PW-34/A has not been put to
Rahul in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and thus the same cannot
be used against him. The omission to put the list of articles found in the
purse recovered from near dead body of Anamica referred to in seizure
memo Ex.PW-34/A to Rahul in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. is
of no consequence for the reason the articles referred to in said list have
put to Rahul in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. (See Question
No.23 put to Rahul in his statement under Section under Section 313
Cr.P.C. noted by us in the preceding paragraphs).
104. Even otherwise, it is settled legal position that prejudice must be
shown by an accused before it can be held that he is entitled to acquittal
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 58 of 97

over a defective and perfunctory statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. (See
the decision of Supreme Court reported as (2011) 6 SCC 1 Satyavir Rathi v
CBI). In the instant case, no prejudice whatsoever has been caused to
Rahul on account of omission to put the list of articles found in the purse
recovered from near dead body of Anamica referred to in seizure memo
Ex.PW-34/A to Rahul in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
inasmuch as the articles referred in the list in question have been put to
Rahul in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
105. Referring back to the point from where we made a detour while
discussing the fifth submission advanced, the argument would mean that
Officers from Haryana Police had planted two ATM cards, one issued by
Syndicate Bank and the other by State Bank of India in the name of Rahul,
photocopy of PAN card of Rahul, original driving license of Rahul,
photocopy of the school leaving certificate of Rahul and several visiting
cards of Rahul. This would mean that officers of Haryana Police had
obtained the same from Rahul. It would also mean that one strand of hair
lifted by the forensic team of Haryana Police from Anamica‘s dead body,
DNA generated wherefrom matched that of Ravi was also planted by the
officers of Haryana Police. Now, no suggestion whatsoever has been
given to the three police personnel from Haryana Police that they had
planted the incriminating exhibits. In his testimony ASI Rajinder Singh
PW-12 has deposed that when he flagged down Rahul who was driving the
red coloured Indica car and asked him to produce the driving license,
Rahul could not produce one. Obviously, Rahul having lost his purse at
the place where Anamica‘s dead body was thrown could not produce the
driving license because it was inside the purse.       He never told ASI
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 59 of 97

Rajinder Singh that some police personnel from Haryana Police has taken
the driving license from him.
106. The sixth argument concerns the legal position pertaining to joint
disclosure statements as discussed by the Supreme Court in the decision
reported as AIR 2005 SC 3820 State v Navjot Sandhu in the following
terms:
        “Before parting with the discussion on the subject of
        confessions under Section 27, we may briefly refer to the legal
        position as regards joint disclosures. This point assumes
        relevance in the context of such disclosures made by the first
        two accused viz. Afzal and Shaukat. The admissibility of
        information said to have been furnished by both of them
        leading to the discovery of the hideouts of the deceased
        terrorists and the recovery of a laptop computer, a mobile
        phone and cash of ` 10 lacs from the truck in which they were
        found at Srinagar is in issue. Learned senior counsel Mr.
        Shanti Bhushan and Mr. Sushil Kumar appearing for the
        accused contend, as was contended before the High Court,
        that the disclosure and pointing out attributed to both cannot
        fall within the Ken of Section 27, whereas it is the contention
        of Mr. Gopal Subramanium that there is no taboo against the
        admission of such information as incriminating evidence
        against both the informants/accused. Some of the High Courts
        have taken the view that the wording "a person" excludes the
        applicability of the Section to more than one person. But, that
        is too narrow a view to be taken. Joint disclosures to be more
        accurate, simultaneous disclosures, per se, are not
        inadmissible under Section 27. 'A person accused' need not
        necessarily be a single person, but it could be plurality of
        accused. It seems to us that the real reason for not acting
        upon the joint disclosures by taking resort to Section 27 is the
        inherent difficulty in placing reliance on such information
        supposed to have emerged from the mouths of two or more
        accused at a time. In fact, joint or simultaneous disclosure is
        a myth, because two or more accused persons would not have
        uttered informatory words in a chorus. At best, one person
        would have made the statement orally and the other person
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 60 of 97

        would have stated so substantially in similar terms a few
        seconds or minutes later, or the second person would have
        given unequivocal nod to what has been said by the first
        person. Or, two persons in custody may be interrogated
        separately and simultaneously and both of them may furnish
        similar information leading to the discovery of fact. Or, in
        rare cases, both the accused may reduce the information into
        writing and hand over the written notes to the police officer at
        the same time. We do not think that such disclosures by two or
        more persons in police custody go out of the purview of
        Section 27 altogether. If information is given one after the
        other without any break almost simultaneously, and if such
        information is followed up by pointing out the material thing
        by both of them, we find no good reason to eschew such
        evidence from the regime of Section 27. However, there may
        be practical difficulties in placing reliance on such evidence.
        It may be difficult for the witness (generally the police
        officer), to depose which accused spoke what words and in
        what sequence. In other words, the deposition in regard to the
        information given by the two accused may be exposed to
        criticism from the stand point of credibility and its nexus with
        discovery. Admissibility and credibility are two distinct
        aspects, as pointed out by Mr. Gopal Subramanium. Whether
        and to what extent such a simultaneous disclosure could be
        relied upon by the Court is really a matter of evaluation of
        evidence. With these preparatory remarks, we have to refer to
        two decisions of this Court which are relied upon by the
        learned defence counsel.
107. From the afore-noted observations, it is clear that in order to place
reliance upon a recovery made pursuant to a joint disclosure statement it is
important that the witness to the recovery in question should state about
the words spoken by the accused in their disclosure statements and the
sequence in which they pointed out the object which was recovered.
108. In the instant case, none of the witnesses to the recovery of dead
body of Anamica have stated as to what were the words spoken by Ravi
and Vinod when they got Anamica‘s dead body recovered or the sequence
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 61 of 97

in which they pointed out the body. In such circumstances we have to
accept the argument being the sixth submission advanced and hold that
keeping in view the manner in which evidence has been led, the recovery
of Anamica‘s dead body cannot be attributed to Ravi and Vinod in the
manner sought to be proved by the prosecution. But would hasten to add
that at least it would be evidence admissible under Section 8 of The
Evidence Act of the conduct of Ravi and Vinod of leading the police party
to a spot wherefrom Anamica‘s dead body was recovered.
109. The seventh submission regarding delay in sending the seized
articles to CFSL deserves to be rejected for the reason HC Bharat Lal PW-
15, Malkana Moharrar, had deposed that the articles seized in the present
case remained intact and were not tampered till the time the same remained
in his custody i.e. till they were sent to CFSL. The testimony of HC Bharat
Lal PW-15, has not been controverted by the accused inasmuch as the
accused have not cross-examined said witness. Further, Dr.S.K.Mohapatra
PW-23, who had examined the seized articles has deposed that he had
received the articles seized in the present case in CFSL in sealed condition
on February 28, 2012. Again, the testimony of Dr.S.K.Mohapatra, has not
been controverted by the accused inasmuch as the accused have not cross-
examined said witness. In this view of the matter, the testimonies of HC
Bharat Lal PW-15, that the articles seized in the present case remained
intact and were not tampered till the time the same remained in his custody
i.e. till they were sent to CFSL and Dr.S.K.Mohapatra PW-23, that articles
seized in present case were received by him in a sealed condition has to be
taken as correct. In this view of the matter, nothing turns on the fact that
articles seized in the present case were sent to CFSL after 11/14 days of
their seizure.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 62 of 97

110. As regards the eighth submission, we have already discussed a part
of the same while discussing the fourth submission relating to planting
Ravi‘s hair on the body of Anamica and planting of other exhibits
incriminating Rahul. Dealing with the limb of the submission that a hair of
Anamica was planted in the car and after taking semen of the accused the
same was planted in the vaginal swab of Anamica, suffice would it be to
note that the post-mortem of Anamica was got conducted by Haryana
Police and vaginal swab, blood sample of Anamica was handed over to HC
Vinod PW-34, an official of Haryana Police, in a sealed condition, who in
turn handed over the same to ASI Balwan Singh. After the post-mortem,
the dead body of Anamica was handed over to her family. Thus, Delhi
Police had no occasion to access the body of Anamica and thus could not
have obtained and planted the hair sample of Anamica in the car. Further,
the ‗sealed‘ swab, samples etc. of Anamica were handed over by ASI
Balwan Singh PW-46, to Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-46, on February
16, 2012 who deposited the same in Malkhana of PS Chhawla on the same
day. HC Bharat Lal PW-15, had deposed that samples of Anamica were
received by him in the Malkhana in a sealed condition, which deposition
has not been controverted by the accused.
111. Likewise, submissions relating to planting of samples of accused in
the car is premised on the possibility of Inspector Sandeep Gupta planting
the semen of Rahul and Vinod and for which it was urged that the
testimony of PW-10 would evidence that he had cleaned the car and it is
not possible that Inspector Sandeep Gupta failed to notice the semen stains
are neither here nor there for the reason there is no evidence that Inspector
Sandeep Gupta had with him the semen of the two accused. Further, Hari
OM PW-10, owner of car, denied having washed the car between February
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 63 of 97

10, 2012 (when car was returned to him by Rahul) and February 13, 2012
(when car was seized by the police) due to non-availability of a driver and
that he had merely cleaned the car on February 11, 2012. Also, the
uncontroverted testimony of HC Bharat Lal PW-15, brings out that
although the car was lying parked in garage of PS Jafarpur due to space
constraints at PS Chhawla the keys of car as also garage of PS Jafarpur
was deposited in Malkhana of PS Chhawla and was taken out from
Malkhana after February 13, 2012 only on two occasions on February 16,
2012 and April 20, 2012 when the car was examined by CFSL Team,
firstly when semen stain exhibits and hair were lifted and on the second
occasion when the broken piece of bumper was matched. Thus ruling out
possibility of planting of semen of Rahul and Vinod in the car as also
planting of the hair of the deceased in the car. As regards the medical
examination of Vinod which was conducted on February 13, 2012,
Inspector Sandeep Gupta PW-48, has clarified in the subsequent portion of
his cross-examination that all the accused were got medically examined by
him on February 13, 2012 before producing them before the Magistrate
within 24 hours of his arrest in compliance of the directions of Supreme
Court in D.K. Basu‟s case and were again medically examined for
purposes of obtaining their samples on February 14, 2012. There is no
evidence that semen of the three accused was taken by the doctor. For
purposes of DNA their blood samples were taken.
112. In order to deal with submission relating to broken piece of bumper
of car found near the dead body of Anamica it would be most apposite to
again note the following portion of the cross-examination of Hari Om PW-
10, the owner of Indica car in question:-
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 64 of 97

        “The said car was not sent any repairs between 10.2.2012
        and 13.2.2012 as no repair was required. Its front Bumper
        had become loose which I had myself tightened.” (Emphasis
        Supplied)
113. The aforesaid deposition of Hari Om PW-10, in fact corroborates the
case of the prosecution that a portion of the bumper of car in question got
broken and was found near the dead body of Anamica. The aforesaid
deposition of Hari Om PW-10, that the front bumper of his car had become
loose and he had tightened the same clearly brings out that something was
wrong with the front bumper of his car.
114. It is true that the call details record Ex.PW-28/F of mobile number
of Rahul shows the presence of the mobile phone of Rahul in Delhi at
10.30 P.M. on February 09, 2012 whereas at the same time mobile phone
number of Anamica was present in Haryana as evident from call details
record Ex.PW-21/A of the mobile phone of Anamica. What has happened
is this. Rahul‘s mobile number is an MTNL number and whenever it is on
roaming, while making or receiving a call it is connected to BSNL
network. Whereas the BSNL network call details which were handed over
by Sandeep Chaudhary PW-22 to MTNL, which regretfully have not been
exhibited show that during the time in question Rahul‘s mobile phone was
in Jhajjar Haryana, there is a problem with the call record details generated
by MTNL for the reason the working of the servers of MTNL, as in most
government departments, is on an outdated technology.          The memory
stored in the servers of BSNL is transferred to the servers of MTNL and in
the process the data gets corrupted. At best Rahul would be entitled to the
benefit of call records pertaining to his mobile number being liable to be
ignored as incriminating evidence against him.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 65 of 97

115. Regarding absence of injuries on private parts of Anamica suffice
would it be to state that it has been held in plethora of judgments by the
Supreme Court that the absence of injuries on private parts of victim of
rape does not imply that the victim has not been raped. (See the decision
reported as 2012 (12) SCALE 506 Radhakrishna Nagesh v State of A.P.)
116. The submission pertaining to motive of the accused to commit the
crime in question is a fallacious argument inasmuch as the prosecution has
not projected the motive of the accused to commit the crime.
117. The facts would bring out that as feral beasts the three accused were
on the prowl looking for a prey. They spotted one in Anamica. The
plucked her out of the company of her friends. They had to feed their
sexual desire. After satisfying the sexual desire they brutally murdered
Anamica. They defiled her dead body evidenced by injuries No.15, 16 and
17. They heated the spanner of the car, in all probability by putting it in
the silencer of the car when the car was on, they then branded the dead
body around the right nipple and the umbilicus.
118. From the evidence on record we separately list what has been
proved against each accused. But before that would highlight that Pooja
Rawat PW-1 and Vikas PW-4, have deposed that on February 09, 2012 at
about 08.45 P.M. Anamica was kidnapped by three persons in a red
coloured Tata Indica car, which depositions have not been controverted by
the accused. Thus, it stands established that on February 09, 2012 at about
08.45 P.M. Anamica was kidnapped by three persons in a red coloured
Tata Indica car.
                            CASE AGAINST RAHUL
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 66 of 97

119. On February 09, 2012 ASI Rajinder Singh had apprehended Rahul
while he was driving the red coloured Tata Indica car bearing registration
No.DL 3C AF 4348 as he appeared to be in a perplexed condition.
Pertinently, Rahul has not disputed that he was apprehended by ASI
Rajinder Singh but has disputed the manner in which he was apprehended
by ASI Rajinder Singh. (See the suggestion: ‗It is wrong to suggest that
accused Rahul was not apprehended by me in the manner as stated above‘
given to ASI Rajender Singh PW-12, in his cross-examination by Rahul).
Rahul has not been able to make good his case that ASI Rajinder Singh
had not apprehended him in the manner as stated by him. Thus, it stands
established that on February 09, 2012 ASI Rajinder Singh had
apprehended Rahul while he was driving the red coloured Tata Indica car
bearing registration No.DL 3C AF 4348.
120. A jack, spanner and a strand of hair were found in Tata Indica car
bearing registration No.DL 3C AF 4348 being driven by Rahul. Jack was
found to be stained with blood. DNA profile generated from jack and hair
found in car and female fraction DNA obtained from vaginal swab of
Anamica was found to be female in origin and consistent with each other,
meaning thereby that the DNA of Anamica was found on the jack and hair
found in the car. The injuries found on the person of Anamica were
possible to have been caused by jack and spanner found in the car coupled
with the fact that said jack was found to be stained with blood and DNA
generated from said blood implied that Jack found in the car was used to
hit Anamica. (The accused have not disputed the correctness of the report
Ex.PW-23/A inasmuch as they have not cross-examined the author of said
report viz. Dr.S.K.Mohapatra PW-23).
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters             Page 67 of 97

121. A broken piece of bumper was found near the dead body of
Anamica, which bumper was opined to be the piece of the bumper of the
red coloured Indica car bearing registration No.DL 3C AF 4348.
122. The facts that DNA of Anamica was found on the jack and hair
found in the car coupled with the fact that the piece of the bumper of the
red coloured Tata Indica car bearing registration No.DL 3C AF 4348 was
recovered near the dead body of Anamica leaves no manner of doubt that
the red coloured Tata Indica car bearing registration No. DL 3C AF 4348
was the red coloured Tata Indica car in which Anamica was kidnapped by
three persons.
123. From the testimony of Hari Om PW-10 it is established that the car
was with Rahul from 7:45 AM from January 09, 2012 till around 10:00
AM of February 10, 2012 i.e. during the period when the crime was
committed.
124. Rahul‘s semen was detected on the seat cover of the TATA Indica
car, meaning thereby that Rahul had raped Anamica in the car.
125. Rahul‘s purse containing two ATM cards, his driving license,
photocopies of school leaving certificate and PAN card was found near the
place where Anamica‘s dead body was recovered.
126. There is enough circumstantial evidence to sustain the verdict of
guilt against Rahul.
                             CASE AGAINST RAVI
127. Against Ravi the incriminating evidence is his strand of hair
recovered from Anamica‘s dead body and DNA extracted from his blood
sample matching DNA extracted from the semen in the vaginal swab of
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 68 of 97

Anamica. It is true that even Vinod‘s DNA was extracted from the vaginal
swab, but the report Ex.PW-23/A has categorically opined that the mixed
profile so generated could have been developed by mixture of alleles
contributed by Ravi and Vinod. Notwithstanding prosecution not being
able to prove because Kuldeep PW-24 turned hostile that telephone
No.8802090923 was with Ravi, but the testimony of the police officers
show, as corroborated by his personal search memo that when he was
arrested Ravi was carrying a mobile phone which was having said number.
The prosecution was not to prove who owned the mobile number. As long
as it was proved that the mobile phone having said number was with Ravi
when he was arrested, onus was him to explain when and how he came in
possession of the phone. The call records would evidence that during the
period Anamica was removed from Delhi and her body dumped in village
Rodai the said phone was around the area of village Rodai. There is
sufficient evidence to sustain the conviction against Ravi.
                            CASE AGAINST VINOD
128. Against Vinod the incriminating evidence is the DNA profile from
the semen extracted from the vaginal swab of Anamica matching his DNA
profile and his semen being detected on the seat cover of the TATA Indica
car.   These, coupled with the fact that they were three persons who
abducted Anamica is sufficient evidence to conclusively opine against his
guilt.
129. We now turn to the issue of appropriate sentence to be imposed.
130. At the outset, we note that learned senior counsel appearing for Ravi
submitted that in cases premised on circumstantial evidence, as the present
case, death sentence ought not to be imposed by the Courts.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 69 of 97

131. The said submission is only noted to be rejected in view of the clear
enunciation of law by the Supreme Court in the judgment reported as
(2008) 15 SCC 269 Shivaji alias Dadya Shankar Alhat v. State of
Maharashtra, wherein concern was expressed by the Court on the rising
number of cases involving rape and murder of young girls and it was
pertinently observed:-
        ―27. The plea that in a case of circumstantial evidence death
        should not be awarded is without any logic. If the
        circumstantial evidence is found to be of unimpeachable
        character in establishing the guilt of the accused, that forms
        the foundation for conviction. That has nothing to do with the
        question of sentence as has been observed by this Court in
        various cases while awarding death sentence... In the
        balance sheet of such circumstances, the fact that the case
        rests on circumstantial evidence has no role to play. In fact
        in most of the cases where death sentence are awarded for
        rape and murder and the like, there is practically no scope
        for having an eye witness. They are not committed in the
        public view. But very nature of things in such cases, the
        available evidence is circumstantial evidence. If the said
        evidence has been found to be credible, cogent and
        trustworthy for the purpose of recording conviction, to treat
        that evidence as a mitigating circumstance, would amount to
        consideration of an irrelevant aspect...‖[Emphasis Supplied]
132. We may give quietus to the said issue by also taking note of a
decision of a Three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court reported as (2008)
13 SCC 767 Swamy Shraddananda (2) alias Murli Manohar Mishra v.
State of Karnataka, wherein the Court sounded a note of caution that there
is no absolute rule that death sentence cannot be imposed in a case proved
by circumstantial evidence.
133. In the decision reported as (2008) 11 SCC 113 Bantu v. State of
Uttar Pradesh, whilst upholding the death sentence imposed on the
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 70 of 97

appellant for the offence of rape, coupled with murder, the Supreme Court
cited with approval the observations of Lord Justice Denning- Master of
Rolls and J.J. Rousseau; the legendary socio-political theorist. It would be
apposite to reproduce the said observations:-
        “23. Lord Justice Denning, Master of the Rolls of the Court of
        Appeals in England said to the Royal Commission on Capital
        Punishment in 1950:
        Punishment is the way in which society expresses its
        denunciation of wrong doing; and, in order to maintain
        respect for the law, it is essential that the punishment inflicted
        for grave crimes should adequately reflect the revulsion felt
        by the great majority of citizens for them. It is a mistake to
        consider the objects of punishments as being a deterrent or
        reformative or preventive and nothing else.... The truth is that
        some crimes are so outrageous that society insists on
        adequate punishment, because the wrong doer deserves it,
        irrespective of whether it is a deterrent or not."
        In J.J. Rousseau's The Social Contract written in 1762, he
        says the following:
        Again, every rogue who criminously attacks social rights
        becomes, by his wrong, a rebel and a traitor to his fatherland.
        By contravening its laws, he ceases to be one of its citizens:
        he even wages war against it. In such circumstances, the State
        and he cannot both be saved: one or the other must perish. In
        killing the criminal, we destroy not so much a citizen as an
        enemy. The trial and judgments are proofs that he has broken
        the Social Contract, and so is no longer a member of the
        State.”[Emphasis Supplied]
134. The said observations unequivocally evince and bring to fore the
sublime philosophy underlying the imposition of sanction (punishment)
upon the wrong-doer when he is found guilty of commission of heinous
crimes that imperil and endanger the very existence of the civilized
society.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                    Page 71 of 97

135. The Court also observed that undue sympathy to impose inadequate
sentence would do incalculable harm to the justice system and undermine
the public confidence in the efficacy of law. The society could not endure
long under such serious threats and it was therefore, the duty of every court
to award proper sentence having regard to the nature of the offence and the
manner in which it was executed or committed.
136. As highlighted by us previously, the sordid facts of the present case
reveal that the victim after having been abducted in public gaze and
consequently removed from society, was ravished and murdered. The tale
of malignity was far from its conclusion as thereafter the sadistic
perpetrators grotesquely stamped the breast and the umbilical region of the
deceased by using the heated spanner.
137. At this juncture, it would not be out of place to take notice of two
decisions of the Supreme Court wherein the post crime conduct of the
accused that evidenced his disregard for the human body was factored as a
relevant circumstance, amongst others, while awarding the penalty of
death.
138. In the decision reported as (2012) 4 SCC 37 Rajendra Pralhadrao
Wasnik v. State of Maharashtra it was observed by the Court that the
accused had left the deceased in a badly injured condition in the open
fields without even clothes and the said fact reflects the most unfortunate
and abusive facet of human conduct, for which the accused was to blame
no one else than his own self. The Supreme Court took into consideration
the said conduct of the accused amongst other features of the case and
confirmed the sentence of death awarded by Courts below. The Court also
reiterated the consistent view that a balance sheet of aggravating and
mitigating circumstances was to be drawn by the Court and due weightage
was to be accorded to the said circumstances. The Court would be required
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 72 of 97

to strike a balance between the two and assess towards which side the
balance of justice tilts. It was also emphasized that the principle of
proportion between the crime and the punishment is the principle of ‗just
deserts‘ that serves as the foundation of every criminal sentence that is
justifiable.
139. Even earlier the Supreme Court in its decision reported as (1999) 9
SCC 581 Molai & Anr. v. State of Madhya Pradesh while confirming the
death sentence took into consideration the fact that by throwing the dead
body of the victim into septic tank, the accused totally disregarded the
respect for the human body.
140. The learned senior counsel drew attention of this Court to the
judgments of a two Judge Bench of the Supreme Court reported as (2013)
2 SCC 452 Sangeet v. State of Haryana and (2013) 5 SCC 546 Shankar
Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharashtra to contend that this Court may
consider awarding consecutive sentences to the appellants for the offences,
if found guilty, rather than confirming the extreme penalty of death. It was
highlighted before us that in Sangeet‟s case (supra), the Bench expressed
reservations on the practice adopted by the Courts in awarding sentences of
imprisonment wherein the possibility of release of the convict on remission
was foreclosed for a prescribed period such as 20 years or 30 years. The
learned senior counsel submitted that in view of the said observations
comprised in Sangeet‟s case (supra), the Supreme Court was pleased to
award consecutive sentences upon the appellant as an alternative to death
sentence in Khade‟s case (supra).
141. Apropos the submission canvassed by the learned senior counsel
predicated upon the observations contained in Sangeet‟s case (supra),
suffice would it be to highlight in the decision reported as (2013) 9 SCC
778 Sahib Hussain alias Sahib Jan v. State of Rajasthan the Supreme
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 73 of 97

Court has in this regard held that in light of the decision of the Larger
Bench in Swamy Shraddananda‘s case, the observation made in Sangeet‘s
case are not warranted. It was further observed that though the Division
Bench in Sangeet‘s case raised a doubt about the decision of a Three Judge
Bench in Swamy Sharaddananda‘s case, yet the same has not been referred
to a Larger Bench and would hold the field.
142. The learned senior counsel also contended that death penalty ought
not to be imposed in a case where even a single mitigating circumstance
accrues in favour of the accused. The said submission was sought to be
planked on certain observations contained in Khade‟s case (supra).
143. While adverting our consideration to the said submission, it would
be pertinent to take note of the observations of a Three Judge Bench of the
Supreme Court comprised in its decision reported as (2014) 4 SCC 292
Mahesh Dhanaji Shinde v. State of Maharashtra wherein in para 26 and 31
it was observed:-
        “26….The decision of this Court in Shankar Kisanrao
        Khade v. State of Maharashtra- (2013) 5 SCC 546 (para 52)
        has been relied upon to contend that:
                "52…To award the death sentence, the "crime
               test" has to be fully satisfied, that is, 100% and
               "criminal test" 0%, that is, no mitigating
               circumstance favouring the accused. If there is any
               circumstance favouring the accused, like lack of
               intention to commit the crime, possibility of
               reformation, young age of the accused, not a
               menace to the society, no previous track record,
               etc. the "criminal test" may favour the accused to
               avoid the capital punishment.”
                                   x      x       x
        31…All that would be necessary to say is that the Constitution
        Bench in Bachan Singh(supra) had sounded a note of caution
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 74 of 97

        against treating the aggravating and mitigating
        circumstances in separate water-tight compartments as in
        many situations it may be impossible to isolate them and both
        sets of circumstances will have to be considered to cull out the
        cumulative effect thereof. Viewed in the aforesaid context the
        observations contained in para 52 of Shankar Kisanrao
        Khade (supra) noted above, namely, 100% crime test and 0%
        criminal test may create situations which may well go beyond
        what was laid down in Bachan Singh (supra).”[Emphasis
        Supplied]
144. The said observations of the Three-Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court furnish a complete answer to the submission canvassed by the
learned senior counsel and judicial discipline obliges this Court to
respectfully follow the law authoritatively laid down by a Five-Judge
Bench of the Supreme Court in (1980) 2 SCC 684 in Bachan Singh v. State
of Punjab in light of the observations contained in Shinde‟s case (supra).
145. The recent decision delivered by a Three-Judge Bench of the
Supreme Court in Shindes‟s case (supra) also creases out the vexing
ambiguities arising in connection with the legal principles governing the
award of death sentence. The Division-Bench in Khade‟s case (supra)
highlighted cases/instances, which in the view of the Court constituted
‗departures‘, wherein the principles applied earlier were not adhered to by
the Court.      The Court in Shinde‟s case after taking note of the said
observations in Khade‟s case (supra) proceeded to clarify the position as
reproduced below:-
      “33. Though such departures may appear to give the
        sentencing jurisprudence in the country a subjective colour it
        is necessary to note that standardisation of cases for the
        purposes of imposition of sentence was disapproved
        in Bachan Singh (supra) holding that: "195…it is neither
        practicable nor desirable to imprison the sentencing
        discretion of a judge or jury in the strait-jacket of exhaustive
        and rigid standards".
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 75 of 97

        34. In this regard, the observations with regard to the
        impossibility of laying down standards to regulate the
        exercise of the very wide discretion in matters of sentencing
        made in Jagmohan Singh (supra), (Para 29 hereinabove) may
        also be usefully recalled. In fact, the absence of any discretion
        in the matter of sentencing has been the prime reason for the
        indictment      of     Section 303       Indian   Penal     Code
        in Mithu v. State of Punjab: AIR 1983 SC 473…
        35. In a recent pronouncement in Sunil Dutt Sharma v. State
        (Govt. of NCT of Delhi): 2013 (12) SCALE 473 it has been
        observed by this Court that the principles of sentencing in our
        country are fairly well settled-the difficulty is not in
        identifying such principles but lies in the application thereof.
        Such application, we may respectfully add, is a matter of
        judicial expertise and experience where judicial wisdom must
        search for an answer to the vexed question--whether the
        option of life sentence is unquestionably foreclosed? The
        unbiased and trained judicial mind free from all prejudices
        and notions is the only asset which would guide the judge to
        reach the 'truth'.”[Emphasis Supplied]
146. We would be failing not to note that in Khade‘s case (supra), the
court had analyzed the species of cases where the victim was raped and
murdered. The analysis of the various decisions shows that the deadlock
between a life sentence and a death sentence was resolved mostly by
looking at whether the offence of rape and murder was a momentary lapse
or was it pre-meditated and further whether the victim dies as a
consequence and not because any overt act by the accused.
147. The said observations of the Supreme Court are a lodestar and guide
us to charter our course through the thickets of the legal conundrum posed
before us.
148. We look to current thinking and legislative trends abroad with
reference to violent sexual crimes against women with not only rape being
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                   Page 76 of 97

the wrong act but followed by violent death and even a continued wrong in
the form of violence against the dead body of the victim. It is obvious that
such kinds of crimes would be psychopathic crimes.
149. Psychopathic personality disorder occupies a position at the heart of
both forensic psychiatry and psychiatric criminal jurisprudence. This is
because psychopaths lie at the intersection between the so-called ‗mad‘
and ‗bad‘- that is, between those who clearly warrant treatment (the
seriously mentally ill) and those who should properly receive punishment.
Psychopaths are thought to be peculiarly and inherently untouched by
therapeutic or rehabilitative interventions - two of the commonly accepted
diagnostic criteria for psychopathic personality disorder being a failure to
learn from experience and a failure to show remorse. Psychopathy
comprises forms of egotism, immaturity, aggressiveness, low frustration
tolerance and inability to learn from experience that places psychopathsat
high risk of clashing with any community that depends upon co-operation
and individual responsibility of its members for its continued existence.
150. The hallmark of psychopathy is abnormal or deficient emotional
responding. Cleckley‘s (1955) classic diagnostic criteria for psychopathy
include absence of nervousness, egocentricity, lack of remorse or shame,
incapacity for love and general poverty in major affective reactions. There
exists in them an abnormality in the processing of emotional stimuli.
Psychopaths are persons with a personality disorder which is characterised
solely or principally by abnormally aggressive or seriously irresponsible
conduct.
151. The standard tool psychiatrists use for diagnosing psychopathy is the
Hare‘s ‗Psychopathy Checklist – Revised‘ (PCL-R). This test is used as
evidence of psychopathy in accused persons in courts of law in countries
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 77 of 97

like USA. The PCL-R consists of 20 criteria. Traditionally these criteria
are divided into two subsets or ‗factors‘. Factor one comprises emotional
deficiencies, such as lack of guilt and lack of empathy. Factor two is
concerned with lifestyle issues such as impulsivity and parasitic lifestyle.
‗Primary psychopaths‘ score highly on factor one criteria and ‗secondary
psychopaths‘ have high factor two scores.
PSYCHOPATHS AND CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY – ‘mad’ or
‘bad’
152. It is believed that crimes of sexual psychopaths are motivated by
sexual desires and impulses to commit violent acts that supposedly are
difficult to control. This assumption is sometimes conflated with the idea
that persons with such desires and impulses suffer from psychopathy or
sociopathy, a deep-seated personality disorder or condition which can
manifest as immoral or ‗evil‘ behaviour. Hence the long-standing
controversy over whether persons so afflicted are ‗mad‘ or ‗bad‘. The
psychiatric profession may be divided about the status of psychopathy and
matters are further complicated by the absence of any generally agreed
psychiatric definition of mental disorder, however most criminal justice
systems understand that psychopathy is not a genuine disorder and that
psychopaths are simply ‗bad‘ not ‗mad‘. While legal definitions of disorder
should be informed by relevant psychiatric expertise, it is vital that such
definitions are also appropriate to the context of criminal responsibility.
When psychiatrists frame definitions of disorder they often have ideas in
mind that are not relevant to criminal responsibility. Many jurisdictions
justify excluding psychopathy from mental non-responsibility on the basis
that it was merely a volitional disorder which impairs (but does not
eliminate) self-control. Only a cognitive disorder, rendering the individual
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 78 of 97

unable ‗to appreciate the nature and wrongfulness of criminal conduct‘ (as
is the law in India) could provide grounds for a complete excuse.
153. It is the dominant view among psychiatrists and the law that
psychopathy should not mitigate or remove criminal responsibility. Robert
Hare a leading researcher in psychopathy notes that in most jurisdictions
psychopathy is considered to be an aggravating rather than a mitigating
factor in determining criminal responsibility. In line with this stance
researches suggest that a diagnosis of psychopathy may result in harsher
judicial sentencing or may even be used to justify imposition of the death
penalty rather than a life sentence. Psychopathy is said to aggravate rather
than mitigate responsibility because of the diagnostic features and clinical
description of psychopathy. Psychopaths are callous, manipulative,
deceitful, indifferent to the rights of others and lacking in empathy and
remorse. A diagnosis of psychopathy looks to be evidence not of
impairment but of the offender‘s lack of any redeeming qualities that the
court could take into account. A number of recent researches and papers in
psychiatry and law have argued that the impairments observed in
psychopathy should not be considered to be exculpating.
DEALING WITH PSYCHOPATHS - COMMUNITY PROTECTION
APPROACH
154. A key aspect of sexual psychopathy is that it is often believed to be
virtually untreatable (at best ‗burning out‘ with old age) and thus requires
long-term confinement or other means of incapacitation. The approach of
most countries to control criminal psychopaths has been predicated on the
notion that they constitute a particularly dangerous class of offenders. This
is based on the combination to commit grave harm i.e physical,
psychological and moral against a vulnerable segment of population
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 79 of 97

particularly women and children and a high probability of repeating crimes
unless special controls are exercised. The notion of dangerousness as
propensity plus probability or risk underlies special legislations for sex
offenders in countries like USA, UK and Canada. The legislations of these
countries includes not only special measures for those offenders at the high
end of the spectrum of risk (who are variously categorized as criminal
sexual psychopaths, sexually dangerous persons, dangerous sexual
offenders, dangerous offenders, sexually violent predators, high-risk
offenders, or long-term offenders), but also ensure measures such as
registration and notification covering all or most persons who have been
convicted of a sexual offence and are capable or repeating their crimes in
future. The community protection model suggests that the best way to deal
with the risk posed by sex offenders is through the use of a combination of
social controls, both during incarceration and after release into the
community. Such mechanisms of risk management include: longer
sentences and detention until warrant expiry date, intensive community
supervision orders restricting freedom of movement and association,
community notification of the release of sex offenders, sex offender
registration, legislatively mandated chemical castration (in the USA), and
civil and criminal commitment allowing for indeterminate confinement
based on a designation of extreme dangerousness and severe personality
disorder. In countries like USA and Canada the clinical models of
dangerousness emphasizing diagnosis and treatment of psychopathology
have been supplanted by approaches emphasizing actuarial risk assessment
and risk management. Also concerns with fundamental justice issues, such
as due process, proportionality, and privacy rights, have given way to
community protection concerns. There is an effort to enact and enforce
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 80 of 97

public-safety measures that seek to prevent crime by ‗regulating‘ criminal
defendants.
RATIONALE FOR PUNISHMENT- PREVENTION/PUNISHMENT
DISTINCTION - The Jurisprudence of Prevention
155. The goals of punishment are retaliation, recognition of victim status,
confirmation of societal values, victim security, and societal security. The
theories of the purposes and justifications of punishment divide broadly
into the retributive and the utilitarian.          While utilitarian theories are
forward looking and focused on the beneficial consequences for society
and the individual that may be brought about by punishment, retributivist
or desert theories are fundamentally backward looking with focus on the
agent and their relation to the wrongful act.
156. The utilitarian theories are concerned with deterrence and protection
of the community. The ultilitarian theory justifies the need to protect
society against psychopathic offenders since they are dangerous and
calculated predators and commit significantly more crimes which are
violent and aggressive. Their propensity for violent crimes is higher so are
their chances of repeating crimes making them a strong and continuing
threat to society.       Psychopathy is a significant predictor of violent
recidivism. Thus psychopathy is an aggravating rather than mitigating
factor in sentencing and results in harsh judicial sentencing or has even be
used to justify imposition of death penalty rather than life sentence.
157. The society considers sexual psychopaths also referred to as sexual
predators as mentally or at least biologically stunted individuals who act
upon     uncontrollable     urges,    and   therefore   present    a  continuing,
unmanageable and amorphous threat as instinct-driven and dangerous
animals. Sexual psychopaths are set apart not only from the general
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                     Page 81 of 97

population but even from other criminals. While the public empathizes
with the victims and their families, its fear of ‗sexual predators‘ stems from
the difficulty of detecting them, concern about their re-offending and the
perceived impossibility of curing them. As a consequence of the
conceptualization of sexual offenders as ‗predators‘, desert-based
sentencing becomes largely irrelevant. Even though retributory ideals and
the proportionality principle are thought to dominate most modern
sentencing regimes, punishment does not play a large part in the present
discourse over what to do with sexual offenders. Instead incapacitation is
at the heart of the presumed solution because sexual psychopaths are
perceived as a persistent threat. While incapacitation implies primarily
long-term imprisonment or indeterminate civil commitment, often
combined with ineffective or almost non-existent treatment programs,
proposals to mandate biological anchor chemical castration stem from the
same desire to prevent recidivism.
158. Criminal justice systems have rejected the notion that detention is
necessarily punitive and have adopted the view that liberty restrictions
based on predictions of future dangerousness may fall on the regulatory
side of the dichotomy between prevention and punishment.                Recent
legislative developments with respect to the disposition of sexual offenders
have been driven by the desire to guarantee public safety. They have
shifted the balance ‗away from the adjudication of demonstrated
blameworthiness and due process in favour of the prediction of future
dangerousness and crime control. They have shifted the balance away from
the adjudication of demonstrated blameworthiness and due process in
favour of the prediction of future dangerousness and crime control being
essentially ‗preventive‘ rather than ‗punitive‘.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 82 of 97

DANGEROUS OFFENDER LEGISLATIONS IN USA, CANADA &
UK–EXECUTING THE COMMUNITY PROTECTION APPROACH
                                        USA
159. In the USA comprehensive community protection measures as a
solution to the problems posed by predatory sex offenders came into being
with the enactment of Washington’s Community Protection Act in
1990. This legislation was a reaction to several high-profile sexual
assaults, most notably the brutal sexual assault in 1989 of a seven-year-old
boy by Earl Shriner, a violent and sadistic pedophilic offender who had
completed his sentence for a previous brutal assault but was deemed
ineligible for commitment under state mental health laws despite a history
of mental disorder. The Community Protection Act was conceived of as a
set of measures (notably sex offender registration, community notification,
and civil commitment of sexually violent predators) that couldprevent
predatory sexual assaults.Legislations enabling the civil commitment of
persons designated as sexually violent predators has since been enacted in
most states in USA. Sex offender registries (SORs) have been enacted,
these are databases of information about persons convicted of sex offences
who have received probation or completed the incarceration portion of
their sentence and now reside in the community. SORs can also include
patients released into the community after being found criminally insane
for a sex offense and committed to a psychiatric hospital.SORs are
predicated on the belief that sex offenders, more than other kinds of
offenders, have an enduring disposition to offend and therefore should
have their rights to privacy and freedom of movement severely limited in
the interests of public safety.The assumptions are that convicted sex
offenders released into the community will be under police supervision and
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 83 of 97

that current reliable information on their whereabouts and life
circumstances will act both as a deterrent for the offender and as an
investigative tool for the police to help them identify and apprehend
previously convicted persons who are suspected of new sexual offenses.
SORs typically require individuals to register with the local police, provide
personal details, and report any changes in the information presented.
Personal details may include information such as the offender‘s photo,
description, date of birth, aliases, offense type(s), and home address.
Registrants are required to report to the local authorities at designated time
intervals to update their information. For most jurisdictions, this occurs
annually, although some high-risk offenders in the United States are
required to register every few months. Any change in residence or plans
for travel requires the registrant to alert authorities of the change within a
given period of time.In 1994, the movement to register offenders in the
United States became national with the enactment of the Jacob Wetterling
Crimes against Children and Sexually Violent Offender Registration
Act (JWA). State sex offender registries are premised on the claim that sex
offenders require special monitoring because of their supposed enduring
propensity to engage repeatedly in sex offenses.In 1996, the Pam Lychner
Sexual Offender Tracking and Identification Act was passed as an
amendment to the JWA. This Act required lifetime registration for
offenders convicted of one or more sexual offenses involving penetration
of a victim below the age of twelve, whether or not force or threat was
used, or any penetrative sex act involving the use of force or threat against
persons over the age of twelve. The Lychner Act also mandated the FBI to
create, within three years, a national sex offender registry (NSOR) that
would link the registries of individual states and enable the tracking of sex
offenders across state lines. In 2005, the Dru Sjodin National Sex
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                  Page 84 of 97

Offender Public Database Act, or ‗Dru‘s Law‘, was enacted which
mandated the United States Department of Justice to create a database of
registrants, accessible to the public via the Internet, which would allow
users to specify a search radius that crosses state lines.In 2006, the United
States Congress repealed the Jacob Wetterling Act and replaced it with the
Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act.The Walsh Act requires
that the dangerousness of offenders be ranked using a three-tier system.
Those considered most dangerous in terms of such factors as the likelihood
of their reoffending, the gravity of their offenses, and the age of their
victims are designated Tier Three and required to register for life; those
deemed Tier Two, or somewhat more dangerous than those in Tier One,
are required to register for twenty- five years; and those deemed Tier One,
or least dangerous in terms of the criteria specified in the legislation, are
required to register for fifteen years. There are no provisions for a petition
for change of tier or removal from the registry. Other components of the
Act include a requirement for the offender to register no more than three
days after custodial release, registration of juveniles convicted of
aggravated sexual assault, and the collection of DNA samples. Information
on all sex offenders must be distributed to local law enforcement agents
where the offender lives, works, or attends school.
160. Community notification - In USA there some states have a formal
mechanism to notify the community about the presence of sex offenders.
This theme of community members‘ ‗right to know‘ about the presence of
sex offenders in their neighborhoods was central in the spread of this type
of legislation across the United States. In 1996, a federal community
notification provision called Megan’s Law (the Child Sexual Abuse
Registry Act) was signed by President Clinton. The Megan‘s Law
amendment to the JWA requires all states to ‗release relevant information‘
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 85 of 97

necessary to protect the public and provides penalties for all states failing
to comply within three years with the new notification requirement, in the
form of a ten percent reduction in federal law enforcement funds. Courts
have generally upheld notification laws on the basis that they are not
intended to punish sex offenders but rather are regulatory measures
designed to protect the public.
161. Sexually Violent Predator (SVP) Statutes The SVP designation is
intended as a measure for the ‗small but extremely dangerous group‘ of
violent sex offenders considered highly likely to commit further serious
personal injury offenses after being released fromprison following
completion of their sentences. An SVP application can also be used for
persons meeting the statutory criteria who have been released from a
psychiatric hospital on the basis that they do not meet the criteria for
hospitalization—that is, a diagnosis of active mental disorder and an
assessment of imminent dangerousness. These statutes, by using the terms
‗personality disorder‘ and ‗mental abnormality‘, rather than ‗mental
disorder‘, primarily target individuals who (however aberrant and
dangerous), did not meet the criteria for involuntary hospitalization under
civil mental health law. The constitutionality of such statutes have been
upheld on the ground that the legislation was civil and not criminal in
nature, since its manifest intention was not to punish the convict for his
condition, but rather to protect the public by preventing him from
committing sexual offenses.
162. Legislation Providing for the Chemical Castration of Sex
Offenders as a Condition of Probation or Parole In contrast with
Europe, there has been a great reluctance in both the United States and
Canada to allow surgical castration to be used for sex offenders, mainly
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 86 of 97

because the permanence of such a procedure is seen by many medical
doctors to pose ethical problems. Currently, chemical castration using
antiandrogens (often combined with cognitive behavioral relapse
prevention therapy) is frequently used in sexoffender treatment.
Antiandrogens (usually a synthetic progesterone such as Depo-Provera or a
gonadotropic releasing hormone such as Luprolide) reduce serum
testosterone levels in males with the aim of reducing their sex drive. The
concern that many sex offenders are irredeemably dangerous and can
neither be deterred by fixed prison sentences nor reliably cured by
psychotherapies and behavioral therapies alone has led to mandatory
antiandrogen treatment as a probation or parole condition in the interest
of community protection. Antiandrogen treatment is intended to
complement community risk-reduction methods, such as registration and
notification, and perhaps be used in cases where post-sentence civil
commitment is not deemed to be appropriate.In the United States, there has
been, since the 1980s, a shift in jurisprudence away from an emphasis on
due process to an emphasis on crime control.
                                     CANADA
163. In Canada the Dangerous Sexual Offender (DSO) legislation was
applied to offenders convicted of a serious personal injury offense who
manifested a pattern of persistent aggressive behaviour or an inability to
control their sexual impulses. The status of dangerous offender, once
applied, remains in force for life and a released dangerous offender is
subject to lifetime parole.In 1994, the Federal Government enacted Bill C-
126 to enable judges to issue life-long probation orders prohibiting sex
offenders from frequenting playgrounds and other areas where children
might be present. More significant in terms of the development of a
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters              Page 87 of 97

Canadian community protection model was the application of the principle
of ‗preventative justice‘ in § 810 of the Criminal Code, which allowed the
court to issue an order (variously referred to as a peace bond, judicial
restraint, or recognizance order) placing restrictions on a person‘s freedom
of movement and associations, his place of residence, and his access to
firearms or alcohol. A common condition is that a particular person not
contact others he or she was deemed to be at risk of harming and not
frequent places where such harm was deemed likely to occur. A peace
bond under § 810 is intended to be preventive, not punitive. It can be
applied both to someone who has already been penalized after being
convicted of an offense and to someone who has not been convicted of an
offense, if there is evidence suggesting substantial risk that he might do
so.In September 1996, the federal government announced the introduction
of Bill C-55, the High-Risk Offenders Initiative, to amend the existing
Dangerous offender (DO) legislation in three ways: removal of judicial
discretion to combine a DO designation with a determinate sentence;
assessment of offenders considered for a DO designation by a multi-
disciplinary team rather than experts for the prosecution and defense; and
extension of initial eligibility for parole from three to seven years. In
addition, a new long-term offender (LTO) designation was created. This
allowed the courts, using the same criteria for a DO designation, to issue
(in addition to the regular sentence) a probation order of up to ten years to
individuals at high risk to reoffend who did not require indeterminate
confinement as a DO because their risk of reoffense could be managed in a
community setting. An offender who does not comply with the terms of an
LTO supervision order is liable to receive a prison term of up to ten years.
In contrast with the United States, where sex offender registries preceded
the development of formal provisions for community notification, various
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 88 of 97

Canadian provinces set up community notification systems without setting
up a registry. Some police officials and victims‘ groups argued that the
community has the right to know such information, especially when
corrections officials have identified a released sex offender as likely to
reoffend. In 2000, the Government of Ontario acted on its own to introduce
‗Bill 31, An Act, in memory of Christopher Stephenson, to establish and
maintain a registry of sex offenders to protect children and communities.‘
Under § 3 of Christopher‘s Law (the sex offender registry provision),
persons resident in Ontario who have been convicted (or found not guilty
by reason of mental disorder) of specified sex offenses are required to
provide information about themselves to the police for the purpose of
registration. This information includes the person‘s name, birth date, and
address, and must be provided within fifteen days of release from a prison
or psychiatric hospital, fifteen days before coming or ceasing to be a
resident of Ontario, and within fifteen days of a change of address. The
federal Sex Offender Information Registration Act(SOIRA) creating a
national sex offender registry under the control of the RCMP was finally
passed in 2004.The latest is a legislation in 2005 mandating a hearing to
consider the imposition of a DO designation following a third conviction
for one or more of a designated list of offenses. Under the terms of this
legislation, the onus is on the offender to give evidence as to why a DO
designation should not be imposed and an LTO designation or a
determinate sentence imposed instead. The legislation was passed by the
Canadian Senate in the fall of 2007. Under the same legislation, the term of
a § 810 order was increased from one year to two.
164. Thus in countries like USA and Canada the dangerousness of sex
offenders has been attempted to be managed through community
protection legislative initiatives; treatment, including cognitive behavioral
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 89 of 97

therapy and pharmacotherapy, such as the use of antiandrogens; or
restorative justice alternatives, such as Circles of Support and
Accountability (CoSA). Special legislation providing indeterminate
sentences for criminal sexual psychopaths, dangerous sexual offenders,
and dangerous offenders was intended to incapacitate and treat offenders
deemed to be unable to control their impulses to offend sexually and/or
violently.
                              UNITED KINGDOM
165. Sex Offender Act 1997 required offenders who have committed
sexual offenses against children to register with police authorities
throughout the United Kingdom. The act further required these offenders
to notify the police of a change of address or name. The Sexual Offences
Act 2003 (like the Sex Offenders Act 1997, which it replaced) aims at
protecting society from sexual offenders, provides that persons are
required to notify their local police force of their name, address and other
details (and any changes to those details) if, in respect of certain sexual
offences, they are: convicted of the offence; or found not guilty of the
offence by reason of insanity; or found to be under a disability and to have
done the act he or she is charged with; or (in England, Wales or Northern
Ireland) cautioned for the offence
166. The details are recorded by the police on a ‗register‘, and this assists
the police in monitoring the whereabouts of any sex offenders living in
their community. The notification requirement for sex offenders is not a
‗sentence‘ imposed by the courts and, therefore, does not attract a
rehabilitation period. The length of the notification period depends on
whether the person was cautioned or convicted for the offence and any
term of imprisonment to which the person was sentenced.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                Page 90 of 97

167. Under this Act a court may make a Sexual offences prevention
orders (SOPO) in certain cases where a person falls within the categories
above and the person's behaviour since the relevant date makes it
necessary to make an order to protect the public (or a specific member of
the public) from serious sexual harm from the offender. As with
notification orders, the police can also apply for a SOPO to be made. A
SOPO contains specific prohibitions designed to protect the public from
serious sexual harm. It remains in effect for the period specified in the
order. A SOPO will be in force for a period of not less than 5 years. Where
a person is already subject to the notification requirements of the Sex
Offenders Register, the notification period is extended until such time as
the SOPO ceases (even if the notification period would have ceased while
the SOPO was in force). Where a SOPO is made in respect of a person
who is not already subject to any notification requirements, that person
will become subject to the notification requirements.
168. The Mental Health Act 1983( now amended by the Mental Health
Act, 2007) in section 1(2) (pre amendment) defined psychopathic disorder
as:
        „psychopathic disorder‟ means a persistent disorder or
        disability of mind (whether or not including significant
        impairment of intelligence) which results in abnormally
        aggressive or seriously irresponsible conduct on the part of
        the person concerned”.
169. Ever since ‗psychopathic disorder‘ was introduced by the Mental
Health Act 1959 as a category of mental disorder, some doctors and
lawyers have harboured doubts about its proper status whilst others have
regarded it as an authentic disorder which can in some cases be treated.
The Mental Health Act 1983 sought to restrict the making of hospital
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 91 of 97

orders upon psychopathic offenders to those cases in which the court is
satisfied that the offender's condition is ‗treatable‘.
170. The Crime (Sentences) Act 1997 superficially adjusts the balance
between psychopaths and society in order better to protect members of the
public.The introduction of the ‗hospital and limitation direction‘ under
section 46 of the Crime (Sentences) Act 1997, amending section 45 of the
Mental Health Act 1983, allows courts to sentence offenders suffering
from psychopathic disorder to a period of imprisonment, whilst directing
that they be admitted to hospital for treatment. In short, the ‗hospital
direction‘ gives the courts the power (in cases where the sentence is not
fixed by law) to impose a sentence of imprisonment and yet direct that the
offender be sent to hospital forthwith. The ‗limitation direction‘ constrains
the powers of the Responsible Medical Officer (RMO) and places the
preponderance of control with the Secretary of State (as set out in section
41 of the Mental Health Act 1983). Before making the hospital and
limitation direction certain technical conditions must be fulfilled. In
particular, two registered medical practitioners (they are not required to be
forensic psychiatrists, general psychiatrists, or even section 12(2)
‗approved‘) must give oral or written evidence:
        “(a) that the offender is suffering from psychopathic disorder
        (b) that the mental disorder from which the offender is
        suffering is of a nature or degree which makes it appropriate
        for him to be detained in a hospital for medical treatment:
        and
        (c) that such treatment is likely to alleviate or prevent a
        deterioration of his condition.”
171. Notably, these are also the standard admission criteria for a hospital
order. Section 45A(4) also requires the attendance of one of the medical
practitioners to give evidence orally (mirroring the requirement for a
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 92 of 97

restriction order with a hospital order). Once in hospital, the offender will
be dealt with as if subject to a section 47/49 order (that is, as a sentenced
prisoner transferred to hospital but subject to a restriction direction).
Section 45B(2) makes it plain that hospital and limitation directions are to
have the same effect as transfer and restriction directions respectively.
Thus, after admission, ‗hospital and limitation‘ direction patients are to be
treated not as hospital order patients but as if they had been transferred
from prison during a sentence of imprisonment. In turn, this means that
they may either serve their entire sentence in hospital, where the RMO is
satisfied that they continue to benefit from treatment, or, on the
recommendation of the RMO, they may be transferred to prison (under HO
warrant section 50(1) of the Mental Health Act 1983) to finish their
sentence. Hospital direction patients will also be in a curious position by
virtue of their right to have their cases reviewed by the Mental Health
Review Tribunal (MHRT). The tribunal may decide that they would
ordinarily be entitled to be conditionally discharged (were they not also on
a concurrent sentence of imprisonment) but that, given such ‗discharge‘
would, in their particular circumstances, imply going to prison (without
comprehensive mental health facilities) rather than to the community (with
such facilities) the tribunal may nonetheless recommend that the offender
continue to be detained in hospital (even though not needing hospital
treatment). If the tribunal does not so recommend, the hospital direction
patient will be transferred back to prison (with whatever detrimental
consequences that may entail).
172. To make a distillate, the literature on the subject guides us that sex
offenders can be classified as criminal sexual psychopaths who are least
dangerous and who would be the peeping Tom voyagers or those who
evince exhibitionism.         The next category would comprise sexually
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                 Page 93 of 97

dangerous persons and in this category would fall those who commit
violent rape with brutality. They may not intend to cause the death of the
victim, but death results from the brutality inflicted. The third category
which is the most dangerous to the society, would be the dangerous and
violent sexual predators and offenders who lack empathy and remorse.
The first category would be depraved, the second would be heinous and the
last would be horrible. The first category does not inflict any physical pain
on the victim. The second category, while perpetrating the crime cause
grotesque suffering in the victim.          The last category causes not only
grotesque suffering in the victim but even defiles the victim after the
crime. The third category is the extreme form of sadomasochism. Society
has to be protected from such sexually violent, dangerous predator sexual
offender. The dominant view is that psychopathy, far from mitigating
criminal responsibility is considered to be an aggravating factor.
Protection of the society from psychopathic offenders who are calculated
predators has to be given primacy. Legislations world over for brutal
assaults are aimed at insuring that sexual predators and specially if they are
of the violent kind, are far removed from society - to protect the society, to
the extent that they be kept in detention till death or till age overtakes them
and incapacitate them. Experts draw a distinction between criminal sexual
psychopaths and dangerous sexual offenders, the latter being considered a
greater threat to society.
173. Societies may do their best, there will still remain, after all has been
said and done, one problem that has to be faced. One may minimise the
difficulty every way, and indeed it is everybody‘s duty to do so, but no
amount of hopefulness can make us blink the fact that when all has been
done and every chance has been offered, there will still remain a residuum
of men and women who have, whether from heredity or custom or
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters                   Page 94 of 97

hopeless demoralization, become reprobates.        The science of humans
guides that some persistent habits tend to convert a human, from a being
with freedom of action and will, into a mere automation. There are some
cases which emerge which seem to confirm that somewhat dreadful
verdict, by which a man appears to be a lost soul, to be put on the other
side of the earth : grave. There are humans so incorrigibly lazy that no
inducement that you can offer will tempt them to work; so eaten up by vice
that virtue is abhorrent to them, and so inveterately dishonest that theft is
to them a master passion. Such a human being has reached a stage where
there is perhaps left only one course that can be rationally pursued.
Sorrowfully, but remorselessly, it must be recognized that this human has
become lunatic, morally demented, incapable of self-government, and that
upon him therefore, must be passed the sentence of permanent seclusion
from a world in which he is not fit to be at large. Indeed, it would be a
crime against the society to allow those who are so inveterately depraved
the freedom to wander, in fact their fellows, prey upon society, and to
multiply their kind. Whatever else society may do, and suffer to be done,
this thing it ought not to allow, any more than it should allow the free
perambulation of a mad law.
174. In India, taking cognizance that some violent sexual offenders
believe that every woman on the street belongs to their league and hence
was available to satisfy the lust, the Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
substituted Section 376A in the Penal Code with effect from February 03,
2013, prescribing that whoever commits an offence punishable under sub-
Section 1 or sub-Section 2 of Section 376 and in the course of such
commission inflicts an injury which causes the death of the woman or
causes the woman to be in an persistent vegetative state shall be punished
with vigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 20
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 95 of 97

years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean
imprisonment for the remainder of that person‘s natural life, or with death.
Of course, the latter to be imposed in the rarest of rare case keeping in
view the reasoning in Bachhan Singh‘s case (supra).
175. We refer back to the first three paragraphs of our decision which
brings out that the three accused moved as trained blood hounds, picking
out a scent. They got one when they saw Pooja, Sangeeta, Saraswati and
Anamica. So swift and furtive were their movements that the other three
girls could hardly react. It was not as if the three accused saw a lonely
woman on the street and the evil in them overtook the good in them. It is
not that they acted upon a sudden impulse. They were predators moving
on the streets and were looking for a prey. The three snatched Anamica
from the society. Their hunter‘s mind was hard and unyielding. The
predominant idea of finding a victim to rape and then kill her had taken
such complete possession of their mind that there was no room for any
emotion.      Satisfying their lust and executing their design to kill the
helpless Anamica, the record which they left upon her dead body was a
sign : this is not a common rape followed by murder. It is a whimsical and
bizarre crime, conceits of which kind are not common in the annals of
crime. After raping unfortunate Anamica, they battered her to death. They
then defiled her body. Their acts revealed the intention to carry out a
crime for the excitement of a criminal act. From the injuries caused to
Anamica which led to her death it is apparent that the duration of
Anamica‘s physical suffering was prolonged, it is apparent that the three
accused intended to traumatize the victim emotionally, maximizing terror
through humiliation, all for experiencing pleasure of the criminal action
and the pain and suffering of Anamica and benefit from the excitement of
the criminal act.
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 96 of 97

176. The legislative response to such kind of crime with effect from
February 03, 2013 cannot be applied in the instant case because the crime
was committed prior to the law being amended. But we cannot ignore that
in a rarest of rare case where the crime and the criminal test are satisfied,
sentence of death can be inflicted for a violent rape followed by murder
and specially when the accused have acted as predators, have snatched a
member of the society from the society to commit the crime. Having
committed the crime the predators have defiled the body of the victim.
Society has to be protected. It cannot be forgotten that punishment is a
moral sanction by the society, not merely a penalty such as a parking fine,
which may be imposed without the moral weight of a finding of criminal
responsibility.
177. The three criminal appeals filed by Rahul, Vinod and Ravi are
dismissed. The death reference is answered by affirming the sentence of
death imposed upon the three for the offence punishable under Section 302
IPC. The sentences for the other offences are also affirmed.
                                                   (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                                         JUDGE
                                                     (MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                         JUDGE
AUGUST 26, 2014
mamta
 Death Sentence Reference No.1/2014 & conn.matters               Page 97 of 97


