*     IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                  Judgment Reserved on: December 10, 2014
%                                 Judgment Delivered on: December 24, 2014
+                                 CRL.A.1685/2014
      STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                                ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:    Ms.Aashaa Tiwari, APP
                                       Insp.J.S.Mehta, SHO and SI Sachin
                                       Kumar, PS Karawal Nagar
                                       versus
      PARWATI @ KANTA & ORS.                              ..... Respondents
                    Represented by: Mr.Shailender Dahiya, Advocate with
                                       Mr.Pradeep Ahlawat, Advocate
                                  CRL.A.1123/2014
      KAMLESH                                             ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:    Mr.Deepak Anand, Advocate with
                                       Ms.Hemlata Rawat and Mr.Sujit
                                       Kumar Singh, Advocates for R-1, R-2
                                       and R-3
                                       Ms.Aashaa Tiwari, APP for R-4
                                       Insp.J.S.Mehta, SHO and SI Sachin
                                       Kumar, PS Karawal Nagar
                                       versus
      SANJAY & ORS.                                       ..... Respondents
                    Represented by:    Mr.Shailender Dahiya, Advocate with
                                       Mr.Pradeep Ahlawat, Advocate
                                  CRL.A.1133/2014
      PARWATI @ KANTA                                     ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:     Mr.Shailender Dahiya, Advocate
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                 Page 1 of 17

                                      with Mr.Pradeep Ahlawat, Advocate
                                      versus
      STATE                                       ..... Respondent
                    Represented by:   Ms.Aashaa Tiwari, APP
                                      Insp.J.S.Mehta, SHO and SI Sachin
                                      Kumar, PS Karawal Nagar
                                  CRL.A.1135/2014
      JEEPU @ DEEPU                               ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:   Mr.Shailender Dahiya, Advocate with
                                      Mr.Pradeep Ahlawat, Advocate
                                      versus
      STATE                                       ..... Respondent
                    Represented by:   Ms.Aashaa Tiwari, APP
                                      Insp.J.S.Mehta, SHO and SI Sachin
                                      Kumar, PS Karawal Nagar
                                  CRL.A.1416/2014
      STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                                ..... Appellant
                    Represented by:   Ms.Aashaa Tiwari, APP
                                      Insp.J.S.Mehta, SHO and SI Sachin
                                      Kumar, PS Karawal Nagar
                                      versus
      PARWATI @ KANTA & ORS.                              ..... Respondents
                    Represented by: Mr.Shailender Dahiya, Advocate with
                                      Mr.Pradeep Ahlawat, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PRADEEP NANDRAJOG
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MUKTA GUPTA
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                 Page 2 of 17

PRADEEP NANDRAJOG, J.
1.     Jeepu, her sister Parwati @ Kanta, Parwati’s son Jitender @ Kallu and
Parwati’s brothers-in-law Sanjay and Dhanpal @ Dhane were charged for
having entered into a criminal conspiracy to murder Sandeep and to have
given effect to the conspiracy by murdering Sandeep in the intervening night
of June 04, 2010 and June 05, 2010, at around 12 midnight to 1:00 hours.
Vide judgment dated May 28, 2014, Sanjay, Dhanpal and Jitender have been
acquitted of both charges framed against them. Parwati and Jeepu have been
acquitted of the charge of entering into a criminal conspiracy but have been
convicted for the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder
punishable under Section 304-II/34 IPC for the death of Sandeep and vide
order on sentence dated May 31, 2014, the two have been sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for eight years and pay fine in sum of
`15,000/- and in default of payment of fine to undergo simple imprisonment
for two months.
2.     Jeepu and her sister Parwati challenge their conviction and the
sentence imposed as a consequence thereof.         Jeepu is the appellant of
Crl.A.No.1135/2014.       Parwati is the appellant of Crl.A.No.1133/2014.
Kamlesh, the mother of Sandeep, is aggrieved by the fact that Sanjay,
Dhanpal and Jitender have been acquitted. She has exercised her right under
the proviso to Section 372 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, as a
victim    of   the    crime,      by filing   Crl.A.No.1123/2014.            Vide
Crl.A.No.1416/2014 the State seeks enhancement of the sentence imposed
upon Parwati and Jeepu, praying that the maximum sentence for the offence
punishable under Section 304-II IPC i.e. ten years’ imprisonment should be
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                Page 3 of 17

imposed     upon    them.       Obtaining  leave  to   appeal   resulting      in
Crl.A.No.1685/2014 being registered, the State seeks conviction of all five
accused for the offence of entering into a criminal conspiracy to murder
Sandeep and for the offence of murdering Sandeep.
3.     In a nut shell, case of the prosecution was that Parwati and Sandeep
were in illicit relationship with each other. Parwati was a widow. Their
relationship was disliked by the other accused and for sometime a dispute
was simmering between Parwati and Sandeep regarding custody of some
papers.   The five accused entered into a conspiracy to kill him.             The
contours of the conspiracy being that Parwati would entice Sandeep to her
house and make him drunk so that the other accused could burn him with
acid. Pursuant to the conspiracy, Parwati enticed Sandeep to her house in
the night of June 04, 2010 and served him alcohol and made him drunk.
Thereafter the three male and the other female conspirators took over.
Sanjay and Dhane pinned down Sandeep. Kallu and Jeepu threw acid on
him and as a result he sustained acid burn injuries which resulted in his
death on September 24, 2010 i.e. after 3 months and 20 days of the incident.
4.     SI Jogender Singh PW-8, working as an ASI on June 04, 2010, as
deposed to by him was the Duty Officer at PS Karawal Nagar. He recorded
DD No.33A, Ex.PW-8/A when the wireless operator from the police control
room informed him that through mobile number 9868672834 an informant
had informed that acid had been poured on a boy at house No.B-136, Rama
Garden, Gali No.4, Karawal Nagar. He entrusted a copy thereof to SI
Ashwani PW-20 who, along with Ct.Vikas PW-21 reached the place of the
incident and learnt that the injured had been removed to GTB Hospital.
They reached the hospital and found Sandeep admitted with acid burn
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                Page 4 of 17

injuries at the hospital, whose statement Ex.PW-1/A was recorded by SI
Ashwani. He made an endorsement Ex.PW-20/A beneath the statement and
sent Ct.Vikas for FIR to be registered. At the police station the FIR Ex.PW-
8/B was registered by SI Jogender Kumar at 5:35 AM.
5.     In the statement Ex.PW-1/A, Sandeep said that he knew Parwati for
the last 3 to 4 years and used to visit her. On June 04, 2010 Parwati called
him to her house to give him some papers in respect whereof he and Parwati
were having some dispute. He went to Parwati’s house in the night. She
made him drink alcohol and made him lie on the bed. After sometime
Parwati’s brothers-in-law Sanjay and Dhane and Parwati’s son Kallu came.
Sanjay pinned him down to the bed by holding his hands and Dhane pinned
him down to the bed by holding his feet. Kallu threw acid on his face, chest
and private parts with the intention to kill him. The PCR van came and
removed him to GTB Hospital.
6.     Relevant would it be to highlight that in the statement Ex.PW-1/A
Sandeep has not spoken of either the presence or the participation of Jeepu.
7.     SI Ashwani Kumar thereafter returned to the place of the crime and
summoned the crime team. A private photographer Gaurav PW-13 was also
summoned who took the photographs Ex.PW-1/B3 to Ex.PW-1/B9 of the
scene of the crime. The photographs show that the bed sheet and the
mattress of a bed have been burnt along the length of the bed, in the middle
portion of the bed : maximum burnt area being towards the head rest side of
the bed and moving down the length of the bed the mattress had been burnt
in a manner which is suggestive of a human being attempted to be burnt
with some corrosive substance when the human was lying on the bed. The
photograph Ex.PW-1/B6 is that of a stainless steel tiffin box of capacity 500
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                 Page 5 of 17

ml which has corroded from the inner side having bluish white deposit along
the inner walls and the base of the tiffin container. No bottle is seen in the
photographs. As deposed to by SI Ashwani PW-20 he seized the tiffin box
Ex.PW-1/P3 vide memo Ex.PW-20/D.             The mattress and the curtains
Ex.PW-1/P1 and Ex.PW-1/P2 were seized vide memo Ex.PW-20/C. A half
consumed bottle of alcohol Ex.PW-1/P4 : brand bagpiper were seized vide
memo Ex.PW-20/E. The seized exhibits were sent to the Forensic Science
Laboratory for analysis and as per the report Ex.PX sulphuric acid and
hydrochloric acid was detected on the mattress and the curtains as also the
steel tiffin box.
8.      The MLC Ex.PW-7/A of Sandeep records that he was admitted by a
PCR van at GTB Hospital at around 2:00 AM on June 04, 2010.
9.      The four persons in the statement Ex.PW-1/A i.e. Parwati, her son
Jitender and her brothers-in-law Sanjay and Dhanpal as also Jeepu were
arrested.    Since Jeepu was having burn injuries on her face, neck and
forearms she was taken by Lady Ct.Sonal PW-10 to GTB Hospital on June
13, 2010 where Dr.Rahul Parikh examined her and wrote the MLC Ex.PW-
14/A, proved at the trial by Dr.Sushma PW-14 who had worked at GTB
Hospital with Dr.Rahul Parikh.      Jeepu’s MLC records that there were
corrosive burns on Jeepu on the lower area of face, left arm and upper
portion of chest, covering about 8% of the area.
10.     Useless to note the disclosure statements of the accused because
except for confessions they contained nothing pursuant whereto any
recovery was made.
11.     Sh.P.K.Sofat PW-6 working as an Executive Magistrate was called by
the Investigating Officer to record Sandeep’s statement. As deposed to by
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                Page 6 of 17

him he recorded Sandeep’s statement Ex.PW-6/A in which he narrated the
same story which he did to SI Ashwani and as finds a mention in his
statement Ex.PW-1/A. Relevant would it be to note that once again he did
not name Jeepu.
12.     Babli PW-1 told the Investigating Officer that Sandeep was her
nephew and that in the midnight of June 04, 2010 one Dharamvir a friend of
Sandeep had informed her over the telephone that Sandeep had told him that
Parwati and her brothers-in-law Sanjay and Dhane had burnt Sandeep.
Babli’s testimony in Court is to said effect.
13.     Unfortunately, the Investigating Officer did not try and contact
Dharamvir, the person whose name was disclosed to him by Babli and thus
we do not have the deposition of said Dharamvir. The Investigating Officer
has not seized any mobile phone of Sandeep and thus it remains a mystery
as to how come Sandeep made a call to Dharamvir.
14.     Jeepu who is also known as Deepu claimed that her sister Parwati had
called her to her house on June 03, 2010 and on the day of the incident as
she came down from the roof to drink water at around 12 midnight Sandeep
who was lying naked on the bed caught her and attempted to outrage her
modesty. She freed himself and entered the toilet. Sandeep followed her
inside and tried to force himself on her. A handy bottle on the ledge was
picked up by her which she threw at Sandeep. Some liquid inside the bottle
fell on Sandeep and some got splashed on her, and from the burn heat felt by
her she realized that some corrosive substance and in all probability acid had
fallen.
15.     Sandeep died, as noted above on September 24, 2010. His dead body
was seized and sent for post-mortem. Dr.Anju Rani PW-9 conducted the
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                Page 7 of 17

post-mortem and authored the report Ex.PW-9/A as per which death was
due to septicaemia consequent upon infected burn injuries which were anti
mortem and were caused by acid. About 50% of the body surface area has
old burns. Trickling of acid was present over right upper limb, back of
chest, front of lower abdomen, front of both legs and back of right leg. She
highlighted the burn areas on the front and the posterior image of the
drawing of a male in the post-mortem report.
16.     In spite of Jeepu’s claim after she was arrested that Sandeep had tried
to outrage her modesty and to save herself she entered the toilet where
Sandeep followed her and thus left with no choice she picked up a handy
glass bottle on the ledge and threw the same at Sandeep, little realizing that
it contained acid, the Investigating Officer chose not to question Sandeep
regarding said allegation directed against him by Jeepu, in spite of the fact
on September 16, 2010 Jeepu made a written complaint Mark DA to the
SHO of the concerned police station. Nothing was done to investigate the
matter keeping in view Jeepu’s statement. SI Ashwani PW-20 admitted
during cross-examination that he had with him the complaint Mark DA, but
denied that in spite thereof he did not properly investigate the case. At the
trial the marriage certificate Mark DY showing that Parwati and Sandeep got
married at the Arya Samaj Mandir, Jamna Bazar on March 11, 2008 was
admitted in evidence because Babli PW-1, the aunty of Sandeep, admitted
that the photograph thereon was that of her nephew Sandeep and Parwati.
17.     There being no eye witnesses to the incident, the only evidence of the
prosecution was the two dying declarations Ex.PW-1/A and Ex.PW-6/A
made by Sandeep, the first to SI Ashwani and the second to Sh.P.K.Sofat.
18.     Since the prosecution did not cite Dharamvir, the person whom, as
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                 Page 8 of 17

alleged by Babli, Sandeep had made a phone call informing that Parwati and
her brothers-in-law had burnt him with acid and there being no evidence
collected of Sandeep having made any phone call to anybody, the learned
Trial Judge has rightly disbelieved Babli’s version that Dharamvir had
passed on information to her that Sandeep had told him that Parwati and her
brothers-in-law had poured acid on him.
19.    The prosecution could not explain the acid burn injuries suffered by
Jeepu as recorded in her MLC Ex.PW-14/A, which are the result of a
corrosive substance falling on Jeepu and are on lower area of her face, left
arm and upper portion of the chest covering about 8% of the body area of
said parts.
20.    Dr.Anju Rani PW-9 who had conducted post-mortem on the dead
body of Sandeep admitted during cross-examination that any person holding
Sandeep by the hands and the feet would receive acid burn marks on his
hands because of the fact the trickling of the acid was from top to bottom,
resulting in the sole of the right foot as well as the palm and back of right
hand being burnt.
21.    Faced with the fact that neither brother-in-law of Parwati had any acid
burns on their hand, the learned Trial Judge had to give the benefit of doubt
to Sanjay and Dhanpal, the two brothers-in-law of Parwati, whose presence
in the house at the time of the incident has not been established by the
prosecution. For same reason benefit of doubt has been given to Sanjay as
well.   The two dying declarations made by the deceased have been
disbelieved because they are exculpatory of the role of Jeepu, who
admittedly suffered acid burn injuries, and the probable cause for Sandeep
not naming Jeepu could be that he wanted to give a version of the incident
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                 Page 9 of 17

showing Jeepu not being present, for if he had lived on, he would have to
face a trial for the offence of attempting to outrage Jeepu’s modesty as
claimed by Jeepu.
22.    That Sandeep was totally nude when he was burnt is a fact proved by
the testimony of SI Ashwani PW-20 who saw Sandeep’s clothes in the
house. Sandeep was removed nude to the hospital. This explains why his
clothes burnt with acid were not seized.
23.    Parwati and Jeepu admitted their presence in the house.              Jeepu
explained Sandeep suffering acid burn injuries as per her version which we
have noted above, and Parwati supports Jeepu.
24.    Acquitting Sanjay, Dhanpal and Jitender as also Parwati and Jeepu for
the charge of conspiracy because no evidence was led of a meeting of the
mind by the five accused, and acquitting Sanjay, Dhanpal and Jitender for
the reason noted by us hereinabove in paragraph 21 above, the learned Trial
Judge has given reasons in paragraph 19 to hold Parwati and Jeepu guilty of
having participated jointly in throwing acid on Sandeep:-
       “Thus the case of the prosecution qua the accused Sanjay,
       Dhanpal and Jitender @ Kallu also fails U/s 302 IPC and
       therefore, they all are also entitled for an order of acquittal in
       their favour therein.
       However, so far as the accused Parwati @ Kanta and Jeepu @
       Deepu are concerned, the prosecution has been able to prove
       their presence at the spot at the relevant time of incident. The
       factum of death of Sandeep, which was unnatural one and was
       caused due to septicaemia, consequent upon infected burn
       injuries by pouring acid upon the deceased. Further as
       discussed earlier, the accused Jeepu @ Deepu by relying on a
       complaint made by her on 16.09.2010 Mark DA before the SHO
       PS Karawal Nagar stating therein that on 04.06.2010 Sandeep
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                 Page 10 of 17

      had tried to outrage her modesty and it was during that course
      to save herself she threw a bottle on Sandeep containing some
      liquid therein, which fell on the face and other body parts of
      deceased and some liquid had also fallen on her and she got
      treatment from Doctor Rajender Kumar, has confirmed her
      participation in the occurrence. Her version is further
      corroborated by the doctor by proving her MLC Ex.PW-14/A
      wherein the injuries of burn are reflected on her face, left
      forearm, right forearm, upper part from chest (right side)
      further corroborates her participation in the crime and
      therefore, the accused Jeepu @ Deepu and also the accused
      Parwati @ Kanta, who was present at the spot at the time of
      occurrence and there is nothing on record to suggest that she
      had not participated in the crime, are liable to be held guilty
      for causing the death of Sandeep.”
      (Underline and bold emphasized)
25.   But immediately thereafter while discussing whether the offence
made out is that of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder, in
paragraph 20 of the decision the learned Trial Judge has reasoned:-
      “The accused persons had not acted with an intention to cause
      such bodily injury, rather, accused Jeepu @ Deepu had poured
      acid on the deceased Sandeep to get herself escaped from the
      clutches of deceased.”
26.   It is apparent that there is a complete conflict in the two findings
returned by the learned Trial Judge. For the purposes of determining the
nature of the offence, the learned Trial Judge has reasoned that Jeepu @
Deepu was compelled to pour acid on Sandeep to save her modesty. In the
preceding paragraph the learned Trial Judge has reasoned that since Parwati
and Jeepu were present, even Parwati would be liable for the offence.
Holding that acid was not poured on Sandeep intending to cause him any
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                               Page 11 of 17

bodily injury, but to save herself Jeepu was compelled to pour acid on
Sandeep, the learned Trial Judge has held that Parwati and Jeepu committed
the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under
Section 304-II IPC.
27.    The reasoning of the learned Trial Judge in paragraph 19 of the
impugned decision and said part of the reasoning which we have underlined
and highlighted in bold, after quoting para 19 of the impugned decision, in
para 24 above of our decision, is totally contrary to law because onus to
prove innocence has been shifted on the shoulders of Parwati.                    The
reasoning : and also the accused Parwati @ Kanta, who was present at the
spot at the time of occurrence and there is nothing on record to suggest
that she had not participated in the crime, are liable to be held guilty for
causing the death of Sandeep, is contrary to the known principles of law.
To hold one guilty on a negative reasoning that there is nothing on record to
show that the person present did not participate in the crime, and thus would
be liable to be held guilty is to say the least a perverse finding.
28.    Once the learned Trial Judge held that Jeepu poured acid on the
deceased to escape from the clutches of the deceased, the logical corollary
would be to hold Parwati not guilty.
29.    Independent of the reasoning of the learned Trial Judge, we have
reappraised the evidence and would highlight that there are no eye witnesses
to the incident. Dharmvir, the person to whom Sandeep allegedly made a
phone call, as claimed by Babli PW-1, has not been examined as a witness
and no evidence has been led that there was a landline number in Parwati’s
house where Sandeep suffered acid burns.             There is no evidence that
Sandeep was having a mobile phone with him. The two dying declarations
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                   Page 12 of 17

made by Sandeep, the first to SI Ashwani Kumar which is Ex.PW-1/A and
the second to Sh.P.K.Sofat which is Ex.PW-6/A are untrustworthy because
of two reasons. Firstly, they do not explain the acid burn injuries on Jeepu
and secondly for the reason given by the learned Trial Judge based upon
Sandeep’s post mortem report Ex.PW-9/A and the testimony of Dr.Anju
Rani PW-9 who conducted the post mortem. The trickling acid burn injuries
would have caused acid burn injuries on the hands of those who would have
held Sandeep when somebody threw acid on him.               In the two dying
declarations Sandeep has stated that after Parwati made him drink alcohol
and made him lie on the bed, Sanjay pinned him down by holding his hands
and Dhane pinned him down by holding his feet and Kalu (Jitender) threw
acid on him. There are no injuries caused by a corrosive substance on the
hands of Sanjay or Dhane. There is no evidence that either Sanjay or Dhane
or Jitender were present in the house of Parwati when Sandeep suffered acid
burn injuries. We thus concur with the reasoning of the learned Trial Judge
that the two dying declarations had to be disbelieved because there was a
possibility of Sandeep speaking a lie to save himself, if he had lived, from
the charge of Jeepu that he attempted to outrage her modesty and in self
defence she threw a bottle containing acid on him, and when she threw the
bottle she was not aware that there was acid in the bottle.
30.    Parwati would also be entitled to the benefit of doubt.
31.    That leaves us to deal with the case on Jeepu.
32.    Now, even Jeepu has not told the complete truth. Her version that
past mid-night, Sandeep was lying naked on the bed is correct.                 The
evidence thereof is that clothes of Sandeep were seen in the room by SI
Ashwani PW-20 and Ct.Vikas PW-21. He was removed to the hospital in a
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                 Page 13 of 17

nude condition. Had acid been thrown on him when he was wearing his
clothes the same would have been burnt by acid and would have been seized
by SI Ashwani Kumar. Thus, we have independent corroborative evidence
to the claim of Jeepu that the deceased was nude. But her claim that as
Sandeep chased her into the toilet, intending to rape her, and in self defence
she picked up a handy bottle lying on the ledge of the toilet and threw the
same at Sandeep, little realizing that there was a acid in the bottle, which
realization dawned on her when some acid splashed on her lower face, neck,
arm and upper chest, is untrue for the reason no bottle containing acid or
having traces of acid or for that matter no bottle at all was seen in the room
where Sandeep suffered acid burns. On the contrary the tiffin box container
Ex.PW-1/P3 was the one in which the corrosive substance : sulphuric acid
and hydrochloric acid was contained before it was thrown on Sandeep would
bring home the point that Jeepu poured the corrosive substance into the
metallic container and threw the same at Sandeep. We take judicial notice
of the fact that both : sulphuric acid and hydrochloric acid react with metal
and if kept stored in a metallic container would eat through the metallic
container within a few minutes. It is obvious that the corrosive substance
popularly known as tehzab (used to clean sticky stains in toilets) was used
by Jeepu. When she threw the same on Sandeep some got spilled on her.
The photographs Ex.PW-1/B3 to Ex.PW-1/B9 would show, as probabilize
by us in para 7 above that Sandeep was lying on the bed when acid was
thrown on him.      The spillage was directed towards his torso and this
explains the mattress Ex.PW-1/P1 burnt substantially towards the head rest
side of the bed and moving down the length of the bed in a manner which is
possible only when the person was lying on the bed and as this person got
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                 Page 14 of 17

up, with substantial acid thrown on the torso, the trickling effect causing
burns in the lower part of the body. The trickling burns on the buttocks and
the back are also thus explainable. To put it pithily, Jeepu has thrown acid
on Sandeep when he was lying on the bed and not, as claimed by her, when
he chased her inside the toilet.
33.    But what happened between Sandeep and Jeepu is not known to us for
the reason both : Jeepu and Sandeep have told a lie. Whereas Sandeep has
given a version exculpatory of Jeepu which is totally unbelievable, even
Jeepu has given a version which is substantially untrue.
34.    But the nugget of truth in her statement that Sandeep was lying naked
on the bed throws light on one possibility : either Jeepu got extremely angry
seeing Sandeep lying nude on the bed with the room unbolted and causing
embarrassment to her when she entered the room to access the kitchen to
drink water, and she said something to Sandeep regarding his lying nude and
Sandeep saying something obscene to Jeepu who in anger went to the toilet
or the kitchen, most probably the kitchen because the tiffin box container
would be in the kitchen, and pouring acid in the tiffin box container she
threw the same at Sandeep. The acid burn injuries on Jeepu can only
possibly take place if a person has a corrosive substance in a container with
a wide mouth, and as the liquid is thrown forward with a jerk, some spilt on
to Jeepu.
35.    Thus, the principle of law that failure of the prosecution to explain
grievous or more than simple injuries on the person of the accused
probabilizes a self defence would not be applicable in the peculiar facts of
the instant case. It is trite that the entire case of the prosecution cannot be
thrown overboard simply because the prosecution does not explain the
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                  Page 15 of 17

injuries on the person of the accused. The question then to be considered
would be as to what is the effect of the non-explanation of those injuries,
which would always be a question of fact and not one of law and one which
would depend upon the circumstances of each case as held by the Supreme
Court in the decision reported as AIR 1974 SC 1550 Onkarnath Singh
vs.State of U.P.
36.    We are faced with a peculiar situation. Sandeep, the deceased has
spoken a complete lie in his two dying declarations Ex.PW-1/A and Ex.PW-
6/A. Jeepu has spoken less than half the truth.
37.    Jeepu’s version of acting in self defence being unbelievable, the only
inference left would be that the deceased and Jeepu had some verbal
dialogue and at that time the deceased was lying on the bed. Something
infuriated Jeepu who went to the kitchen, picked up a metallic tiffin box
container, poured acid in the container and came back to throw the same on
Sandeep and when she threw the acid on Sandeep, some part got spilt on
her. The burn injuries on Sandeep covered more than 50% of the body area
but were probably not very deep burns, evidenced by the fact that Sandeep
lived for more than three months and twenty days after he was burnt. The
date of the incident is June 04, 2010. Sandeep died on September 24, 2010.
Under the circumstances, acting under some provocation, Jeepu throwing
acid on Sandeep which caused Sandeep’s death, would make liable Jeepu
for the offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable
under Section 304 Part-II IPC. As regards the sentence imposed upon
Jeepu, we are of the opinion that sentence to undergo rigorous imprisonment
for eight years is excessive. The adequate sentence has to be of five years.
38.    Crl.A.No.1685/2014 and Crl.A.No.1416/2014 filed by the State and
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                                Page 16 of 17

Crl.A.No.1123/2014 filed by Kamlesh are accordingly dismissed.
39.    Crl.A.No.1133/2014 filed by Parwati is allowed. Her conviction and
the sentence imposed by the learned Trial Judge are set aside. She is
acquitted.   Bail bond and surety bond furnished by her when she was
admitted to bail by this Court are discharged.
40.    Crl.A.No.1135/2014 filed by Jeepu is disposed of maintaining her
conviction for having committed an offence punishable under Section 304
Part-II IPC, but the sentence imposed is reduced.       She shall undergo
rigorous imprisonment for a period of five years and pay fine in sum of
`1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only), in default she shall undergo simple
imprisonment for fifteen days. Needless to state she shall be entitled to the
benefit of Section 428 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The bail bond
and surety bonds furnished by her are cancelled. Jeepu shall surrender to
undergo the remaining sentence.
41.    TCR be returned.
                                              (PRADEEP NANDRAJOG)
                                                    JUDGE
                                                (MUKTA GUPTA)
                                                    JUDGE
DECEMBER 24, 2014
mamta/skb
CRL.A.No.1685/2014 & conn.matters                              Page 17 of 17


