* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ CRL.M.C. 4501/2013
                             Date of Decision : February 12th, 2016
  HARVINDER SINGH & ORS.                              .....Petitioners
                      Through      Mr. Pankaj Thareja, Adv.
                      versus
  STATE (NCT OF DELHI) & ANR.                         .....Respondents
                      Through      Mr. Satya Narayan Vashishith, APP
                                   for State
                                   Mr. Kishore Kumar, Adv. for R-2
                                   alongwith R-2 in person.
         CORAM:
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.S.TEJI
  P.S.TEJI, J.
  1.     The present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed
  by the petitioners, namely, Sh. Harvinder Singh, Smt. Tej Kaur and
  Ms. Parvinder Kaur for quashing of FIR No.73/2004 dated
  16.01.2004, under Sections 406/498A/34 IPC registered at Police
  Station Punjabi Bagh on the basis of the mediation report of the Delhi
  Mediation Centre, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi arrived at between the
  petitioner no.1 and respondent No.2, namely, Smt. Rajinder Kaur on
  22.11.2012.
  2.     Learned Additional Public Prosecutor for respondent-State
  submitted that the respondent No.2, present in the Court has been
  Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                          Page 1 of 10

identified to be the complainant/first-informant of the FIR in question
by her counsel.
3.     The factual matrix of the present case is that the marriage
between the complainant/respondent no.2 and the petitioner no.1 was
solemnized on 02.06.2002. At the time of the marriage, it was told to
the complainant that the petitioner no.1 has a shop of motor parts and
an auto rickshaw which was driven by a driver and his first wife is
now dead. But after the marriage, it was revealed that the petitioner
no.1 has no shop and that his first wife is still alive. The complainant
was also tortured for dowry including demands for a gold chain, wrist
watch and mobile and two-wheeler. The accused used to beat up the
complainant.
       Thereafter, the respondent no.2 lodged a complaint against the
petitioners before the CAW Cell, New Delhi which resulted into the
FIR in question. The respondent no.2 also filed a petition under
Section 125 Cr.P.C. which was dismissed by the Court concerned and
during the pendency of the trial, the parties were referred to mediation
cell, where they resolved all their disputes.
4.     Respondent No.2, present in the Court, submitted that the
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                           Page 2 of 10

dispute between the parties has been amicably resolved. As per the
mediation report, the parties have agreed to take divorce by mutual
consent and the first motion petition shall be filed in the first week of
December 2012. It is also agreed between the parties that petitioner
no.1 shall pay an amount of Rs.10,000/- to respondent no.2 which is
claims of the present, past and future maintenance, permanent
alimony, dowry articles, stridhan, jewellery etc. It is further agreed
that within one month of obtaining the divorce by mutual consent, the
petitioner no.1 shall move a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for
quashing the FIR in question. The respondent no.2 assured the
petitioner no.1 that she shall fully cooperate with the same. It has been
further agreed by both the parties that in future, they shall not file any
case etc. against each other in respect of their matrimonial disputes
and all the claims of the parties qua each other shall stand satisfied.
Respondent No.2 affirms the contents of the aforesaid settlement. All
the disputes and differences have been resolved through mutual
consent. Now no dispute with petitioners survives and so, the
proceedings arising out of the FIR in question be brought to an end.
Statement of the respondent No.2 has been recorded in this regard in
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                          Page 3 of 10

which she stated that she has entered into a compromise with the
petitioners and has settled all the disputes with them. She further
stated that she has no objection if the FIR in question is quashed.
5.     In Gian Singh v. State of Punjab (2012) 10 SCC 303 Apex
Court has recognized the need of amicable resolution of disputes in
cases like the instant one, by observing as under:-
              “61. In other words, the High Court must consider
              whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest
              of justice to continue with the criminal proceedings
              or continuation of criminal proceedings would
              tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
              settlement and compromise between the victim and
              the wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of
              justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an
              end and if the answer to the above question(s) is in
              the affirmative, the High Court shall be well within
              its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings.”
6.     The aforesaid dictum stands reiterated by the Apex Court in a
recent judgment in Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab (2014) 6 SCC
466. The relevant observations of the Apex Court in Narinder Singh
(Supra) are as under:-
              “29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and
              lay down the following principles by which the High
              Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
              the settlement between the parties and exercising its
              power under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the
              settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
              accept the settlement with direction to continue with the
              criminal proceedings:
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                                     Page 4 of 10

              29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to
              be distinguished from the power which lies in the Court
              to compound the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
              No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court
              has inherent power to quash the criminal proceedings
              even in those cases which are not compoundable, where
              the parties have settled the matter between themselves.
              However, this power is to be exercised sparingly and with
              caution.
              29.2. When the parties have reached the settlement and
              on that basis petition for quashing the criminal
              proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases
              would be to secure:
              (i) ends of justice, or
              (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court.
              While exercising the power the High Court is to form an
              opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
              29.3. Such a power is not to be exercised in those
              prosecutions which involve heinous and serious offences
              of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,
              dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature and
              have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for the
              offences alleged to have been committed under special
              statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the
              offences committed by public servants while working in
              that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
              compromise between the victim and the offender.
              29.4. On the other hand, those criminal cases having
              overwhelmingly and predominantly civil character,
              particularly those arising out of commercial transactions
              or arising out of matrimonial relationship or family
              disputes should be quashed when the parties have
              resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
7.     The inherent powers of the High Court ought to be exercised to
prevent the abuse of process of law and to secure the ends of justice.
The respondent no.2 agrees to the quashing of the FIR in question
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                                Page 5 of 10

without any threat or coercion or undue influence and has stated that
the matter has been settled out of her own free will. As the matter has
been settled and compromised amicably, so, there would be an
extraordinary delay in the process of law if the legal proceedings
between the parties are carried on. So, this Court is of the considered
opinion that this is a fit case to invoke the jurisdiction under Section
482 Cr.P.C. to prevent the abuse of process of law and to secure the
ends of justice.
8.     The incorporation of inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
is meant to deal with the situation in the absence of express provision
of law to secure the ends of justice such as, where the process is
abused or misused; where the ends of justice cannot be secured;
where the process of law is used for unjust or unlawful object; to
avoid the causing of harassment to any person by using the provision
of Cr.P.C. or to avoid the delay of the legal process in the delivery of
justice.    Whereas, the inherent power is not to be exercised to
circumvent the express provisions of law.
9.     It is settled law that the inherent power of the High Court under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. should be used sparingly. The Hon’ble Apex
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                          Page 6 of 10

Court in the case of State of Maharashtra through CBI v. Vikram
Anatrai Doshi and Ors. MANU/SC/0842/2014 and in the case of
Inder Singh Goswami v. State of Uttaranchal MANU/SC/0808/2009
has observed that powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. must be
exercised sparingly, carefully and with great caution. Only when the
Court comes to the conclusion that there would be manifest injustice
or there would be abuse of the process of the Court if such power is
not exercised, Court would quash the proceedings.
10.    It is a well settled law that where the High Court is convinced
that the offences are entirely personal in nature and therefore do not
affect public peace or tranquillity and where it feels that quashing of
such proceedings on account of compromise would bring about peace
and would secure ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash them.
In such cases, pursuing prosecution would be waste of time and
energy. Non-compoundable offences are basically an obstruction in
entering into compromise.        In certain cases, the main offence is
compoundable but the connected offences are not. In the case of B.S.
Joshi and others v. State of Haryana and another 2003 (4) SCC 675
the Hon’ble Apex Court observed that even though the provisions of
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                         Page 7 of 10

Section 320 Cr.P.C. would not apply to such offences which are not
compoundable, it did not limit or affect the powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C. The Hon’ble Apex Court laid down that if for the purpose of
securing the ends of justice, quashing of FIR becomes necessary,
section 320 Cr.P.C. would not be a bar to the exercise of power of
quashing.     In the nutshell, the Hon’ble Apex Court justified the
exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the
proceedings to secure the ends of justice in view of the special facts
and circumstances of the case, even where the offences were non-
compoundable.
       In the light of the aforesaid, this Court is of the view that
notwithstanding the fact the offence under Section 498A IPC is non-
compoundable offence, there should be no impediment in quashing
the FIR under this section, if the Court is otherwise satisfied that the
facts and circumstances of the case so warrant.
11.    The Courts in India are now normally taking the view that
endeavour should be taken to promote conciliation and secure speedy
settlement of disputes relating to marriage and family affairs such as,
matrimonial disputes between the couple or/and between the wife and
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                         Page 8 of 10

her in-laws. India being a vast country naturally has large number of
married persons resulting into high numbers of matrimonial disputes
due to differences in temperament, life-styles, opinions, thoughts etc.
between such couples, due to which majority is coming to the Court to
get redressal. In its 59th report, the Law Commission of India had
emphasized that while dealing with disputes concerning the family,
the Court ought to adopt an approach radically different from that
adopted in ordinary civil proceedings and that it should make
reasonable efforts at settlement before the commencement of the trial.
Further it is also the constitutional mandate for speedy disposal of
such disputes and to grant quick justice to the litigants. But, our
Courts are already over burdened due to pendency of large number of
cases because of which it becomes difficult for speedy disposal of
matrimonial disputes alone. As the matrimonial disputes are mainly
between the husband and the wife and personal matters are involved
in such disputes, so, it requires conciliatory procedure to bring a
settlement between them. Nowadays, mediation has played a very
important role in settling the disputes, especially, matrimonial
disputes and has yielded good results. The Court must exercise its
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                        Page 9 of 10

inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to put an end to the
matrimonial litigations at the earliest so that the parties can live
peacefully.
12.    Since the subject matter of this FIR is essentially matrimonial,
which now stands mutually and amicably settled between the parties,
therefore, continuance of proceedings arising out of the FIR in
question would be an exercise in futility and is a fit case for this Court
to exercise its inherent jurisdiction.
13.    In the facts and circumstances of this case, in view of statement
made by the respondent No.2 and the compromise arrived at between
the parties, the FIR in question warrants to be put to an end and
proceedings emanating thereupon need to be quashed.
14.    Accordingly, this petition is allowed and FIR No.73/2004 dated
16.01.2004, under Sections 406/498A/34 IPC registered at Police
Station Punjabi Bagh the proceedings emanating therefrom are
quashed against the petitioners.
15.    This petition is accordingly disposed of.
                                                             (P.S.TEJI)
                                                              JUDGE
FEBRUARY 12, 2016/dd
Crl.M.C. 4501/2013                                           Page 10 of 10


