* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                               Date of Decision : January 19th, 2018
+ CRL.A. 695/2017
  DEEPAK @ PETA                                 ..... Appellant
                       Through:    Ms.Aishwarya Rao, Advocate
                                   (DHCLSC)
                       versus
  STATE                                         ..... Respondent
                       Through:    Ms.Aashaa Tiwari, APP for the
                                   State.
  CORAM:
  HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
  HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.S.TEJI
                             JUDGMENT
  P.S. TEJI, J.
  1.              The present appeal has been filed by the convict/
  appellant (hereinafter referred to as “the appellant”), namely,
  Deepak @ Peta under Section 374(2) of the Cr.P.C. against the
  judgment dated 27.01.2010 whereby the appellant has been
  convicted under Section 302 IPC, and against the order on
  sentence dated 03.02.2010 whereby the appellant has been
  sentenced to life imprisonment along with fine of Rs.5,000/-, in
  default of payment of fine to further undergo one year simple
  imprisonment.
  Crl.A. 695/2017                                       Page 1 of 34

2.              Factual matrix, emerging from the record, is that
on 25.06.2007 at about 23.33 hours, an information was
received by the police with regard to commission of a murder at
House No.6/207, Block No.6, Trilok Puri, Delhi. On receipt of
said information, SI Om Prakash along with Ct.Shiv Kumar
reached the spot and found a dead body wrapped in a black
colour cloth bag under a cot in a room situated on the ground
floor. The said bag was opened and a dead body of deceased
Pooran Chand was found in it, which was identified by his son
Shiv Kumar. Statement Ex.PW3/1 of Shiv Kumar was recorded
who stated that they were two brothers and a sister. His elder
brother was Deepak and sister was Seema. Name of his mother
was Rekha. His father used to work in MCD and on 25.06.2007,
at about 12:30 in the day time he returned from his duty. He had
his meals and got his head and legs massaged form Shiv Kumar
and then went to sleep on the ground floor. His brother Deepak
sent Shiv Kumar to 22 Block Trilok Puri to get the prices of
memory card, lead, charger and two connections. He inquired
from three shops and informed Deepak that the price of these
articles was Rs. 860/-. Deepak met him near the stairs of his
house. Deepak again sent Shiv Kumar to 15 Block and 10
Block, Trilok Puri to ask for the price of the said items. After
coming from there, Deepak met Shiv Kumar on the road outside
the street and informed him that the rates were same at all the
places. Shiv Kumar remained outside on the road as there was
no electricity at his house. At about 4 p.m, his mother came to
Crl.A. 695/2017                                    Page 2 of 34

the house and then Shiv Kumar went to his friends house to take
meals. When he returned back to his house, he found that the
door of the room on the ground floor was locked. He asked his
mother as to why it was locked, to which she replied to ask
from Deepak. She also told that Deepak had sprinkled some
medicine. On asking, Deepak informed that he had sprinkled
medicine to remove bed –bugs, and not to open the door as the
influence of the medicine would remain for 10 hours. Shiv
Kumar went upstairs and laid there. At about 7:30 pm he went
to the mobile shop and when he returned, Deepak met him on
the ground floor and asked him to go and sleep upstairs.
Thereafter, he went to sleep. At that time, his mother had gone
to the house of his aunt at 12 Block Trilok Puri. Shiv Kumar
woke up due to drizzle. He saw people had gathered outside his
house and one of the person said that Deepak had killed his
father. His uncle Ranjeet broke the lock of the room. Inside the
room, he saw the dead body of his father in a cloth bag stained
with blood. He had shown his suspicion on Deepak.
3.              On the basis of the statement of Shiv Kumar, FIR
of the present case was registered. Investigating Officer
prepared site plan and place of occurrence got inspected by the
Crime team. Said spot was got photographed. The dead body of
the deceased was removed to Lal Bahadur Shastri (LBS)
Hospital. One lock and a hammer were seized. From the spot,
one black bag, cloth sheet, towel, vest and a piece of vest were
Crl.A. 695/2017                                      Page 3 of 34

seized. From near the cot, one Pyjama and one black-white
pillow cover were seized. Earth control from the spot was taken.
After opening the one side box of the double bed, one round
pillow with cover, one square pillow and one quilt cover were
seized. From the other side of the bed box, one hammer having
blood stains weighing about 11 kg and another hammer
weighing about 8 kg were seized. After conducting post
mortem, dead body of the deceased was handed over to his legal
heirs.
4.              During investigation Smt. Rekha, wife of deceased
had disclosed that on the day of incident when she asked
Deepak why the door had been locked, Deepak became
perplexed and disclosed that he and Dheeraj had killed the
deceased/his father. On 02.07.2007, accused Deepak was
apprehended outside Anand Vihar ISBT who confessed that he
had killed his father. He was arrested and thereafter got
recovered one piece of vest from the bushes near the drain of 8
Block Trilok Puri, and further disclosed that the black coloured
bag was tied after putting the dead body of the deceased with
the remaining piece of the vest. The said piece of vest was
seized. From a pit beneath the boundary of drain, he got
recovered one key-while disclosing that the said key was of the
lock put in the room where he had killed his father.             He
disclosed that he had thrown the same after locking the room.
The same was also seized. The accused Deepak pointed out a
Crl.A. 695/2017                                     Page 4 of 34

shop from where he had purchased the black colored cloth, and
the tailor from whom he got the bag stitched. Co-accused
Dheeraj was also arrested. After completion of investigation,
charge sheet was filed in the court.
5.              Charge under Section 302/34 IPC was framed
against both the accused to which they pleaded not guilty and
claimed the trial.
6.              To prove its case, prosecution had examined 25
witnesses viz. Seema (PW1), Rekha (PW2), Shiv Kumar
(PW3), Satish Kumar (PW4), Meera (PW5), Vinod Kumar
(PW6), Manoj Kumar (PW7), Kirori (PW8), Ranjeet (PW9), SI
Mukesh Kumar (PW10), Dr. C.P Singh (PW11), ASI Madan
Kumar (PW12), H.C Lalta Prasad (PW13), ASI Jai Ram
(PW14), Jitender (PW15), Const. Shiv Om (PW16), Mohd.
Khalid (PW17), Dr. Mukta Rani (PW18), Const. Omvir Singh
(PW19), Const. Inder Kumar (PW20), Const. Adesh Tyagi
(PW21), Const. Shiv Kumar (PW22), Const. Mukesh Kumar
(PW23), SI Om Singh (PW24) and ACP Rajeshwar Kumar
(PW25).
7.              After completion of prosecution, statement of
accused Deepak @ Peta under section 313 of Cr.PC was
recorded in which he denied the entire case of prosecution.
Despite opportunity being granted, he did not lead any defence
evidence.
Crl.A. 695/2017                                    Page 5 of 34

8.              The Ld. Trial court vide impugned judgment dated
27.01.2010, acquitted accused Dheeraj, whereas accused
Deepak has been convicted under Section 302 IPC and
sentenced as aforesaid. Feeling aggrieved by the judgment of
conviction, the present appeal has been preferred by the
appellant.
9.              Arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the
appellant are that the present case is based on circumstantial
evidence and the prosecution has failed to establish all the links
to make out a case against the appellant. It was further argued
that it is settled law that in the cases based on circumstantial
evidence, the prosecution is bound to prove its case beyond all
reasonable doubts. The chain of events and the circumstances
must be proved convincingly, and if there is any missing link, it
would lead to acquittal of an accused while granting him the
benefit of the doubt. It was further submitted that in the present
case, the prosecution has failed to prove the motive behind the
alleged murder of the deceased. The daughter of the deceased
has not supported the case of the prosecution. She stated that
she was never teased or molested by the deceased. Even there
is no evidence on record to show that appellant was given step-
fatherly treatment by the deceased. There is also no evidence
on record to show that the deceased and appellant were having
any enmity or quarrel. It was argued that PW-2 Rekha had
informed PW6-Vinod, that Shibu (Shiv Kumar) had put the lock
Crl.A. 695/2017                                     Page 6 of 34

on the door and that in the PCR Form Ex.PW13/A, it is
mentioned that Vinod Kumar sent a message that Rekha had
informed that the room was locked by Shibu, and not by the
appellant. It was submitted that the appellant is entitled for
acquittal, as the prosecution has not been able to prove all the
circumstances and there are several missing links in the chain of
circumstances.
10.             On the other hand, learned APP for the State has
argued that there is enough evidence and material available on
record which connects the appellant with the murder of his
father. The relatives of the deceased as well as appellant have
categorically admitted that they had seen the appellant outside
the room where the murder of the deceased was committed. All
these     witnesses   have   deposed   about   the  extra-judicial
confession made by the appellant before them regarding killing
of the deceased. Key of the locked room was recovered from
the appellant, which is an important link in the chain of
circumstances. It was further submitted that motive is not an
essential ingredient to prove the commission of murder when
other circumstances have duly been established. There is no
missing link of circumstances and the prosecution has
successfully proved its case against the appellant conclusively.
11.             We have heard the rival contentions of the parties
and have gone through the evidence and material available on
record, meticulously.
Crl.A. 695/2017                                     Page 7 of 34

12.             First important witness of the prosecution is PW2-
Rekha. PW2 had deposed that she used to work as house helper
in kothies/bungalows in Lajpat Nagar.          Her marriage with
deceased Pooran Chand was her second marriage. From the
wedlock with Pooran Chand, son Shiv Kumar was born. From
her earlier marriage, she had two children, namely, Deepak-the
appellant, and Seema. Her husband Puran Chand used to work
in MCD as Safai Karamchari. She further deposed that her son
Deepak had not been doing any work and her husband Pooran
Chand and Deepak used to quarrel every day.                Whatever
Deepak used to earn, he used to spend the same on himself.
Whenever PW2 used to say something to Deepak, he used to
quarrel with PW2 also. She further deposed that on the day of
death of her husband, he came back home at about 12.00 noon
and PW2 returned from her work at about 4.00 p.m. When she
reached home, she enquired from her daughter Seema as to
whether her father had taken lunch. She told PW2 that Shiv
Kumar gave lunch to his father. After that, PW2 had her lunch,
lay down, and slept for some time on the second floor. At that
time, Deepak was on the ground floor and sitting outside the
door. When PW2 woke up and came down on the ground floor,
she enquired from Deepak as to why he had locked the ground
floor, to which Deepak replied that he had sprinkled medicines
to kill bed-bugs. Thereafter, PW2 went outside to search her
husband, as he was a habitual drinker. She could not trace him
and when she returned back home and told Deepak that his
Crl.A. 695/2017                                       Page 8 of 34

father was untraceable, Deepak became nervous. Again, PW2
went to search for her husband and reached 12 Block where her
bhabhi (sister-in-law) Meera used to reside, and asked her to
come with PW2. PW2 told Meera that Deepak had locked the
room and had not been opening the same. Meera came along
with PW2 and she (Meera) asked Deepak as to why he was not
opening the door of the ground floor. Deepak came down and
informed that his father was no more and then told that he had
killed his father and then ran away. Thereafter, PW2 raised an
alarm.      Neighbours gathered there and police was called.
Someone broke open the lock of the door. Police came and
dead body of her husband was found in a bora (sack) lying
under a cot. She identified the dead body of her husband. She
also stated that when she had seen the dead body, its head was
broken.
13.             During cross-examination, PW2 stated that police
recorded her statement after the cremation of her husband. She
admitted that when she came back from her work on the day of
the incident, she had not seen her husband.             She further
admitted that her house was of 25 sq. yards and on its ground
floor, there was only a hall and stairs to the first floor which
passed from its side.      She denied that she was involved in
immoral activities or that, in order to get rid of her husband, she
in collusion with her son Shiv Kumar, killed deceased Pooran
and falsely implicated accused Deepak. She denied that Deepak
Crl.A. 695/2017                                       Page 9 of 34

used to hand over his earnings to his father and PW2 used to
quarrel with him for not handing over his earnings to her. She
denied that Deepak was not present at home on the day of
incident.
14.             Testimony of PW2 has been corroborated by PW1-
Seema, step-daughter of the deceased, who is also the real sister
of appellant Deepak. PW1 had deposed that her deceased father
Pooran Chand was an employee with MCD, and her mother
used to work in Kothies. She has two brothers, Deepak and
Shiv Kumar. On 25.06.2007, her father Pooran Chand left the
house at about 6 a.m. and thereafter her mother had left for
work. At about 12 noon, her father came back to the house.
Thereafter, her father refilled the gas cylinder from the gas
agency.      Thereafter, her younger brother Shiv Kumar gave
lunch to her father.       After having lunch, her father was
massaged by Shiv Kumar. Thereafter, her father went to sleep
in the room on the ground floor. Deepak sent PW2’s younger
son Shiv Kumar to the market. Thereafter, PW1 went to the
room which was situated on the second floor and slept there. At
about 4 p.m., when her mother came to the house, she asked
whether PW1 has given lunch to her father, to which PW1
replied that Shiv Kumar had given lunch to her father. The
room in which her father was sleeping was locked. Her mother
asked accused Deepak as to why the room was locked, on
which accused Deepak told that he had sprinkled medicine to
Crl.A. 695/2017                                   Page 10 of 34

kill bed-bugs. They had asked for the keys of the room, but
accused Deepak refused to hand over the keys to them.
Thereafter, her mother searched for her father in the locality but
he could not be found. Thereafter, her mother called herMami,
namely, Meera (PW5), who asked accused Deepak as to why he
was not giving the keys of the room. On this, accused Deepak
became perplexed and said that he had done something with the
father and father was no more, and then he ran away. Her
mother started crying and weeping on which, people in the
locality gathered.    Someone broke the lock and door was
opened. She further stated that on opening the door, dead body
of her father was found in a black coloured sack lying under the
cot and blood was oozing from his head.
15.             PW3-Shiv  Kumar, son of deceased further
corroborated the testimony of PW1-Seema and PW2-Rekha.
PW3 had deposed that on 25.06.2007, his father Pooran Chand
had returned from his work at about 12.30 p.m. PW3 gave
meals and then massaged his father. Accused Deepak sent him
to 22 Block, Trilok Puri for checking the rates of lead, charger,
one memory card and two new connections for the mobile
phone. When he returned back at about 2.00 p.m., Deepak met
him in the street. PW3 told Deepak that the cost of the items
was Rs.860/- and then again he was sent by Deepak to 15, 21
and 10 block to again check the price. When PW3 again came
back, accused Deepak met him on the road. After collecting
Crl.A. 695/2017                                     Page 11 of 34

books, when PW3 again returned back to his house, accused
Deepak took the books from him and did not let him enter the
house. PW3 sat outside his house. His mother returned home
at about 4.00 p.m. At about 4.45 p.m., he reached home and
found the door of the ground floor locked. When he enquired
from his mother the reason for locking the room, his mother
told that Deepak had locked the room. PW3 went to the second
floor and slept there. He got up at about 7.30 p.m., went to a
mobile shop and returned at about 11.30 p.m. Deepak met him
in the street. PW3 came back home and went to the roof and
slept there. PW3 woke up due to drizzling and heard the noise
below. Someone told him that Deepak had killed their father.
PW3 came down and found many people there. The door was
still locked. Uncle Ranjit broke open the lock. Inside the room,
they found dead body of his father in a black coloured sack.
Someone informed the police and police reached there. Police
seized the articles from the spot. Police seized hammer and
lock, two crushed pillow, one quilt cover and a part of the vest
which was stained with blood. Police also took a piece of the
floor where the blood was lying and sealed that also. Thereafter,
all the seized articles were shown to the witness where he
identifies the hammer and a piece of cloth. Another blood
stained hammer was also seized vide seizure memo Ex.PW3/3
which is also shown to witness and the witness identifies both
the articles. After that, one round pillow, one cover of round
pillow, one square pillow of white colour and one quilt cover all
Crl.A. 695/2017                                    Page 12 of 34

stained with blood were also sealed vide seizure memo
Ex.PW3/4, which were also identified by the witness. Police
also seized one blood stained piece of vest having sticker of
mark swagat, one big black colour bag, one old white colour
bedsheet, one old towel, one old vest having sticker mark of
Divya, which were sealed vide seizure memo Ex. PW3/5. They
also were identified by the witness. Police has also taken a piece
of the concrete floor having blood stains which was seized vide
seizure memo Ex.PW3/6. The blood which was lying on the
floor was also taken into possession vide seizure memo
Ex.PW3/7. Police had also seized one blood stained pillow and
one blood stained male pyjama which were seized vide seizure
memo Ex.PW3/8, and the same were identified by the witness.
A lock and one small hammer was also seized vide seizure
memo Ex. PW3/9 which was also identified by the witness.
16.             PW1, PW2 and PW3 are the material witnesses in
support of the case of the prosecution to prove the fact that door
of the room, wherein the dead body of the deceased was
recovered, was locked by the appellant Deepak.          PW3-Shiv
Kumar has stated that on the day of the incident, when his
deceased father came back from work, he gave lunch to him and
then gave massage to him at the ground floor room. Thereafter,
he was repeatedly sent to the market for checking the price of
some articles by his brother-appellant Deepak. When he came
back home in the evening, he found the door of the ground floor
Crl.A. 695/2017                                     Page 13 of 34

room locked and on asking, he came to know from his mother-
Rekha (PW2) that it was locked by the appellant Deepak on the
pretext of sprinkling some medicine. In the night, when he
woke up, he found crowd at the gate of his house and then he
came to know that his father was killed by appellant Deepak.
Almost similar testimony has been made by Smt.Rekha (PW2),
wife of the deceased. PW2 has categorically stated that when
she returned from her work, she asked her daughter Seema
(PW1) whether she had given lunch to her father, to which
Seema replied that the same was given by Shiv Kumar.
Thereafter, she kept on searching her deceased husband in the
locality but he could not be found. She found the door of the
ground floor locked, and on asking from appellant Deepak, he
told that he had sprinkled some medicine in the room and that is
why the room was locked. She along with Meera came back
after searching her husband to her house, and on asking by
Meera, appellant Deepak confessed that his father was no more
and that he had killed his father and then ran away. Seema
(PW1) also corroborated the testimony of PW2-Rekha and
PW3-Shiv Kumar. PW1 has stated that on 25.06.2007 at about
12 noon, his father came from work and he was given lunch was
Shiv Kumar (PW3). After having lunch and massage, her father
went to sleep in the room on the ground floor. Thereafter, Shiv
Kumar was sent to the market by Deepak. After the return of
her mother Rekha (PW2), it was found by this witness that the
room in which her father was sleeping, was locked. She also
Crl.A. 695/2017                                   Page 14 of 34

stated that when her mother asked Deepak as to why the room
was locked, he replied that he had sprinkled medicine to kill the
bed-bugs. When they asked for the keys of the room, Deepak
did not give it to them. Thereafter, her mother searched for her
father in the locality and then called her Mami Meera. On
asking by Meera to hand over the keys of the room, Deepak
confessed that he had done something with the father and that
her father was no more and then he ran away.
17.             Smt.Meera (PW5) has also corroborated the
testimony of PW2-Rekha and PW1-Seema. PW5 had deposed
that on the day of incident, Rekha came to her house and told
that Deepak was not opening the lock, and asked PW5 to
accompany her. Thereafter, PW5 accompanied Rekha to her
house and on reaching there, Deepak was found there. She
asked Deepak to open the lock to which he declined, and
confessed that he had killed his father and then he ran away.
18.             From the testimony of PW1-Seema, PW2-Rekha,
PW3-Shiv Kumar and PW5-Meera, it has duly been established
that on the day of incident the door of the room where the
deceased was sleeping was locked by the appellant Deepak. As
per their testimony, the excuse given by the appellant for
locking the door was that he had sprinkled medicine to kill the
bed-bugs. He did not open the door. When he was asked
sternly to open the lock on the door, he confessed his guilt that
he had killed his father, and then ran away. From the testimony
Crl.A. 695/2017                                     Page 15 of 34

of these witnesses, the circumstance of locking the room
wherein the deceased was sleeping and his presence at the spot
has clearly been established. It is also established that he gave a
false excuse for locking the room.
19.             The next circumstance put forth by the prosecution
is the recovery of the key with which the lock of the ground
floor room was locked at the instance of the appellant Deepak,
and it was the same key of the said lock. Investigating Officer
Rajesh Kumar (PW25) had deposed that Deepak @ Peta was
arrested on 02.07.2007 at the instance of a secret informer.
After his arrest, accused got recovered one piece of vest from
ganda nala near bushes, and one key was also recovered at his
instance. Both were seized vide seizure memo Ex.PW17/D and
Ex.PW17/E. He further deposed that accused disclosed that it
was the second piece of vest which was tied with the black bag
and that it was the key with which he locked the room. PW25
identified the piece of vest as Ex.P20 and key as Ex.P21.
Similar statements regarding apprehension/arrest of the
appellant Deepak and recovery of key and piece of vest by him
have been made by Ct. Omvir Singh (PW19) and Ct. Mohd.
Khalid (PW17).
20.             So far the recovery of key Ex.P21 is concerned, the
same is clearly admissible in view of Section 27 of the Indian
Evidence Act. The Supreme Court in the case of Dhananjoy
Crl.A. 695/2017                                       Page 16 of 34

Chatterjee alias Dhana Versus State of West Bengal1994 (2)
SCC 220 observed as under :
                      “....Though, the entire statement made by
                      the appellant before the police is
                      inadmissible in evidence being hit by
                      Sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act
                      but that part of his statement which led to
                      the discovery of the shirt and the pant is
                      clearly admissible under Section 27 of
                      the Evidence Act. We disregard the
                      inadmissible part of the statement and
                      take note only of that part of his
                      statement which distinctly relates to the
                      discovery of the articles pursuant to the
                      disclosure statement made by the
                      appellant as it is only so much of the
                      statement made by a person accused of
                      an offence while in custody of a police
                      officer, whether it is confessional or not,
                      as relates distinctly to the fact discovered
                      which is capable of being proved and
                      admitted into evidence. The discovery of
                      the fact in this connection includes the
                      discovery of an object found, the place
                      from which it is produced and the
                      knowledge of the accused as to its
                      existence.
                Similar views have been further expressed inNisar
Khan @ Guddu and Ors. v. State of Uttaranchal (2006) 9 SCC
386.
Crl.A. 695/2017                                          Page 17 of 34

21.             Dr.C.P. Singh (PW11) further established the
circumstance that the key Ex.P21 which was got recovered by
the appellant Deepak was the same key which was used to lock
the lock put on the room wherein the dead body of the deceased
was found.         Dr.C.P. Singh (PW11), Assistant Director
(Physics), Forensic Science Laboratory, Delhi had deposed that
on 31.07.2007, he had received two cloth parcels through Ct.
Mohd. Khalid. The said parcels were found containing one
hammer, one lock and one key.             He deposed that on
examination of lock and key, it was observed that the lever
system of the lock could be made in alignment for locking and
unlocking the lock. He was of the view that the lock could be
opened by the key. He proved his report as Ex.PW11/A.
22.             From   the  testimony  of  PW11      and    report
Ex.PW11/A also, the prosecution has successfully established
on record the circumstance that the lock used on the door of the
room in question could be opened by the key Ex.P21, which
was got recovered by the appellant as the key Ex.P21 was in
working order to lock and unlock the lock.
23.             The post mortem over the dead body of the
deceased was conducted by Dr.Mukta Rani (PW18). PW18 had
deposed that on 26.06.2007, she had conducted the postmortem
on the dead body of the deceased Puran Chand.                    On
examination, she found following external injuries :
Crl.A. 695/2017                                    Page 18 of 34

                1.Lacerated wound 3.5 x 0.5 x bone deep over left
                temporal area of head placed 6.5 cms above left ear
                pinna.
                2.Lacerated wound 7 x 1.5 cms x bone deep in
                front and above the left ear pinna.
                3.Lacerated wound 4.5 x 1 x 1 cm over inner and
                upper half of left ear pinna.
                4.Lacerated wound 2 x 0.5 x 2.5 cms over outer
                part of upper 1/3rd of left ear through and through
                the left ear.
                5.Bruise 5 x 2.5 cms reddish just below left ear.
                6.Abrasion 2.5 x 0.2 cms reddish over left side of
                nape of neck placed 5.5 cms behind left ear.
                7.Bruise 10 x 8 cms reddish over left ear and all
                around left ear.
                8.Bruise over inner side of both lips in an area of 7
                x 5 cms with loosening of left lower canine tooth
                and lacerations of gums and multiple fracture,
                dislocation of facial bones including jaw.
                9.Bruise 5 x 1.5 cms reddish over back of left
                shoulder placed 12 cms below shoulder tip.
                10.Abrasion 2 x 0.2 cms reddish over upper outer
                back of left side of chest placed 17 cms to left of
                midline and 7.5 cms below and inner to injury
                no.9.
                11.Bruise 5 x 5 cms over outer middle 1/3rd of back
                of left side of chest placed 5 cm below injury no.10
                and 16 cms to left of midline.
                12.Bruise 8 x 7 cms reddish over outer lateral part
                of middle 1/3rd of left side of chest placed 11.5 cms
                outer to midline and adjacent to injury no.11.
Crl.A. 695/2017                                          Page 19 of 34

                13.Bruise 16 x 7 cms reddish over outer lower
                lateral aspect of left side of chest placed 14.5 cms
                outer to midline and 6 cms below injury no.12.
                14.Bruise of dimension 4.5 cms x 2.5 cms x 2 cms
                reddish over outer lateral aspect of left side of
                abdomen placed 21 cms outer to midline.
                15.Bruise 2 x 2 cms reddish over lateral aspect of
                left side of abdomen just inner to injury no.14.
                16.Bruise 9 x 7 cms reddish over outer lower
                lateral aspect of left side of abdomen with abrasion
                in its centre of size 2 x 1 cms.
                17.Multiple abrasion reddish over back of right
                hand, two over knuckles of middle finger 0.1 x 0.1
                cms, 0.1 x 0.1 cms, 1 x 1 cms over middle back of
                right ring finger.
                18.Bruise 3 x 1 cms reddish over back of right
                middle finger.
                On internal examination, the doctor found effusion
of blood over ribcage on reflection of skin of chest. There were
fractures of all the ribs on left side along posterior vertebral
lines.     Both lungs of the deceased were found congested.
Spleen showed multiple lacerations and contusions.               In the
head, there was effusion of blood on reflection of scalp on left
side as well as temporalis muscle via injuries no.1 to 7. In the
skull, there were multiple comminuted fractures of vault and
base including facial bones via injuries no.1 to 8. Brain showed
contused laceration of both temporal lobes and subdural
haemorrhage over left frontal, temporal and right fronto-
temporo -parietal area of cerebrum via injuries no.1 to 7. There
Crl.A. 695/2017                                         Page 20 of 34

was subarachnoid haemorrhage all over the brain. The doctor
opined the cause of death as combined effect of cranio cerebral
damage and injuries to abdominal organs produced by blunt
force impact via injuries no.1 to 7 and 14 to 16. All the injuries
were opined to be ante mortem in nature, fresh in duration and
injuries no.1 to 7 and 14 to 16 were found to be sufficient to
cause death in ordinary course of nature individually and
collectively. Time since death was given as about one day (24
hours). PW18 proved the postmortem report prepared by her as
Ex.PW18/A.
24.             From the testimony of PW18 and the postmortem
report Ex.PW18/A, it has duly been established that the death of
the deceased had taken place due to ante mortem injuries caused
to him on his abdominal region and scalp and as per the opinion
of the doctor, all the said injuries are individually and
collectively sufficient to cause death in ordinary course of
nature. Therefore, it was duly proved that the death of the
deceased was a homicidal death and not otherwise.
25.             PW18 had also examined the alleged weapons of
offence i.e. hammers Ex.P1 and Ex.P2. PW18 had deposed that
on 06.07.2007, she received an application from Insp.
Rajeshwar Kumar regarding opinion in relation to examination
of weapons in respect of postmortem on the body of Puran
Chand. Two sealed parcels were received having two hammers
weighing 10 kg 300 gms and 8 kg 800 gms. The heavy hammer
Crl.A. 695/2017                                    Page 21 of 34

had blood stains. She had examined both the hammers and was
of the opinion that injury no.1 to 18 on the body of deceased
could be caused by the said weapons or by some similar
weapons. She proved her subsequent opinion as Ex.PW18/C.
She had identified both the hammers as Ex.P1 and Ex.P2.
There is no cross-examination of PW18 on any point. Thus, the
testimony of PW18 and her report remained unrebutted,
unchallenged and uncontroverted to the effect that the hammers
Ex.P1 and Ex.P2 recovered from the spot were the same
weapons with which the deceased was murdered.
26.             The important circumstance relied upon by the
prosecution is that the offence had taken place inside the room
which was locked by the appellant.       The dead body of the
deceased was recovered from inside the room when the door
was broken open and only the accused had the opportunity to
commit the offence. Prosecution mainly relied upon Section 106
of Indian Evidence Act which says that when any fact is
especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of
proving that fact is upon him.       In the present case, the
prosecution mainly relied upon the circumstance that the
occurrence had taken place on the ground floor room; that
murder had taken place inside the room; that the appellant has
no plausible explanation for the death of his father-Pooran
Chand; and the absence of explanation by the accused point to
his guilt. In similar circumstances, the Supreme Court in the
Crl.A. 695/2017                                   Page 22 of 34

case of Shambu Nath Mehra v. The State of Ajmer AIR 1956
SC 404 held that :
                   “This lays down the general rule that
                   in a criminal case the burden of proof
                   is on the prosecution and Section 106
                   is certainly not intended to relieve it of
                   that duty. On the contrary, it is
                   designed to meet certain exceptional
                   cases in which it would be impossible,
                   or at any rate disproportionately
                   difficult for the prosecution to
                   establish facts which are 'especially'
                   within the knowledge of the accused
                   and which he could prove without
                   difficulty or inconvenience. The word
                   'especially' stresses that. It means facts
                   that are pre-eminently or exceptionally
                   within his knowledge. If the section
                   were to be interpreted otherwise, it
                   would lead to the very startling
                   conclusion that in a murder case the
                   burden lies on the accused to prove
                   that he did not commit the murder
                   because who could know better than
                   he whether he did or did not. It is
                   evident that that cannot be the
                   intention and the Privy Council has
                   twice refused to construe this section,
                   as reproduced in certain other Acts
                   outside India, to mean that the burden
                   lies on an accused person to show that
                   he did not commit the crime for which
Crl.A. 695/2017                                      Page 23 of 34

                      he is tried. These cases are Attygalle
                      v. Emperor A.I.R. 1936 P.C. 169 and
                      Seneviratne v. R. [1936] 3 All E.R.
                      36, 49”
         Further in the case of State of West Bengal vs. Mir
Mohammad Omar & Ors. etc. AIR 2000 SC 2988, while
discussing section 106 of the Evidence Act, the court observed
that:
                      “The section is not intended to relieve
                      the prosecution of its burden to prove
                      the guilt of the accused beyond
                      reasonable doubt. But the Section
                      would apply to cases where the
                      prosecution has succeeded in proving
                      facts from which a reasonable
                      inference can be drawn regarding the
                      existence of certain other facts, unless
                      the accused by virtue of his special
                      knowledge regarding such facts, failed
                      to offer any explanation which might
                      drive the court to draw a different
                      inference.”
         Further, in the case of Trimukh Maroti Kirkan vs. State
of Maharashtra (2006) 10 SCC 681, scope of Section 106 of
the Evidence Act was discussed and it was observed as under :
                      “If an offence takes place inside the
                      privacy of a house and in such
                      circumstances where the assailants
                      have all the opportunity to plan and
                      commit the offence at the time and in
Crl.A. 695/2017                                        Page 24 of 34

                    circumstances of their choice, it will be
                    extremely difficult for the prosecution
                    to lead evidence to establish the guilt
                    of the accused if the strict principle of
                    circumstantial evidence, as noticed
                    above, is insisted upon by the Courts.
                    A Judge does not preside over a
                    criminal trial merely to see that no
                    innocent man is punished. A Judge
                    also presides to see that a guilty man
                    does not escape. Both are public
                    duties. The law does not enjoin a duty
                    on the prosecution to lead evidence of
                    such character which is almost
                    impossible to be led or at any rate
                    extremely difficult to be led. The duty
                    on the prosecution is to lead such
                    evidence which it is capable of
                    leading, having regard to the facts and
                    circumstances of the case.”
27.             The principle underlying Section 106 of the
Evidence Act is that the burden to establish those facts, which
are within his personal knowledge is cast on the person
concerned, and if he fails to establish or explain those facts, an
adverse inference may be drawn against him. Explaining the
death of deceased, the appellant has simply denied having
committed any such offence.        It is not in dispute that the
deceased was the father of the appellant. It is also not in dispute
that he was present in his house on the day of incident. The
prosecution witnesses, particularly, PW1-Seema, PW2-Rekha
and PW5-Meera have categorically stated that on the day of
incident when they asked the appellant as to why he had locked
Crl.A. 695/2017                                      Page 25 of 34

the room, he took the excuse that he had sprinkled some
medicine to kill the bed-bugs and then on the insistence of
Meera (PW5) to open the room, Deepak confessed his guilt that
he had killed his father and then he ran away from the spot. It
has also been established on record that the key was recovered
at the instance of the appellant with which the room was locked
wherein the dead body of the deceased was recovered. The
report of the FSL expert further established that the said key
belonged to the same lock which was identified to be put up on
the door wherein the dead body of the deceased was lying.
Therefore, we are of the view that the present case is a fit case
to raise a presumption under Section 106 of the Evidence Act
against the appellant.
28.             It was argued by the learned counsel for the
appellant that the prosecution has failed to prove any motive for
commission of alleged murder of deceased by the appellant. It
was contended that PW1-Seema, daughter of the deceased has
stated that she was never teased or molested by her deceased
father, whereas the case of the prosecution from the very
beginning was that the appellant had enmity against his
deceased father due to teasing and molestation of his sister
Seema (PW1) who were born from the first marriage of their
mother. It was also submitted that the prosecution has also tried
to put on record another motive that the deceased used to give
step-fatherly treatment to the appellant, which led to the
Crl.A. 695/2017                                     Page 26 of 34

commission of his murder. It was further submitted that since
the prosecution has failed to prove any motive, the prosecution
case falls and the appellant is entitled for acquittal.
29.             Though it is correct that initially the prosecution
has alleged that the motive behind the commission of murder of
the deceased by the appellant was teasing and molesting of his
sister (PW1-Seema) and step-fatherly treatment given by the
deceased to the appellant, but there is no such evidence on
record to establish the same. We are of the view that in cases
based on circumstantial evidence, though motive plays an
important aspect, but when the prosecution has successfully
established all the circumstances from the ocular and reliable
testimony of witnesses, absence of motive cannot be made basis
to discard the case of the prosecution in toto.            In similar
circumstances, the Supreme Court in the case of Thaman
Kumar v. State of Union Territory of Chandigarh (2003) 6
SCC 380 held as under :
                     “There is no such principle or rule of
                     law that where the prosecution fails to
                     prove the motive for commission of
                     the crime, it must necessarily result in
                     acquittal of the accused. Where the
                     ocular evidence is found to be
                     trustworthy and reliable and finds
                     corroboration from the medical
                     evidence, a finding of guilt can safely
                     be recorded even if the motive for the
                     commission of the crime has not been
                     proved. Hence, in the facts and
Crl.A. 695/2017                                         Page 27 of 34

                     circumstances of the case, the absence
                     of any evidence on the point of
                     motive cannot have any such impact
                     so as to discard the other reliable
                     evidence available on record which
                     unerringly establishes the guilt of the
                     accused.”
30.             Next contention made by the learned counsel for
the appellant was that PW2-Rekha had informed PW6-Vinod
Kumar that Shibu had put the lock on the door. To support his
arguments, the counsel has referred to the PCR Form
Ex.PW13/A in which it has been mentioned that Vinod Kumar
had sent a message in which it has been mentioned that Rekha
had informed that the room was locked by Shibu. It was further
submitted that PW3-Shiv Kumar is also known as Shibu, and
happened to be real son of PW2-Rekha and the deceased.
31.             To deal with the above contention, we have gone
through the PCR form Ex.PW13/A, statement of PW13-HC
Lalta Prasad, testimony of PW2-Rekha and of PW6-Vinod
Kumar.        PW13-HC Lalta Prasad had deposed that on
25.06.2007, he was working as HC at PCR Control Room. At
about 11.28 p.m., he had received a call regarding commission
of murder at house no.6/207, Trilok Puri. He filled up the PCR
Form, Ex.PW13/A and flashed the message.
32.             PCR Form Ex.PW13/A shows that on 25.06.2007,
an information was received by the Police Control Room to the
effect that a murder took place at Block No.6, House No.6/207,
Crl.A. 695/2017                                      Page 28 of 34

Trilok Puri. Further at about 2345 hours, a report was received
from the Van that Rekha, wife of Pooran Singh met at the spot
who informed that Shibu had closed the door. It is apparent
from the PCR Form Ex.PW13/A that the informant was one
Vinod Kumar. So far the information allegedly given to police
by Rekha regarding closing of door by Shibu is concerned,
PW2-Rekha in her testimony had denied the same. She has
categorically stated that “….It is incorrect to suggest that when
PCR van officials came, I told them that ‘Shiv Kumar ne ek
kamra band kar rakha hai’. There is complete denial by PW2-
Rekha that on the day of incident she had made any such
statement to the police that Shibu had closed the door, though
she stated that Shiv Kumar was also known as Shibu.
33.             Vinod Kumar (PW6) was the informant on whose
information PCR Form Ex.PW13/A was filled up.                In his
testimony before the Court, PW6-Vinod Kumar has stated that
when he went to the spot, he saw one black bora (sack) from
which the blood was flowing towards the latrine under the
staircase. On seeing this, he asked the people not to touch the
bora and made a call to the police on no.100. Though he has
admitted having informed the police on no.100 about the
incident taken place at the spot, but he had not stated anything
with regard to recording of any statement of Rekha in his
presence by the police, or him informing to the police about the
room being locked by Shibu. Rather, the defence has cast a
Crl.A. 695/2017                                     Page 29 of 34

suspicion about the informant himself and making any such
information to the police which led to filling up of form
Ex.PW13/A. A suggestion was given by the appellant to the
effect that he had not made any such call to the police : “….It is
incorrect to suggest that I did not make any telephone call over
no.100 and am deposing falsely at the instance of family
members of deceased.” PW6-Vinod never stated that he made
any such statement to the police. From the perusal of entire
evidence, the submission made by the counsel for the appellant
does not find any basis, reason being that the PCR Form
Ex.PW13/A is based upon the hearsay statement of witness
Vinod Kumar (PW6). This fact was put to PW2-Rekha who
categorically denied making any such information to PW6-
Vinod Kumar. Vinod Kumar was never questioned that he had
made the statement to the effect that such information was
given to him by PW2-Rekha. Rather a suggestion was given to
PW6-Vinod Kumar that he had not made any call to the police.
So, the contention that PW2-Rekha informed PW6-Vinod
Kumar, and Vinod Kumar informed the police that Shibu had
put a lock on the room, which was recorded in PCR Form
Ex.PW13/A does not find any legally admissible substance or
basis.
34.             Further contention of the learned counsel for the
appellant is that the chain of circumstances in the present case is
incomplete and if the prosecution has failed to complete the
Crl.A. 695/2017                                      Page 30 of 34

chain, no conviction can be based. Undoubtedly, it is true that
in cases based on circumstantial evidence, the prosecution is
bound to prove beyond reasonable doubt every chain of
circumstances and the circumstances so alleged should be
proved from which no other inference than that of the guilt of
the accused can be made out. While dealing with the similar
situation, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in C. Chenga Reddy and
Ors. v. State of A.P. (1996) 10 SCC 193, held as under:
                      “21. In a case based on
                      circumstantial evidence, the settled
                      law is that the circumstances from
                      which the conclusion of guilt is
                      drawn should be fully proved and
                      such      circumstances     must     be
                      conclusive in nature. Moreover, all
                      the     circumstances     should     be
                      complete and there should be no gap
                      left in the chain of evidence. Further,
                      the proved circumstances must be
                      consistent only with the hypothesis
                      of the guilt of the accused and totally
                      inconsistent with his innocence. In
                      the present case the courts below
                      have overlooked these settled
                      principles and allowed suspicion to
                      take the place of proof besides
                      relying upon some inadmissible
                      evidence.”
                Further in the case of Shivu and Anr. v. Registrar
General, High Court of Karnataka and Anr. (2007) 4 SCC
713, it was held as:
Crl.A. 695/2017                                        Page 31 of 34

                      “12. It has been consistently laid
                      down by this Court that where a case
                      rests squarely on circumstantial
                      evidence, the inference of guilt can be
                      justified    only when         all     the
                      incriminating facts and circumstances
                      are found to be incompatible with the
                      innocence of the accused or the guilt
                      of any other person. (See Hukam
                      Singh v. State of Rajasthan (1977) 2
                      SCC 99; Eradu v. State of Hyderabad
                      (AIR 1956 SC 316), Earabhadrappa v.
                      State of Karnataka (1983) 2 SCC 330,
                      State of U.P. v. Sukhbasi (1985
                      (Supp.) SCC 79), Balwinder Singh v.
                      State of Punjab (1987) 1 SCC 16 and
                      Ashok Kumar Chatterjee v. State of
                      M.P. (1989 Supp. (1) SCC 560). The
                      circumstances from which                an
                      inference as to the guilt of the accused
                      is drawn have to be proved beyond
                      reasonable doubt and have to be
                      shown to be closely connected with
                      the principal fact sought to be inferred
                      from those circumstances. In Bhagat
                      Ram v. State of Punjab AIR 1954 SC
                      621, it was laid down that where the
                      case depends upon the conclusion
                      drawn from circumstances, the
                      cumulative        effect      of       the
                      circumstances must be such as to
                      negative the innocence of the accused
                      and bring home the offences beyond
                      any reasonable doubt.
                Further, in the case of Padala Veera Reddy v. State
of A.P. and Ors. 1989 Supp. (2) SCC 706, it was laid down that
Crl.A. 695/2017                                          Page 32 of 34

in a case of circumstantial evidence such evidence must satisfy
the following test:
                      (1) the circumstances from which an
                      inference of guilt is sought to be drawn,
                      must be cogently and firmly established;
                      (2) those circumstances should be of a
                      definite tendency unerringly pointing
                      towards guilt of the accused;
                      (3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively,
                      should form a chain so complete that there
                      is no escape from the conclusion that
                      within all human probability the crime was
                      committed by the accused and none else;
                      and
                      (4) the circumstantial evidence in order to
                      sustain conviction must be complete and
                      incapable of explanation of any other
                      hypothesis than that of the guilt of the
                      accused and such evidence should not only
                      be consistent with the guilt of the accused
                      but should be inconsistent with his
                      innocence. (See Gambhir v. State of
                      Maharashtra (1982) 2 SCC 351).
35.             In the case at hand, we are of the view that the
prosecution has successfully established all the circumstances
against the appellant like, his presence at the place of incident,
locking of room of the deceased by the appellant, admission of
guilt in the form of extra-judicial confession, recovery of
weapons of offence inside the room, recovery of key at the
instance of the appellant, and report of FSL expert to the effect
that the lock put up on the door of the room could be opened
Crl.A. 695/2017                                       Page 33 of 34

from the recovered key. There is no missing link of events and
from the circumstances brought on record, we are of the view
that the only inference which can be incurred is the guilt of the
appellant in commission of murder of his father.
36.             In view of the above discussion, we are of the view
that the prosecution has successfully established the charge of
commission of murder of the deceased by the appellant/convict.
There is no merit in the instant appeal. Thus, the judgment of
conviction and the order on sentence passed by the trial court
are accordingly upheld.
37.             Consequently, the appeal is hereby dismissed.
                                         P.S. TEJI, J
                                         VIPIN SANGHI, J
JANUARY 19, 2018
dd
Crl.A. 695/2017                                       Page 34 of 34


