* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ CRL.M.C. 82/2016 & Crl.M.A. No. 320/2016
                                   Date of Decision : March 17th, 2016
  NAVED & ORS                                   ..... Petitioners
                      Through      Mr.Sahid Azad, Adv.
                                   Mr.Anubhav Mehrotra, Adv.
                      versus
  STATE ( GNCTD) & ANR                                  ..... Respondents
                      Through      Ms.Manjeet Arya, APP for the State.
                                   Mr.Dinesh, PS Jamia Nagar/SE.
                                   Ms.Meenu Sharma, Adv. for R-2.
                                   Respondent no.2 in person.
          CORAM:
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.S.TEJI
  P.S.TEJI, J.
  1.      The present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed by
  the petitioners, namely, Sh. Naved, Sh. Musahir Khan and Sh.
  Wajahat Ali @ Bhajji for quashing of FIR No.298/2011 dated
  17.06.2011, under Sections 324/341/427/506/34 IPC registered at
  Police Station Jamia Nagar on the basis of Memorandum of
  Understanding (MOU) in view of the settlement arrived at between the
  petitioners and respondent no.2, namely, Sh. Mohd. Azhar along with
  others on 19.12.2015.
  2.      Learned Additional Public Prosecutor for respondent-State
  submitted that the respondent no.2, present in the Court has been
  Crl.M.C. 82/2016                                             Page 1 of 7

identified to be the first-informant/complainant in the FIR in question
by the counsel.
3.      The factual matrix of the present case is that the FIR in question
was lodged by the complainant on the allegation that on 16.06.2011 at
about 11:30 pm, he along with his friend Hashim was going to Haji
Colony on his motorcycle. When the complainant reached near the
Jamia College, three boys namely, Naved, Musahir and Bhajji came
from behind in a motorcycle and they stooped their motorcycle in
front of the motorcycle of the complainant and they started beating the
complainant. Naved attacked the complainant with a sharp pointed
weapon which inflicted injuries on his left hand and back. The
complainant got treated in the Holy Family Hospital.
        After completion of the investigation, charge sheet was filed
against the petitioners. Later on, the parties arrived at an amicable
settlement and resolved all their issues with the intervention of well-
wishers and common friends.
4.      Respondent No.2 present in the Court, submitted that the
dispute between the parties has been amicably resolved. As per the
MOU, it is agreed that the all disputes and differences have been
resolved with the intervention of the elderly people from both sides,
both the parties and their family members have amicably settled all
their disputes out of Court unconditionally with their sweet will and
desire and they have withdrawn all their allegations against each other
irrevocably and do not want to proceed further against each other. It is
also agreed that both parties have agreed to withdraw their respective
complaints against each other and shall cooperate with each other for
Crl.M.C. 82/2016                                            Page 2 of 7

quashing of FIRs before this Court by making appropriate statements
before this Court and the Trial Court as and when required.
Respondent No.2 affirmed the contents of the aforesaid settlement and
of his affidavit dated 05.01.2016 supporting this petition. In the
affidavit, the respondent no.2 has stated that he has no objection if the
FIR in question is quashed. All the disputes and differences have been
resolved through mutual consent. Now no dispute with petitioners
survives and so, the proceedings arising out of the FIR in question be
brought to an end. Statement of the respondent No.2 has been
recorded in this regard in which he stated that he has entered into a
compromise with the petitioners and has settled all the disputes with
them. He further stated that he has no objection if the FIR in question
is quashed.
5.      In Gian Singh v. State of Punjab (2012) 10 SCC 303 Apex
Court has recognized the need of amicable resolution of disputes in
cases like the instant one, by observing as under:-
                 “61. In other words, the High Court must consider
                 whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest
                 of justice to continue with the criminal proceedings
                 or continuation of criminal proceedings would
                 tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
                 settlement and compromise between the victim and
                 the wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of
                 justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an
                 end and if the answer to the above question(s) is in the
                 affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
                 jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings.”
6.      The aforesaid dictum stands reiterated by the Apex Court in a
recent judgment in Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab (2014) 6 SCC
466. The relevant observations of the Apex Court in Narinder Singh
Crl.M.C. 82/2016                                                        Page 3 of 7

(Supra) are as under:-
                 “29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up
                 and lay down the following principles by which the
                 High Court would be guided in giving adequate
                 treatment to the settlement between the parties and
                 exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code
                 while accepting the settlement and quashing the
                 proceedings or refusing to accept the settlement with
                 direction to continue with the criminal proceedings:
                  29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code
                 is to be distinguished from the power which lies in the
                 Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of
                 the Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code,
                 the High Court has inherent power to quash the
                 criminal proceedings even in those cases which are
                 not compoundable, where the parties have settled the
                 matter between themselves. However, this power is to
                 be exercised sparingly and with caution.
                 29.2. When the parties have reached the settlement
                 and on that basis petition for quashing the criminal
                 proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases
                 would be to secure:
                 (i) ends of justice, or
                 (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court.
                 While exercising the power the High Court is to form
                 an opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
                 29.3. Such a power is not to be exercised in those
                 prosecutions which involve heinous and serious
                 offences of mental depravity or offences like murder,
                 rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in
                 nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly,
                 for the offences alleged to have been committed under
                 special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act
                 or the offences committed by public servants while
                 working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely
                 on the basis of compromise between the victim and
                 the offender.
                 29.4. On the other hand, those criminal cases having
                 overwhelmingly and predominantly civil character,
Crl.M.C. 82/2016                                                     Page 4 of 7

                 particularly those arising out of commercial
                 transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship
                 or family disputes should be quashed when the parties
                 have resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
7.      The inherent powers of the High Court ought to be exercised to
prevent the abuse of process of law and to secure the ends of justice.
The respondent no.2 agreed to the quashing of the FIR in question and
has stated that the matter has been settled out of his own free will. As
the matter has been settled and compromised amicably, so, there
would be an extraordinary delay in the process of law if the legal
proceedings between the parties are carried on. So, this Court is of the
considered opinion that this is a fit case to invoke the jurisdiction
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to prevent the abuse of process of law and
to secure the ends of justice.
8.      The incorporation of inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
is meant to deal with the situation in the absence of express provision
of law to secure the ends of justice such as, where the process is
abused or misused; where the ends of justice cannot be secured; where
the process of law is used for unjust or unlawful object; to avoid the
causing of harassment to any person by using the provision of Cr.P.C.
or to avoid the delay of the legal process in the delivery of justice.
Whereas, the inherent power is not to be exercised to circumvent the
express provisions of law.
9.      It is settled law that the inherent power of the High Court under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. should be used sparingly. The Hon’ble Apex
Court in the case of State of Maharashtra through CBI v. Vikram
Crl.M.C. 82/2016                                                     Page 5 of 7

Anatrai Doshi and Ors. MANU/SC/0842/2014 and in the case of
Inder Singh Goswami v. State of Uttaranchal MANU/SC/0808/2009
has observed that powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. must be exercised
sparingly, carefully and with great caution. Only when the Court
comes to the conclusion that there would be manifest injustice or there
would be abuse of the process of the Court if such power is not
exercised, Court would quash the proceedings.
10.     It is a well settled law that where the High Court is convinced
that the offences are entirely personal in nature and therefore do not
affect public peace or tranquillity and where it feels that quashing of
such proceedings on account of compromise would bring about peace
and would secure ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash them.
In such cases, pursuing prosecution would be waste of time and
energy. Non-compoundable offences are basically an obstruction in
entering into compromise.         In certain cases, the main offence is
compoundable but the connected offences are not. In the case of B.S.
Joshi and others v. State of Haryana and another 2003 (4) SCC 675
the Hon’ble Apex Court observed that even though the provisions of
Section 320 Cr.P.C. would not apply to such offences which are not
compoundable, it did not limit or affect the powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C. The Hon’ble Apex Court laid down that if for the purpose of
securing the ends of justice, quashing of FIR becomes necessary,
section 320 Cr.P.C. would not be a bar to the exercise of power of
quashing.       In the nutshell, the Hon’ble Apex Court justified the
exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the
proceedings to secure the ends of justice in view of the special facts
Crl.M.C. 82/2016                                          Page 6 of 7

and circumstances of the case, even where the offences were non-
compoundable.
        In the light of the aforesaid, this Court is of the view that
notwithstanding the fact that the offence under Section 324 IPC is a
non-compoundable offence, there should be no impediment in
quashing the FIR under this section, if the Court is otherwise satisfied
that the facts and circumstances of the case so warrant.
 11.    In the facts and circumstances of this case and in view of
statement made by the respondent No.2, the FIR in question warrants
to be put to an end and proceedings emanating thereupon need to be
quashed.
12.     Accordingly, this petition is allowed and FIR No.298/2011
dated 17.06.2011, under Sections 324/341/427/506/34 IPC registered
at Police Station Jamia Nagar and the proceedings emanating
therefrom are quashed against the petitioners.
13.     This petition is accordingly disposed of.
14.     Application Crl.M.A. No. 320/2016 is also disposed of.
                                                          (P.S.TEJI)
                                                            JUDGE
MARCH 17, 2016
dd
Crl.M.C. 82/2016                                         Page 7 of 7


