* IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ CRL.M.C. 2140/2016
                                   Date of Decision: August 22nd, 2016
  SHIJAUDDIN & ORS.                                    ..... Petitioners
                      Through      Mr.Ravinder Kumar Gupta,
                                   Advocate.
                      versus
  STATE & ANR.                                         ..... Respondents
                      Through      Mr.Izhar Ahmad, APP for the State
                                   with SI Mohd. Usman, PS Chandani
                                   Mahal.
                                   Mr.Ajay M. Lal, Advocate with
                                   respondent no.2 in person.
  CORAM:
  HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.S.TEJI
  P.S.TEJI, J.
  1.      The present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed by
  the petitioners, namely, Sh. Shijauddin, Sh. Sultan Salauddin, Ms.
  Shahnaaz Begum and Ms. Nazia for quashing of FIR No. 95/2012
  dated 24.06.2012, under Sections 498-A/406/34 IPC registered at
  Police Station Chandni Mahal on the basis of the Mediation Report of
  the Delhi Mediation Centre, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi dated
  10.03.2014 between petitioner no.1 and respondent no.2, namely, Ms.
  Lubna and Divorce deed dated 03.06.2014.
  2.      Learned Additional Public Prosecutor for respondent-State
  submitted that the respondent No.2, present in the Court has been
  identified to be the complainant/first-informant of the FIR in question
  by her counsel.
  3.      The factual matrix of the present case is that the marriage was
  solemnized between petitioner no.1 and the complainant/respondent
  Crl.M.C. 2140/2016                                            Page 1 of 8

no.2 on 06.04.2011 as per Muslim rites and ceremonies. In just a few
days of their marriage, the in-laws and husband of the complainant
started harassing her. It is the case of the complainant that her husband
used to beat her mercilessly and would ask her to bring money from
her parental home. Due to such rude and harsh behavior of the accused
persons, the complainant was forced to leave her matrimonial home.
        Thereafter, the complainant got lodged the complaint following
which the FIR in question was registered against the petitioners.
During the pendency of the proceedings, the matter was settled
between the petitioner no. 1 and the respondent no. 2.
4.      Respondent No.2, present in the Court, submitted that the
dispute between the parties has been amicably resolved. It is pertinent
to mention that, as per the Divorce Deed dated 03.06.2014 petitioner
no.1 has given triple talaq to respondent no.2 in the presence of
witnesses. The parties have agreed to settle all their disputes for the
total consideration amount of Rs.90,000/- in full and final settlement
of the claim of respondent no.2 regarding her istridhan, dowry articles,
jewellery, maintenance for iddat period, past, present and future
maintenance and the amount of mehar of Rs.15,000/-; in addition to
the aforesaid amount respondent no.2 has already received a sum of
Rs.1,00,000/- before the Court in two installments at the time of grant
of bail to petitioner no.1 in lieu of istridhan etc. including jewellery. It
is agreed that the respondent no.2 shall withdraw the case bearing
no.681/06/2012 under section 12 of DV Act pending before the Ld.
MM, Mahila Court, Delhi. It is agreed that the parties, after signing
the divorce deed, shall not initiate any civil or criminal proceedings in
Crl.M.C. 2140/2016                                            Page 2 of 8

future against each other or their family members. It is agreed between
the parties that respondent no.2 shall co-operate with the petitioner
no.1 in getting the FIR in question quashed before this Court and that
the petitioner no.1 shall pay a sum of Rs.30,000/- to respondent no.2 at
the time of such quashing.
        Respondent No.2 affirmed the contents of the aforesaid
settlement and of her affidavit dated 14.10.2015 supporting this
petition. In the affidavit, she has stated that she has no objection if the
FIR in question is quashed. All the disputes and differences have been
resolved through mutual consent. Now no dispute with petitioners
survives and so, the proceedings arising out of the FIR in question be
brought to an end. Statement of the respondent No.2 has been
recorded in this regard in which she stated that she has entered into a
compromise with the petitioners and has settled all the disputes with
them. She further stated that she has no objection if the FIR in
question is quashed.
5.      In Gian Singh v. State of Punjab (2012) 10 SCC 303 Apex
Court has recognized the need of amicable resolution of disputes in
cases like the instant one, by observing as under:-
            “61.       In other words, the High Court must consider
            whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice
            to continue with the criminal proceedings or continuation of
            criminal proceedings would tantamount to abuse of process of
            law despite settlement and compromise between the victim
            and the wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of justice, it
            is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if the
            answer to the above question(s) is in the affirmative, the High
            Court shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal
            proceedings.”
Crl.M.C. 2140/2016                                                     Page 3 of 8

6.      The aforesaid dictum stands reiterated by the Apex Court in a
recent judgment in Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab (2014) 6 SCC
466. The relevant observations of the Apex Court in Narinder Singh
(Supra) are as under:-
            “29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay
            down the following principles by which the High Court would
            be guided in giving adequate treatment to the settlement
            between the parties and exercising its power under Section 482
            of the Code while accepting the settlement and quashing the
            proceedings or refusing to accept the settlement with direction
            to continue with the criminal proceedings:
            29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be
            distinguished from the power which lies in the Court to
            compound the offences under Section 320 of the Code. No
            doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has
            inherent power to quash the criminal proceedings even in those
            cases which are not compoundable, where the parties have
            settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
            to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
            29.2. When the parties have reached the settlement and on that
            basis petition for quashing the criminal proceedings is filed,
            the guiding factor in such cases would be to secure:
            (i) ends of justice, or
            (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court.
            While exercising the power the High Court is to form an
            opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
            29.3. Such a power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions
            which involve heinous and serious offences of mental
            depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such
            offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on
            society. Similarly, for the offences alleged to have been
            committed under special statute like the Prevention of
            Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants
            while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on
            the basis of compromise between the victim and the offender.
            29.4. On the other hand, those criminal cases having
            overwhelmingly and predominantly civil character,
Crl.M.C. 2140/2016                                                   Page 4 of 8

            particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or
            arising out of matrimonial relationship or family disputes
            should be quashed when the parties have resolved their entire
            disputes among themselves.
7.      The inherent powers of the High Court ought to be exercised to
prevent the abuse of process of law and to secure the ends of justice.
The respondent no.2 agrees to the quashing of the FIR in question
without any threat or coercion or undue influence and has stated that
the matter has been settled out of her own free will. As the matter has
been settled and compromised amicably, so, there would be an
extraordinary delay in the process of law if the legal proceedings
between the parties are carried on. So, this Court is of the considered
opinion that this is a fit case to invoke the jurisdiction under Section
482 Cr.P.C. to prevent the abuse of process of law and to secure the
ends of justice.
8.      The incorporation of inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
is meant to deal with the situation in the absence of express provision
of law to secure the ends of justice such as, where the process is
abused or misused; where the ends of justice cannot be secured; where
the process of law is used for unjust or unlawful object; to avoid the
causing of harassment to any person by using the provision of Cr.P.C.
or to avoid the delay of the legal process in the delivery of justice.
Whereas, the inherent power is not to be exercised to circumvent the
express provisions of law.
9.      It is settled law that the inherent power of the High Court under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. should be used sparingly. The Hon’ble Apex
Crl.M.C. 2140/2016                                                Page 5 of 8

Court in the case of State of Maharashtra through CBI v. Vikram
Anatrai Doshi and Ors. MANU/SC/0842/2014 and in the case of
Inder Singh Goswami v. State of Uttaranchal MANU/SC/0808/2009
has observed that powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. must be exercised
sparingly, carefully and with great caution. Only when the Court
comes to the conclusion that there would be manifest injustice or there
would be abuse of the process of the Court if such power is not
exercised, Court would quash the proceedings.
10.     It is a well settled law that where the High Court is convinced
that the offences are entirely personal in nature and therefore do not
affect public peace or tranquility and where it feels that quashing of
such proceedings on account of compromise would bring about peace
and would secure ends of justice, it should not hesitate to quash them.
In such cases, pursuing prosecution would be waste of time and
energy. Non-compoundable offences are basically an obstruction in
entering into compromise.         In certain cases, the main offence is
compoundable but the connected offences are not. In the case of B.S.
Joshi and others v. State of Haryana and another 2003 (4) SCC 675
the Hon’ble Apex Court observed that even though the provisions of
Section 320 Cr.P.C. would not apply to such offences which are not
compoundable, it did not limit or affect the powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C. The Hon’ble Apex Court laid down that if for the purpose of
securing the ends of justice, quashing of FIR becomes necessary,
section 320 Cr.P.C. would not be a bar to the exercise of power of
quashing.       In the nutshell, the Hon’ble Apex Court justified the
exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the
Crl.M.C. 2140/2016                                          Page 6 of 8

proceedings to secure the ends of justice in view of the special facts
and circumstances of the case, even where the offences were non-
compoundable.
        In the light of the aforesaid, this Court is of the view that
notwithstanding the fact the offence under Section 498A IPC is a non-
compoundable offence, there should be no impediment in quashing the
FIR under this section, if the Court is otherwise satisfied that the facts
and circumstances of the case so warrant.
11.     The Courts in India are now normally taking the view that
endeavour should be taken to promote conciliation and secure speedy
settlement of disputes relating to marriage and family affairs such as,
matrimonial disputes between the couple or/and between the wife and
her in-laws. India being a vast country naturally has large number of
married persons resulting into high numbers of matrimonial disputes
due to differences in temperament, life-styles, opinions, thoughts etc.
between such couples, due to which majority is coming to the Court to
get redressal. In its 59th report, the Law Commission of India had
emphasized that while dealing with disputes concerning the family, the
Court ought to adopt an approach radically different from that
adopted in ordinary civil proceedings and that it should make
reasonable efforts at settlement before the commencement of the trial.
Further it is also the constitutional mandate for speedy disposal of
such disputes and to grant quick justice to the litigants. But, our
Courts are already over burdened due to pendency of large number of
cases because of which it becomes difficult for speedy disposal of
matrimonial disputes alone. As the matrimonial disputes are mainly
Crl.M.C. 2140/2016                                           Page 7 of 8

between the husband and the wife and personal matters are involved
in such disputes, so, it requires conciliatory procedure to bring a
settlement between them. Nowadays, mediation has played a very
important role in settling the disputes, especially, matrimonial
disputes and has yielded good results. The Court must exercise its
inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to put an end to the
matrimonial litigations at the earliest so that the parties can live
peacefully.
12.     Since the subject matter of this FIR is essentially matrimonial,
which now stands mutually and amicably settled between the parties,
therefore, continuance of proceedings arising out of the FIR in
question would be an exercise in futility and is a fit case for this Court
to exercise its inherent jurisdiction.
13.     In the facts and circumstances of this case, in view of statement
made by the respondent No.2 and the compromise arrived at between
the parties, the FIR in question warrants to be put to an end and
proceedings emanating thereupon need to be quashed.
14.     Accordingly, this petition is allowed and FIR No. 95/2012 dated
24.06.2012, under Sections 498-A/406/34 IPC registered at Police
Station Chandni Mahal and the proceedings emanating therefrom are
quashed against the petitioners.
15.     This petition is accordingly disposed of.
                                                             (P.S.TEJI)
                                                               JUDGE
AUGUST 22, 2016/dd
Crl.M.C. 2140/2016                                            Page 8 of 8


