                        ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                             F.A.O. NO.327 OF 2011
     From the common order dated 02.08.2011 passed by the Civil Judge
     (Senior Division), Berhampur in I.A. No.115 of 2010 and I.A. No.16 of
     2011 arising out of C.S. No.478 of 2010.
                                      _________
     Smt. Namita Kumari Jena                      ……          Appellant
                                     Versus
     Smt. Moningi Rajani & another                ……          Respondents
              For Appellant          :      M/s. U.C. Behura,
                                            D.K. Mohapatra, B.K. Behura.
              For Respondents        :      M/s. S. P. Mohanty,
                                            P. Lenka, M. Barik.
     PRESENT :
             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAGHUBIR DASH
     Date of hearing : 19.02.2014             Date of judgment : 03.03.2014
R. DASH, J.    This appeal is against the common order dated 02.08.2011
     passed by learned Civil Judge (Senior Division), Berhampur in I.A.
     No.115 of 20103 and I.A. No.16 of 2011 arising out of C.S. No.478 of
     2010.
     2.           The present Appellant is the plaintiff in the civil suit and
     petitioner in the I.A. No.115 of 2010 whereas the Respondents are the
     defendants-opposite parties before the lower court. In I.A. No.16 of
     2011, the defendants are the petitioners and the plaintiff is the
     opposite party.

                                     2
3.           Vide the impugned order, the learned lower court has
dismissed I.A. No.115 of 2010 and allowed I.A. No.16 of 2011. Being
aggrieved for dismissal of I.A. No.115 of 2010, the Appellant has
preferred the present appeal.
 4.          The Appellant as plaintiff has filed the suit against the
Respondents-defendants      for  specific   performance   of   contract
executed by late M. Prasad Rao, the husband of the Respondent No.1
and father of Respondent No.2.       It is asserted in the plaint that
during life time of M. Prasad Rao, he executed two unregistered
Chuktinama, one on 17.10.2002 and another on 16.01.2005 for the
self-same property, agreeing to execute sale deed in the name of
Appellant to alienate the suit land within eleven months of final
disposal of T.S. No.5 of 1983 in the court of Civil Judge (Senior
Division), Berhampur, admitting to have received Rs.30,00,000/- in
advance under agreement dated 17.10.2002 and Rs.13,00,000/-
under agreement dated 16.01.2005.          In the meanwhile, said M.
Prasad Rao has died on 19.02.2007 leaving behind the defendants as
his legal heirs and successors to the suit property. It is alleged that
the defendants are trying to alienate the suit schedule land creating
third party interest.     Therefore, the plaintiff filed the suit for
permanent      injunction   restraining    the   defendants    not   to

                                      3
alienate/sale/mortgage/lease out or to make agreement creating
third party interest in the suit property.
5.           The defendants’ stand is that M. Prasad Rao had never
executed any Chuktinama in respect of the suit land, which has,
admittedly, fallen to the share of M. Prasad Rao. After his death the
defendants as his successors-in-interest have been enjoying the suit
schedule property and also maintaining pending litigations relating to
the suit property. Therefore, if they are restrained from dealing with
their property in the manner they like, they will sustain irreparable
loss and immense inconvenience.
6.           Observing that the validity of the agreement and the
question of acceptance of part consideration being substantial
questions, which would be determined while finally deciding the suit
on its own merit, learned lower court concluded that the plaintiff has
got a prima facie case in his favour. On the point of irreparable loss,
the learned lower court recorded a negative answer observing that the
loss likely to be sustained by the plaintiff, who has claimed to have
paid part consideration to the tune of Rs.43,00,000/-, could be
adequately compensated.       Regarding balance of convenience, the
learned lower court observed that since the defendants are in
possession of the suit land, they would suffer inconvenience if they
are not allowed to deal with the property in the manner they like.

                                    4
7.           Challenging the impugned order, learned counsel for the
Appellant submits that the learned lower court has failed to
appreciate materials on record while determining the existence of
ingredients of balance of convenience and irreparable injury in favour
of the Appellant-petitioner.    Supporting the impugned order, the
learned counsel for the Respondents submits that even there is no
prima facie case in favour of the Appellant-petitioner in as much as
the unregistered agreements basing on which the suit has been filed
are forged/created documents and the alleged payment of part
consideration is not supported by any receipt affixed with revenue
stamp.   It is also contended that under the amended provisions of
Section-17    and  49   of  the  Registration Act,  the  unregistered
agreements referred to by the Appellants have no evidentiary value.
8.           It appears from the submissions made by the learned
counsels that the suit documents, i.e., the two unregistered
agreements, are disputed by the defendants contending that late M.
Prasad Rao had never executed such agreements and the same have
been forgery by the plaintiff. Learned counsel for the Respondents
strenuously argues that forgery is evident from the fact that in both
the agreements, purportedly executed within a gap of two years three
months, the age of the parties to the agreements remains unchanged.
But this aspect would be considered at the time of final disposal of
the suit. The due execution of the agreements along with payment of

                                       5
part consideration are to be decided at the time of final disposal of
the suit.   But the assertions made by the Appellant-plaintiff in his
plaint need serious consideration.       In that sense, the learned trial
court has rightly observed that there is a prima facie case in favour of
the plaintiff-petitioner.
9.            As regards irreparable injury, the observation made by
the trial court does not appear to be correct. As per the explanation
to Section-10 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, there shall be a
presumption, until the contrary is proved, that the breach of contract
to transfer immovable property cannot adequately be relieved by
compensation in money. Of course, this presumption is rebuttable.
But, if not rebutted, a decree for specific performance of the
agreement will be passed. Therefore, at this stage it cannot be said
that in case the plaintiff-petitioner succeeds in the suit but fails to get
the immovable property alienated in his favour in terms of the
agreements for the reason that the suit property has been alienated
in favour of a third party, he would not suffer any loss as he would be
entitled to compensation.        The submission that under amended
provisions of Sections-17 and 49 of the Registration Act the
unregistered agreements in question bear no evidentiary value is not
tenable. Because, these agreements are not contracts coming within
the purview of Section-53(A) of the Transfer of Property Act.            In
addition to that, it is also laid down in the proviso to Section-49 of

                                      6
the Registration Act that an unregistered document affecting
immovable property and required to be registered may be received as
evidence of a contract in a suit for specific performance under
Chapter-II of the Specific Performance Act, 1877. Regarding balance
of convenience, learned lower court has observed that the defendants
are the successors of M. Prasad Rao in whose share the suit property
has been allotted and they are also in possession of the suit land and
if they would not be allowed to deal with the property according to
their need, they will suffer great inconvenience, particularly, it will be
difficult on their part to meet the litigation expenses in respect of
cases pending in different courts in respect of the suit property. It
transpires that the suit property is the subject matter of partition suit
in respect of which a final decree proceeding is pending.         During
pendency of such suit, the parties to the partition suit are expected to
maintain status quo. If status quo in respect of the suit property is
not   preserved   till  disposal   of the  Appellant’s   suit   and    the
Respondents create third party interest in the suit property, then the
Appellant, if he comes out successful in the suit, would face
inconvenience. Thus, the balance of convenience leans in favour of
the Appellant.
10.          In the light of discussion made above, it is to be held that
the interim relief sought for by the Appellant in I.A. No.115 of 2010
ought to be granted. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed on contest

                                     7
but in facts and circumstances without cost. The impugned order is
set aside and the I.A. No.115 of 2010 is allowed on contest.           The
defendants-opposite parties before the learned lower court are
directed not to create any third party interest till disposal of the suit.
                                                …………………………
                                                     R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 3rd March, 2014/D. Aech


