                             RFA NO.140 OF 2009
                                   Misc. Case No.68 of 2011
17. 17.07.2013            This petition for appointment of Receiver of the
               Suit schedule property arises out of R.F.A. No.140 of
               2009. The Respondent No.1 is the petitioner herein and
               the appellant is the contested opposite party No.1.
                          In a Suit for declaration of title by way of adverse
               possession with other consequential reliefs filed by the
               appellant-opposite party No.1, the learned trial court has
               dismissed the Suit but it has recorded findings to the
               effect that the appellant-opposite party No.1 has been in
               possession of the Suit land appertaining to Plot No.236
               under Consolidation Khata No.15 of Mouza Anakhia.
                          Plaintiff-appellant’s case is that the Suit land
               which belonged to the deity Sri Gopinath Jew at Adhanga
               was sold to him under Registered Sale Deed No.3919
               dated 11.7.1959 executed by the then Managing Trustee,
               Harekrushna Tripathy, and since then he has been in
               possession of the land. However, the sale transaction was
               without prior permission from the concerned authority
               under the Orissa Hindu Religious and Endowment Act.
               Though it is pleaded on behalf of the deity that the said
               sale transaction was illegal and it was without delivery of
               possession of the Suit land and that the Sale Deed was
               never acted upon, it is admitted that with express
               permission of the Managing Trustee of the deity, the
               plaintiff-appellant has been in possession of the Suit land.
               It is also the case of the deity that in 1995 the Trustee of
               the deity moved before the Commissioner of Endowment
               for recovery of possession of the Suit land from the
               Plaintiff but possession has not yet been recovered. Thus,

                               2
there is no dispute that the opposite party No.1 is in
settled possession of the Suit land.
          In the petition for receivership, the petitioner has
alleged that opposite party No.1 being in unauthorized
possession of the Suit land has been enjoying the valuable
property without paying anything to the deity and that if
the property is allowed to remain with the opposite party
No.1, there is every possibility of the Suit property getting
wasted. It is further contended that since the opposite
party No.1 has been misappropriating the income derived
from the Suit land and there is no chance of early
disposal of the appeal, someone should be appointed as
receiver of the property.
          It is well settled that while the property is in the
medio, receiver can be appointed but where the property
is in possession of a party to the suit, the petitioner who
prays for appointment of a receiver has to satisfy that
there would be dissipation, danger or injury to the
property in the hand of the party who is in possession. An
order of appointment of receiver should not be made
where it has the effect of depriving of a party in de facto
possession. In the case at hand the petitioner has failed to
show that there is any likelihood of danger or loss to the
property demanding Court’s intervention by way of
appointment of a receiver. Mere allegation that the
opposite    party    No.1    has   been    enjoying,   and/or
misappropriating the income from the Suit land is not a
ground to disturb his possession by way of introducing a
receiver.

                           3
         Thus, the petition for appointment of a receiver
being without merit, the same is rejected. The Misc. Case
stands dismissed but in the facts and circumstances
without cost.
                                  ………………………
                                       R. Dash, J.


