                         ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
                          Misc. Appeal No.666 of 1996
     From the judgment dated 25.02.1995 passed by Sri B.N. Bastia,
     Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation-cum-Assistant Labour
     Commissioner, Sambalpur in W.C. Case No.3 of 1991.
                                    __________
     Laxmidhar Kumbhar                            ……          Appellant
                                    Versus
     Divisional Manager,                          ……          Respondent
     Orissa Forest Development
     Corporation Ltd.,
     At-Budharaja, Dist.-Sambalpur
              For Appellant      :   M/s. P.C. Rout & P.K. Pattanaik
              For Respondent     :   M/s. S.K. Pattanaik, U. C. Mohanty,
                                     P.K. Pattanaik, D. Pattanaik &
                                     S. Pattnaik.
     PRESENT :
             THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAGHUBIR DASH
      Date of hearing : 12.09.2014           Date of judgment : 17.09.2014
R. DASH, J.   This appeal is in challenge of the judgment dated 25.02.1995
     passed by the learned Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation-
     cum-Assistant Labour Commissioner, Sambalpur in W.C. Case No.3
     of 1991 dismissing the claim for compensation made by the appellant
     consequent upon the accidental death of his father late Netra
     Kumbhar on the ground that the accident and the death of the

                                     2
deceased had no nexus with his employment nor was it incidental to
his employment.
2.          There is no dispute that the deceased Netra Kumbhar
was employed by the respondent for cutting of bamboos in Podadihi
Forest on piece-rate basis.     On 04.03.1993 night, while he was
sleeping in a hut near or at the worksite, a wild elephant trampled
him to death. There is evidence to the effect that after the day’s work,
some workers, including deceased, were sleeping in a hut at the
worksite. A wild elephant chased them and trampled the deceased to
death.
3.          Learned Commissioner took the view that the accident
caused by the wild animal has no nexus with the employment of the
deceased, nor was it incidental to his duties.
4.          Learned counsel for the appellant argues that the learned
Commissioner should have appreciated that the deceased workman
had stayed in the hut provided by the respondent to achieve better
outturn of work, otherwise the deceased should not have stayed there
exposing himself to the violence of wild animals in the forest. It is
further argued that the course of employment started from the time
when the workman left his residence towards his workplace and was
to continue till the workman’s return to home.
            Learned counsel for the respondent, however, argues in
support of the conclusion arrived at by the learned Commissioner.

                                      3
5.           Learned counsel for the appellant has cited decision of
this Court reported in 104 (2007) CLT 343 (Divisional manager,
M/s. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. -Vrs.- Subas Chandra Swain &
another) and presses the following observations into service:
                    Apart from that, this Court is reminded of
             its duty while construing the provisions of the
             Workmen’s Compensation Act, which is a social
             welfare legislation. In construing such legal
             provision the Court has a duty to construe it in
             a manner which preserves the right of the
             workman belonging to a socially weaker Section
             and to eschew an interpretation which takes
             away the benefit, provided the interpretation in
             favour of the workman is reasonably possible in
             the facts and circumstances of the case.
6.           In the reported case the workman was deputed to a
garage to look after the repairing of the employer’s vehicle and on
3.2.1991, after taking permission of his employer, the workman was
returning home riding on a bicycle. On the way a truck dashed him
as a result of which he sustained fracture.      Their Lordships under
such circumstances held that since the accident took place after the
commencement of the duty and while the claimant was coming back
after discharging his duty, the accident could be said to have taken
place out of his employment.
7.           On factual aspect, the aforecited decision has no
application to the case in hand.        No authority has been cited in
support of the contention that the course of employment starts from
the time when the workman starts his journey from his residence

                                    4
towards the place of employment and it continues till he comes back
home.     The expression “in course of employment” cannot be given
elasticity to such an extent. Rather, this proposition does not find
support from the aforecited decision wherein it has been observed
that when accident takes place but at a distance from place of
employment, there is no casual connection between the injury/death
and the employment.
8.           It is well settled that the expression ‘in course of
employment’ means within the currency of employment and the
expression ‘out of employment’, in relation to the injury caused in
accident, connotes that the injury might have been caused as a result
of some causal connection between the employment and the injury.
9.           In Subas Chandra Swain’s case (supra) it is observed
that if the injury is in some way incidental to the duties of the
workman and unless the workman has invited the injury by
endangering himself in any unreasonable way, the injury will be one
out of employment.
10.          In the judgment in Mackinnon Machenzie and Co. (P)
Ltd. v. Ibrahim Mahmmed Issak, reported in 1969 (2) SCC 607,
Hon’ble    Supreme   Court held    that  the  words  arising  out   of
employment are understood to mean that during the course of the
employment, injury has resulted from some risk incidental to the
duties of the service, which, unless engaged in the duty owing to the

                                      5
master, it is reasonable to believe the workman would not otherwise
have suffered. In other words, there must be a casual relationship
between the accident and the employment.
11.          Unless it is proved that the accident had a casual
connection with the employment and it was suffered in course of
employment, the claimant is not entitled to get any compensation.
12.          Learned counsel for the respondent has relied on a
decision of the Supreme Court in AIR 1997 SC 432 (Regional
Director, E.S.I. Corporation and another -Vrs.- Francis De Costa
and another) which deals with a situation where the workman was
going from his home to his place of work and on the way he suffered
injury in an accident. Under such fact-situation it is held that the
accident cannot be said to have arisen out of and in course of his
employment. On factual aspect this judgment is also not applicable
to fact situation of the case in hand.
13.          Learned Commissioner in the impugned judgment has
referred to a decision of this Court in a case between D.M., New India
Assurance Co. -Vrs.- G. Krishna Rao and others decided on
27.04.1994 stating that in that case the deceased was a labourer
employed by a contractor and was engaged in construction of
Koraput-Rayagada Railway Line. The deceased was provided with a
hut by the contractor at the worksite. The deceased on the date of
incident after the day’s work was sleeping at night in the hut. A fire

                                      6
broke out which gutted the hut and deceased workman was burnt
alive. In the said facts and circumstances, this Court is quoted to
have observed as follows:
                    Such accommodation by itself cannot form
             a basis to claim compensation on the ground
             that death by accident was caused out of and in
             the course of employment. The accident caused
             by fire has no nexus to the employment of the
             deceased, nor was it incidental to her duties. In
             the circumstances, no reasonable or legitimate
             reference can be drawn that the accidental death
             arose out of and in the course of employment of
             the deceased.
             This decision is found reported in I (1995) ACC 582
(ascertained from the website http://indiankanoon.org). The fact
situation in the case G. Krishna Rao (supra) is almost identical to
that of the case in hand.
14.          That apart, it is stated by one of the co-worker examined
before the Commissioner that the deceased used to stay at the
worksite as because his native place was at a far off place. It implies
that the night stay in the worksite had no nexus with the deceased’s
bamboo cutting work for which he was engaged on piece-rate basis.
The deceased was at liberty to reside somewhere else as well. The
employer had not compelled him to stay at the worksite. Under such
circumstances, it cannot be said that the accidental death in question
had any nexus with the deceased’s employment or that there was any
causal relationship between the accident and the employment.

                                     7
Therefore, findings of the learned Commissioner is not liable to be
disturbed.
15.          In the result, the appeal is dismissed and the impugned
judgment is confirmed.
                                              …………………………
                                                  R. Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 17th September, 2014/D. Aech


