                                  1
            HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                CRA Nos.344 & 350 of 1990
(From the judgment dated 24.11.1990 passed by Sri M.R. Behera,
Additional Sessions Judge, Jajpur in S.T. Case No.230/52 of 1989)
                             -----------
In CRA No.344 of 1990
      Kathia @ Narendra Behera              ……      Appellant
                                   Versus
      State of Orissa                       ……      Respondent
        For Appellant         : M/s. Devashis Panda,
                                  G.C. Mahapatra &
                                  Ms. D.R. Nanda
        For Respondent        : Additional Standing Counsel
In CRA No.350 of 1990
      Nalini Dwibedi                        ……      Appellant
                                   Versus
      State of Orissa                       ……      Respondent
        For Appellant         : M/s. B.N. Mohanty &
                                  Jeevan Mohanty.
         For Respondent       : Additional Standing Counsel

                                      2
    PRESENT:
          THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE RAGHUBIR DASH
    Date of hearing : 3.11.2015             Date of judgment : 27.11.2015
Raghubir Dash, J.    Both the Criminal Appeals are in challenge of the
    judgment passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Jajpur
    in S.T. No.230/52 of 1989 corresponding to G.R. Case No.338 of
    1981 from the file of S.D.J.M., Jajpur whereunder Appellant in
    each of the appeals has been convicted for commission of offences
    under Sections 307/34 of I.P.C. and under Rule 16 of Orissa
    Timber and other Forest Produce Rules, 1967 read with Section
    46(2) of the Orissa Forest Act and sentenced to undergo R.I. for 3
    years with fine of Rs.7,000/- for the offence under Section 307/34
    of I.P.C. but no separate sentence has been passed for the other
    offence punishable under the Orissa Forest Act.
    2.           On 27.3.1981 F.I.R. was lodged at 3.40 P.M. in
    Sukinda Police Station by the then Assistant Conservator of Forest,
    Duburi alleging that on 26.3.1981 night getting information that
    smuggled timber was being transported by one truck bearing
    No.OR-U-5769 he and his staff went to Duburi Chhak at 2.00
    A.M., waited there for the arrival of the truck and sometime
    thereafter, when the truck was found coming from Sukinda side,

                                  3
they signalled the truck to stop but the truck sped away heading
towards Chandikhol. The forest officials chased the truck by their
official jeep. On their way, in the process of such chasing, they
noticed that the truck was in stationary condition near Pankapal.
The forest jeep stopped behind the truck maintaining some
distance. Seeing arrival of the jeep both the accused persons got
down the truck. They were armed with bow and arrow. They sent
arrows towards the forest officials.     One wooden-tipped arrow
struck P.N.Padhi, Forester and one arrow tipped with pointed iron
plate, pierced into the left rear wheel of the jeep as a result of
which the wheel got flat. Suddenly, the truck moved backward in
high speed in an attempt to give a dash to the jeep. The jeep driver
suddenly swerved the jeep to the extreme right side of the road as
a result of which the A.C.F., who was sitting on the front seat of
the jeep, got thrown out of the jeep, fell on the ground and
sustained minor injuries on his person. The truck moved forward
and sped away from the spot. After replacing the flat wheel the
forest officials moved on in search of the truck but could not trace
it out, despite extensive search at different places.    Thereafter,
F.I.R. was lodged.

                                   4
3.            The  police   registered  the   case   under   Section
379/307/34 of I.P.C. and Section 37 of Orissa Forest Act against
both the Appellants and some unknown persons including the
driver of the truck. In course of investigation the truck was seized
and the Appellants and the driver of the truck were arrested.
While in police custody, Appellant Nalini Kumar disclosed that the
smuggled timber had been dropped in the water of a tank of village
Gadamadhupur. On such disclosure, the logs were recovered from
tank water and seized. On completion of investigation charge-sheet
was submitted against five persons showing two of them as
absconders. The Appellants and the driver of the truck faced the
trial. While the driver has been acquitted the Appellants have been
convicted and sentenced as indicated earlier.
4.            The impugned judgment is challenged on different
grounds. It is contended that the testimony of the prosecution
witnesses suffers from a lot of discrepancies on material points
which the learned court below did not give due importance, that
the testimony on record falls far short of making out a case under
Section 307 of I.P.C., that the conviction of the Appellants under
Rule 16 of the Orissa Timber and other Forest Produce Rules, 1967
is illegal inasmuch as the said Rules stood repealed at the relevant

                                     5
time and also for the reason that no charge was framed against the
Appellants under the said Rules. It is further contended that the
F.I.R. is an outcome of grudge and revengeful attitude. It is
contended that the forest officials, at whose instance the case has
been initiated, had personal grudge on the Appellants for which
they have tried to cook up a carefully crafted story which looks real
but, in reality, is totally false and concocted.
5.            Learned counsel for the State, however, supports the
order of conviction as well as the sentence contending that the
official witnesses who have no personal grudge on the Appellants
have convincingly deposed on the incident and there is no
reasonable ground for disbelieving their testimony.
6.            Prosecution has examined nine witnesses. P.W.1 is the
informant who at the relevant time was the Assistant Conservator
of Forest, Duburi under Keonjhar Forest Division. P.W.2 is the
owner of the truck bearing No.ORU 5769 by which the timber in
question was being allegedly transported. P.W.3 is the Doctor who
examined the injured persons on Police requisition. P.W.4 was
then attached to Chandikhol Outpost as an A.S.I. of Police. He has
seized the truck bearing No.ORU 5769 from near a garage of one
Kailash Sahu. P.W.6 was the than Forester, Ransol and P.W.7 was

                                   6
the than Forester, Kansa, both under Sukinda Forest Range. They
had accompanied P.W.1 to detain the truck in order to prevent
illegal transportation of timber. P.Ws.5 and 8 are the investigating
officers. P.W.9 is another Police Officer who simply submitted the
charge-sheet.
7.           P.Ws.1, 6 and 7 are eye-witnesses. They are all forest
officials. There is nothing on record showing their personal ill-
feeling towards the Appellants. Therefore, the plea that because of
personal grudge against the Appellants a false case has been
foisted is not acceptable. The testimony of these official witnesses
needs careful scrutiny to test their credibility, besides finding out
whether the offences the Appellants have been charge for have
been made out or not. Before the learned trial court, the defence
had pointed out several contradictions appearing in the testimony
of the eye-witnesses but the learned court below did not find them
sufficient enough to disbelieve the testimony of the eye-witnesses.
It has opined that such inconsistency in their testimony is as a
result of their delayed examination in the court. It is true, nine
years after the alleged incident the witnesses deposed in the court.
However, arguing before this Court the learned counsels for the
Appellants have submitted that the contradictions being on

                                     7
material points those cannot be brushed aside merely on the
ground that the witnesses had deposed in the court after lapse of
a long period. They have further submitted that the allegation that
the accused persons attempted to kill any members of the raiding
party is a super-imposed as well as embroidered version with a
view to see the Appellants arrested and kept in jail for some time
which is an act of frustration for having failed to seize logs being
illegally transported by some unidentified persons. All such
evidences and the attending circumstances about which the
learned counsels have made mention while making such argument
are dealt with hereunder.
8.            According to the prosecution, the forest officials
noticed one truck coming from Sukinda side in the occurrence
night at about 2.00 A.M. They gave signal for the truck to stop but
it did not stop. It moved on along the express Highway towards
Chandikhol. The forest officials in their jeep chased the truck. On
their way, near Pankapal-Dangadi Crossing, they saw that the
truck was stationary. The incident of alleged attempt to take the
life of the forest officials allegedly took place at this place on the
Highway. It is alleged that both the Appellants got down the truck
being armed with bows and arrows and shot arrows towards the

                                    8
forest officials and in that process one wooden - tipped arrow hit
on the right leg of P.W.7 and another arrow pierced into the left
rear wheel of the jeep for which the wheel got flatted. Thereafter, all
on a sudden the truck started moving backward with great speed
in an attempt to give a dash to the jeep. But the jeep driver moved
the vehicle to the extreme right side of the road and, in that
process it ran over a heap of stones. There was a jerk and the
informant was thrown out of the jeep due to the impact of the jerk.
The evidence on this part of the prosecution story needs to be
scrutinized with great care and caution to find out whether the
official witness are to be relied on or not.
9.            The inconsistencies noticed in the testimony of official
witnesses (P.Ws.1, 6, and 7) are as follows. P.W.1 says that while
the forest officials were moving in their official jeep to overtake the
truck, the truck was found in stationary condition near Pankapal
and, therefore, they stopped the jeep about 60-70 yards behind the
truck. But, P.W.6 says that at Pankapal the jeep overtook the truck
and only after such overtaking the truck became stationary. P.W.7
says that at Pankapal the jeep overtook the truck, stopped when it
was about one furlong ahead of the truck and thereafter he noticed
that the truck also stopped. He then proceeds to say that sometime

                                  9
thereafter the truck moved forward and then stopped at a distance
of 20 to 25 meter ahead of the jeep. Thus, all the three witnesses
stand contradicted by one another. On this part of the occurrence,
P.Ws.1 and 7 say that the truck attempted to kill them by crushing
the jeep under the wheels of the truck.       But, here also both
contradict on material particulars.    While P.W.1 says that the
truck came in reverse gear to give a dash to the jeep, P.W.7 says
that the truck moved forward with a speed to crush the jeep and
when the jeep driver foiled that attempt by moving the jeep to its
extreme right side of the road, the truck went ahead of the jeep
and then stopped. P.W.6, on his part, has maintained silence on
this part of the prosecution case. Also on the alleged shooting of
arrows these three witnesses are not consistent. P.W.1 says that
first the arrows were shot at them and thereafter the truck
attempted to give a dash to the jeep. But, P.W.7 says that first the
truck attempted to hit the jeep and thereafter the arrow shooting
took place.    P.W.7 also speaks about the shooting of arrows.
According to P.Ws.1 and 7, Appellant Nalini only shot arrows
towards the jeep. But according to P.W.6, both the Appellants sent
arrows towards the jeep. P.Ws.1 and 7 say that only two arrows
were shot at.    But P.W.6 says that about 10 arrows were sent

                                   10
towards them.       However, all of them say that the arrow with
wooden tip hit P.Ws.7 causing injury and another arrow, tipped
with sharp and pointed iron plate, punctured one of the wheels of
the jeep.
              The inconsistencies noted above cannot be burshed
aside saying that it was but natural due to loss of memory on
account of passage of a long span of time.         The charge under
Section 307, I.P.C., which has been read over to the Appellants
during trial, states that all the three accused persons in
prosecution of their common intention to prevent the forest
officials from making seizure of the logs, shot arrows to the forester
(P.W.7) to kill him and moved the truck in reverse gear to crush
the jeep in an attempt to kill the forest officials. In view of such
charges, the prosecution ought to have adduced consistent and
cogent evidence to establish the charge beyond reasonable doubt.
The witnesses are not consistent on the manner in which such
attempt was taken.       This kind of unsatisfactory evidence on the
charge under Section 307, I.P.C. has to be appreciated with due
consideration of some other attending circumstances.
              It is rightly submitted by the learned counsel for the
Appellants that the prosecution has not shown as to why the truck

                                      11
should have stopped at Pankapal when the truck, loaded with
timber, was being chased by the forest officials. It is not found
from the evidence on record that the truck had any mechanical
problem.     So it cannot be said that due to mechanical snag it
stopped at Pankapal.         It is also not shown that there was any
check gate near that spot or the truck was stopped by any public
authority or any other person(s) at Pankapal.        It is also not on
record that the truck had halted there for the purpose of taking
rest or refreshment. The truck could have escaped the notice of
the forest officials had it not stopped at Pankapal. Therefore, the
story narrated in the F.I.R. with which P.W.1 is consistent while
deposing in Court, becomes highly doubtful. This doubt is further
strengthened by the contradictory statements made by the eye-
witnesses on the manner the accused persons allegedly attempted
to kill the forest officials.
10.           The prosecution evidence on the identification of the
culprits also appears to be somewhat doubtful. When P.W.1 says
that search light focused on the spot and under that focus the
culprits could be identified, P.W.6 and 7 do not mention about the
use of any search light. They say that with the help of the jeep-
light they could identify the culprits. Admittedly, the incident took

                                    12
place in the dead hour of the night. P.Ws. 6 and 7 say that the
accused persons shot arrows standing at a distance of 50-60 feet
from the jeep whereas P.W.1 says that the jeep was at a distance of
60 yards from the truck when the Appellant Nalini got down the
truck   and    sent   arrows     towards    the   jeep.   Under     such
circumstances, correct identification of the culprits is almost
impossible. It is also difficult to believe, in the absence of clarifying
evidence, that the arrow that was shot at a distance of 50-60 feet
from the front side of the jeep could pierced into one of the rear
wheels of the vehicle and punctured it.
11.          It is also rightly submitted by the learned counsel for
the Appellants that since the occurrence took place at Pankapal
and there is a Out Post at Chandikhol, which is nearest to the
spot, the forest officials could have lodged the report at the Out
Post instead of waiting for the next day to lodge the report at
Sukinda Police Station, moreso when the spot at Pankapal does
not come within the jurisdiction of Sukinda Police Station.
12.          Having considered the nature and quality of evidence
available on record and on finding that the official witnesses are
not safe to be relied on in so far as the allegation of commission of

                                   13
the offence under Section 307, I.P.C. is concerned, the order of
conviction under Section 307/34, I.P.C. is not sustainable.
13.           As regards the charge under Section 46(2) of the
Orissa Forest Act, read with Section 16 of the Orissa Timber and
other Forest Produce Rules, 1967, it is argued that the charge itself
is defective causing serious prejudice to the Appellants for which
the order of conviction and sentence is liable to be set aside. In
addition to that it is also submitted that there is no iota of evidence
making out any offence under Section 46(2) of the Orissa Forest
Act.   It is further pointed out that the Rules of 1967, which is
referred to in the charge, had stood repealed under rule 22 of the
Orissa Timber and other Forest Produce Transit Rules, 1980 which
came into force w.e.f. 21.4.1980 whereas the alleged occurrence
took place on 27.3.1981. This submission is also quite tenable.
Since the identity of the Appellants is also found to be not proved
beyond reasonable doubt it is not possible to say that these
Appellants transported the seized timber by the truck as alleged.
There is evidence that during the investigation Appellant Nalini
disclosed before the I.O. (P.W.5) that the logs were kept concealed
inside the tank water of Village- Gadamadhupur. P.W.5 says that
on the basis of such disclosure he has seized 10 logs of different

                                  14
size after making recovery from the tank water. There is no report
that the seized logs were kept in the tank water in such a manner
that no one was in a position to see the same lying inside the
water. If it was visible from outside then it cannot be presumed
that only Nalini had the knowledge about such concealment.
Therefore, it cannot be said to be a case of disclosure on the basis
of the statement made by the Appellant Nalini.           Under such
circumstances, there is no evidence to prove the charge framed
under Section 46(2) of the Orissa Forest Act read with Section 21
of the Orissa Timber and other Forest Produce Transit Rules, 1980
and, consequently, the order of conviction thereunder is not
sustainable. Thus, the charge under Section 46(2) of the Orissa
Forest Act is not sustainable.
14.          In view of the discussion made above, the Appellants
are entitled to benefit of the doubt. The order of conviction and
sentence impugned herein is liable to be set aside. Accordingly,
both the Appeals are allowed.       The impugned judgment is set
aside.   Appellants in both the Appeals are found not guilty and
they are acquitted of all the charges. They be set at liberty at once.
Their bail bonds stand discharged.

                                   15
            The seized logs which are directed to be given to the
custody of the Range Officer shall be disposed of in accordance
with the rules governing disposal of such forest produce.
                                             …………………………
                                              Raghubir Dash, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 27th November, 2015/A.K. Kar, Secretary/
                          D. Aech, Sr. Steno


