               HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
           JAIL CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.41 OF 2004
   From the judgment dated 07.04.2004 passed by Sri S. Pravakar
   Rao, Adhoc Additional Sessions Judge (F.T.), Keonjhar in S.T. Case
   No.105/27 of 2002/03.
                                  -----------
   Charan Nayak                       …                      Appellant
                                  -   Versus –
   State of Orissa                    …                     Respondent
                For Appellant         … Mr. H.K. Malik
                For   Respondent      …    Mr. Sk. Zafarulla,
                                           Additional Standing Counsel
                                --------------
   PRESENT:
          THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE VINOD PRASAD
                                     AND
         THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE RAGHUBIR DASH
   Date of hearing: 03.07.2014              Date of judgment :24.07.2014
Raghubir Dash, J.    This Jail Criminal Appeal is against the judgment
   dated 07.04.2004 passed by the learned Ad hoc Additional
   Sessions Judge (F.T.), Keonjhar in S.T. Case No.105/27 of
   2002/03 convicting the appellant for the offence punishable under
   Section   302,   I.P.C.  and     sentencing    him   to  undergo    life
   imprisonment.

                                   2
2.           The F.I.R. story is that on 7.12.2001 at about 6.00
A.M. while the informant with his wife Samari Behera were sitting
near a fire lit in their front courtyard the deceased came their to
join with them to enjoy the warmth of the fire in the wintery
morning. The accused-appellant all of a sudden came there and
gave two blows to the deceased with a stick.           As a result,
deceased died on the spot.
3.           Same day F.I.R. was lodged at about 10.50 A.M.
The police took up investigation. In course of investigation the
police conducted inquest over the dead body, sent the dead body
for post mortem, examined witnesses, made seizure of some
articles from the spot including the weapon of offence, arrested
the appellant, sent him for medical examination as he was
found to have sustained some injuries and on completion of
investigation submitted charge-sheet on 09.04.2002 before the
learned S.D.J.M., Keonjhar who committed the appellant to the
court of Sessions on 07.05.2002. After commitment, the case
was registered in the court of Sessions and thereafter it was
transferred to the court of the Ad hoc Additional Sessions Judge
(F.T.), Keonjhar for trial.    The learned Sessions Judge, on the
inability of the appellant to engage a lawyer, appointed a State
Defence Counsel to defend the appellant.         Charge-sheet was

                                  3
framed under Section 302 of I.P.C.      The appellant denied the
charge and claimed to be tried.        Prosecution examined 14
witnesses.    Appellant’s statement was recorded under Section
313 of the Cr.P.C.      He did not adduce any evidence in his
defence.
4.           Learned trial court, after examining the oral and
documentary evidence, recorded findings of guilt and convicted
the accused for the offence of murder and inflicted the
punishment of life imprisonment.
5.           Since the date of his arrest, i.e., 07.12.2001 the
appellant has been in custody. After his conviction he sent a
prisoner’s petition through the Superintendent of District Jail,
Keonjhar on receipt of which the present Appeal has been
registered.
6.           According to the prosecution, P.Ws. 2, 3 and 6 are
eye-witnesses    to   the  alleged  assault  but  during   cross-
examination it is found that P.W.2 is not an eye-witness.
P.Ws.3 and 6 have stated that while they were sitting by the side
of a fire in their front-courtyard, the deceased came there and
joined with them and thereafter the appellant also came there
holding a lathi and assaulted the deceased on his head as a
result of which the deceased died on the spot.       P.W. 5, the

                                 4
doctor, who conducted post mortem examination, found the
following injuries:
       (i)   Haematoma over left temporal region : size 4″ x 3″
       (ii)  Haematoma over occipital region : size 3″ x 3″.
       (iii) Laceration over occipital region : size 1″ x ½″.
             The doctor also found the skull bone (occipital and
temporal) showing multiple fracture. He also noticed that the
brain was lacerated and flooded with fresh blood. The doctor
opined that the death was caused due to the head injury leading
to multiple fracture of skull bone and laceration of brain. He
also opined that the injuries are ante-mortem in nature
sufficient to cause instant death in ordinary course of nature.
7.           Finding the eye-witness account of P.Ws. 3 and 6 to
have withstood the test of cross-examination and corroborated
by the medical evidence, the learned trial court concluded that
the appellant committed the offence of murder.
8.           Mr. H.M. Malik, Advocate, engaged as Legal Aid
Counsel to defend the appellant, fairly submits that the evidence
on record stand undemolished yet, it is argued, it must be
appreciated that if the learned trial court had made a critical
analysis of the evidence, the appellant would have been
convicted under Section 304 I.P.C. and not under Section 302

                                  5
I.P.C. Inviting our attention to the factum of absence of motive
it is argued that in order to ascertain the ‘intention’ or
‘knowledge’ which cannot be proved by direct evidence absence
of motive plays a vital role.
9.            Learned counsel for the State, on the other hand,
supports the conviction recorded by the learned trial court and
submits that impugned order of conviction and sentence is not
liable for interference.
10.           The sole question to be answered in this appeal is
whether     the   culpable  homicide   now    under   consideration
amounts to murder punishable under Section 302 I.P.C. or it
comes within the purview of Section 304 I.P.C.
11.           There is absence of allegations that the accused and
the deceased had any ill-feeling towards each other. Both of
them hail from different villages. They are not related to each
other. The occurrence took place in the morning at about 6 A.M.
The informant (P.W.6), his wife (P.W.4) and the appellant all are
residents of village Nuapada. The incident took place at the front
courtyard of informant’s house. It was a wintry morning. The
informant and his wife had lit fire at their front-courtyard to sit
by its side to ward off cold.       They were busy in weaving a
bamboo basket. The deceased, who is a resident of a nearby

                                    6
village named Machhabhandar, came there and joined them to
sit near the fire. Then the appellant came armed with a wooden
stick and all on a sudden dealt three blows with the stick on the
deceased’s head. The deceased died on the spot.
             The prosecution story is totally challenged as to what
was the motive behind sudden attack on the deceased. Although
eyewitnesses seem to be impartial, but the learned State Defence
Counsel had made no effort to cross-examine them on the question
of motive and had left their deposition unchallenged. Prosecution
on its part had also not fathomed out the reason for a sudden
attack by the appellant. Neither the prosecution nor the defence
therefore, got it elicited as to what was the cause of the incident.
As stated above, the participation of the appellant in the crime,
though seems to have been established, but regarding the offence
committed by him, motive for assault was a relevant consideration.
In absence of any evidence tendered by the prosecution in the trial
regarding that, it is very difficult to accede to the prosecution case
that appellant had the requisite intention to commit murder of the
deceased. In absence of any evidence to indicate the motive which
prompted the appellant to commit murder, it will not be
appropriate for us to presuppose it against the appellant-accused
to hold him guilty for a charge of murder.

                                  7
12.          ‘Intention’ or ‘knowledge’ being a man’s state of mind
cannot be proved by direct evidence thereof, except through his
own confession. In the absence of such a confession they can be
proved only by circumstantial evidence. In other words, these are
matters of inference from all the circumstances available in a case.
Such circumstances may well be motive, the preparation made, the
declaration, if any, made by the offender at the time of commission
of the offence, the weapon used, the nature of the injuries actually
inflicted: (1988 (3) Crimes 430 : Dr. A.G. Bhagwat Vs. U.T.
Chandigarh). In the case at hand, the record is completely silent
as to why the appellant did the act. It is true that in a case where
the available ocular testimony is reliable, absence of motive loses
significance. That is so when the question is on the reliability of
the prosecution case. But, here in this case we are not called upon
to determine whether the prosecution case is susceptible to any
reasonable doubts. What we are required to ascertain is the
requisite intention or knowledge to bring the criminal act under
either Section 302 or Section 304 of I.P.C. For that purpose
absence of motive is one of the significant factors that will not lose
significance even if the direct evidence is above any suspicion.
Therefore, the absence of motive is a circumstance which favours
the appellant to some extent.

                                   8
13.          Another significant aspect which we consider favorable
to the appellant is regarding his preparedness to commit the crime.
The prosecution evidence is that the appellant had arrived at the
incident scene holding a wooden stick. If he had an intention to
annihilate the deceased, in the normal circumstance he could have
approached the deceased armed with a much lethal weapon.
Without uttering a single word, the appellant straight way
assaulted the deceased by giving three blows to him, but what is of
utmost significance is that out of these three blows, two did not
had sufficient force even to cause a lacerated wound. Injury nos.1
and 2 to the deceased are only Haematoma and therefore, as a
matter of fact, it can reasonably be inferred that while giving those
blows, appellant had taken enough care and due precaution not to
hit the deceased with such excessive force so as to cause lacerated
wounds and      cause his death. On the contrary what emerges is
that while inflicting those blows intention to commit murder or to
cause such bodily injury which in all likelihood would have
resulted in victim’s death eluded appellant’s minds and at that
moment he only intended to cause hurt with knowledge sans
intention that he might cause death of the deceased. The
precaution taken by the appellant while inflicting those two
injuries thus is a significant circumstance to elude the intention to
commit murder on the part of the appellant. The weapon of assault

                                  9
wielded by the appellant, which is a wooden stick, is another
pointer of the absence of an intention to commit murder or to
cause such bodily injury as would have resulted in the death of the
appellant. Absence of any declaration made by the appellant while
committing the offence is another factor which does not help the
prosecution to make out a case under Section 302 of I.P.C. Under
such circumstances, it appears to be very much difficult to infer
that the appellant had the intention to inflict such injury as was
likely to cause death. Appellant was in his prime youth and it
seems that the incident had occurred in heat of passion because of
some thing which defy our imagination and is not known to us and
for which prosecution has also not tendered any evidence. It has
not been brought on the record that the appellant was suffering
from some mental ailment and under that influence he had acted
in such a bizarre manner. We are, therefore, robbed off the clear
intention and motive on the part of the appellant to commit
murder although without ambiguity it can be safely inferred that
he had assaulted the deceased taking a safer position with
knowledge that death may ensue because of his assault. It will
thus be appropriate to hold the appellant guilty only of that crime
which has been proved by the prosecution beyond all reasonable
doubt. Once the intention to commit murder or an intention to give
such fatal injury as in all probability would have resulted in death

                                  10
of the deceased is not satisfactory proved, the only course left open
is to hold the appellant guilty of an offence of culpable homicide
not amounting to murder punishable under section 304, Part-I,
IPC. Thus, in our considered opinion, recorded conviction under
section 302, IPC and imposed sentence of life imprisonment are
unsustainable. The appellant can be held to be guilty only for
committing an offence punishable under section 304, Part-I, IPC,
for which rigorous imprisonment already served by the appellant
which is twelve and half years, seems to be an appropriate
sentence.
14.         Appeal thus, is allowed in part. Conviction of the
appellant   under   Section    302,   IPC,   and  sentence    of   life
imprisonment therefor, is hereby set aside and instead appellant is
convicted under Section 304, Part-I, IPC.
15.         The appellant is in jail since 7.12.2001. As such, as on
date he has already undergone twelve and half years of sentence
and therefore, the period of imprisonment already undergone by
him is sufficient to meet the ends of justice and it is hereby
ordered as such.
16.         The appellant is directed to be set at liberty unless he
is wanted in any other crime.
                                                …………………………
                                                 Raghubir Dash, J.

                                    11
Vinod Prasad, J.  I agree.
                                       ………………………
                                        Vinod Prasad, J.
       Orissa High Court, Cuttack
       The 24th July, 2014/Kar/Dhal

12

