                              Review Petition No.15 of 2016
                            BEFORE
      HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
8.6.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Mr.KN Choudhury, learned senior counsel, assisted by
       Mr. A Dhar, learned counsel for the review petitioner.
       Mr.RKD      Choudhury,     learned    Additional      Senior
       Government Advocate, Assam for Respondent Nos.1, 2
       and 3 and Mr.Jayanta Deka and Mr.TK Bhuyan, learned
       counsel for Respondent No.4.
       Mr.M   Angamuthu,      Deputy    Commissioner,       Kamrup
       (Metro) is personally present.
       The petitioner in the present review petition has prayed
for review of order dated 15.10.2015 passed by the Division
Bench of this Court in PIL No.10 of 2015 insofar as it directs the
Deputy Commissioner to receive the donations given by the
devotees and public in Kamakhya Temple and to maintain a
separate account of such donations and spend the same for
developmental activities of the Kamakhya Temple.
       According to the review petitioner, the right of Doloi over
the management of the religious and secular aspects of
Kamakhya Temple has been upheld by the Supreme Court and,
therefore, the Deputy Commissioner cannot be directed to
maintain a separate account of the donations received from the
devotees and public.
                                                 Page 1 of 2

        What we understand from the order sought to be
reviewed is that the Deputy Commissioner has been directed to
receive the donations given by the devotees and public for
developmental activities of the Kamakhya Temple and spend
the same for its developmental activities by maintaining a
separate account. The order does not say that the Deputy
Commissioner is required to maintain a separate account of
every offering given by the devotees and public in Kamakhya
Temple. Yet, we deem it proper to clarify that any donation
given by the devotees and public in Kamakhya Temple for the
developmental activities of the Temple shall be received by the
Deputy Commissioner, who shall also maintain a separate
account of the same and use the amount for developmental
activities of the Temple. And for the usual offerings given in the
Temple by the devotees and public, the Deputy Commissioner
need not maintain a separate account.
        With the above clarification, the review petition stands
finally disposed of.
           JUDGE                             CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                 Page 2 of 2


