                     THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
  (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                        R.F.A. No. 28 OF 2009
                     M/s R. R. Mazumdar & others
                                                        … Appellants
                            -Versus-
                     M/s Zenith Pharmaceuticals & others
                                                      ..Respondents
                                BEFORE
            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE KALYAN RAI SURANA
For the appellant           :      Mr. T. Roy,
                                   Mr. B. Sarkar,
                                   Mr. P. Sen, Advocates.
For the respondents         :      Mr. RL Yadav
                                   Ms. K. Yadan,
                                   Mr. R. Das, Advocates
Date of hearing & judgment :       01.08.2017
                     JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
       Heard Mr. T. Roy, the learned counsel for the appellants and also
heard Mr. RL Yadav, the learned counsel for the respondents No.1 & 2.
None appears on call for the proforma respondents. The name of
respondent No.3 was already struck off by the order dated 04.12.2015.
RFA No.28/2009                                               Page 1 of 10

2.      This regular first appeal is directed against the judgment and
decree dated 25.08.2000 passed by the learned Civil Judge, No.2, Kamrup,
Guwahati in Money Suit No.325/2018 thereby dismissing the suit of the
appellants/plaintiffs.
3.      As per the original plaint, the plaintiff No.1 was M/s R.R. Mazumdar
and the plaintiff No.2 was Sri Ranjit Ranjan Mazumdar, the proprietor of
plaintiff No.1 concern. The defendant No.1, namely, M/s Zenith
Pharmaceuticals, which was a partnership concern of the original
defendants No.2 & 3 had availed a loan from the plaintiff No.1, which was
not repaid.      Therefore, by the notice dated 07.10.1998, plaintiffs
demanded a sum of Rs.5,50,100/- with interest @ 20.75% from the
original defendants No. 1,2 and 3. Thereafter, the suit was filed for
recovery of the said amount.         The suit was numbered as Money Suit
No.325/1998.
4.      The plaintiff No.2 died on 29.06.2001 during the pendency of the
suit and thereafter, the appellant herein, who are the legal representatives
of the deceased-plaintiff No.2 filed a substitution petition being Petition
No.2118 dated 20.12.2001. As the defendants did not file any objection,
the learned trial court vide order dated 20.01.2002 allowed the
substitution and directed that amended plaint to be filed on 26.02.2012.
The amended plaint was filed on 30.04.2002 and the learned trial court
directed the defendants to file their additional written statement.
However, without any specific order from the learned trial court, the name
of the Firm (M/s R.R. Mazumdar) was deleted/dropped by the substituted
plaintiffs No. 1(a) to 1(d).  In the amended plaint, which was filed on
30.04.2002, the name of the plaintiff No.1 was struck off and the present
appellants’ names were shown at Serial Nos. 1(a) to 1(d) and the suit was
proceeded accordingly without the firm (M/s R.R. Mazumdar), as a plaintiff
in the suit.
RFA No.28/2009                                                    Page 2 of 10

5.      In the trial, PW.1 tendered his affidavit on 20.07.2006, in which it
was mentioned that the plaintiff No.1 (M/s R.R. Mazumdar) was the
proprietorship concern of plaintiffs No. 1(a) to 1(d) as the legal heirs of
plaintiff No.2 after the death of plaintiff No.2. Further, it has been stated
therein that the plaintiff No.1 is proprietorship concern of plaintiff No.2.
6.      As stated earlier, in the amended plaint, the firm (M/s R.R.
Mazumdar) was not a party. It would be pertinent to record herein that as
per the trial court record, the suit was dismissed on 23.11.2004.              It
appears that the suit was restored by the order dated 23.06.2005, but
before the suit was restored, no notice before restoration was issued on
the defendants No.1, 2 and 3. Therefore, when the evidence on affidavit
by PW.1 was filed, he was not cross-examined by the contesting
defendants No.1, 2 and 3 and the suit was heard ex-parte against them.
7.      In course of trial, on the basis of pleadings of both sides, issues
were framed on 16.11.2005–
               (i) whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree as prayed for?
               and
               (ii) whether the defendant No.5 has been impleaded
               unnecessarily in the suit?.
8.      In respect of issue No.1, the learned trial court arrived at a finding
that in the original plaint, the plaintiff No.1 was arrayed as M/s R.R.
Mazumdar, but in the amended plaint, there was no mention of the
proprietorship concern i.e., M/s R.R. Mazumdar. Therefore, the amended
plaint filed by the substituted plaintiffs on 30.04.2002, was found to be
defective and by holding that the court cannot grant relief to the plaintiff
on such defective pleadings, the suit filed through amended plaint on
RFA No.28/2009                                                     Page 3 of 10

30.04.2002 was not found maintainable in its form and issue No.1 was
decided against the plaintiffs.
9.      The proforma defendant No.5 (the State Bank of India), who had
filed their written statement in the case was found to be not a necessary
party to the suit and accordingly, the second issue was also decided in
negative against the plaintiffs.      Resultantly, the suit was dismissed on
contest.
10.     The learned counsel for the appellants has submitted that the
deletion of the name of the original plaintiff No.1 (M/s R.R. Mazumdar)
was a mistake committed by their learned counsel, for which the present
appellants should not be made to suffer. It is further submitted that in
view of the provisions of Order I Rule 10(2) CPC, this Court still has the
power to add or strike out the parties and thereby the formal defect in the
plaint can be removed. The learned counsel for the appellants has relied
on the case of Pratibha Singh and another vs. Shanti Devi Prasad, (2003)
2 SCC 330. The relevant pargarph-15 on which the appellants’ counsel
heavily relied on is extracted below:
                        “       It appears that the defendant judgment-debtors
                       did not execute the sale deed as decreed, and
                       therefore, the plaintiff-decree holders had to file an
                       execution application. At one stage of the execution
                       proceedings the plaintiff-decree holders filed a draft of
                       sale deed accompanied by a map of the suit property to
                       be executed and registered by the defendant judgment-
                       debtors. Admittedly this map was drawn by the
                       plaintiff-decree holders and filed for the first time
                       during the execution proceedings and as accompanying
                       the draft sale deed. As we have already stated neither
                       the plaint nor the decree was accompanied by any map
                       and so also the revenue survey map did not indicate
                       sub-plot no. 595/1 and 595/II. These sub-plots find
                       mention either in the two registered deeds of sale
                       whereby the suit property was acquired by the
                       defendant judgment-debtors or in the map annexed
                       with the court sale deed. The Executing Court directed
RFA No.28/2009                                                     Page 4 of 10

                      the draft sale deed submitted by the plaintiff-decree
                      holders, along with the map forming part of the draft
                      sale deed, to be executed and registered. That was
                      done. Thereafter, it appears that the plaintiff-decree
                      holders also got possession over some property
                      purportedly the decretal property, but there was some
                      dispute raised and the judgment-debtors succeeded in
                      possession over the property being restored to them. As
                      on the date, it is an admitted position, that the sale
                      deed as per the draft filed by the plaintiff-decree
                      holders stands executed and registered under the
                      directions of the Court but the possession over the suit
                      property is with the defendant judgment- debtors.
                      There is also a dispute raised by the judgment-debtors
                      that full balance consideration has not yet been
                      deposited by the plaintiff-decree holders and realised by
                      the defendant judgment-debtors; it is stated to be short
                      by Rs. 5000.”
11.     The learned counsel for the appellants has further relied on in the
case of Smt. Lachi Tewari and others vs. Director of Land Records and
others, AIR 1984 SC 41, to project that for the mistake committed by the
counsel, the client should not be made to suffer.
12.     Per contra, the learned counsel for the respondents has argued
that it would be incorrect to shift all the blame on the learned counsels
who had carried out the substitution. It is submitted that the counsels,
who had made the substitution by making unauthorised amendment of
deleting the name of respondent No.1 was having full knowledge of the
consequences. It is projected that as per the plaint, the loan was given by
the firm (M/s R.R. Mazumdar) and therefore, with the death of plaintiff
No.2, the proprietorship firm has to be held to be dissolved by the death
of plaintiff No.2 and that unless it is satisfactory shown that the
substituted legal representatives of the deceased plaintiff No.2 had
become entitled to the debts and liabilities, which is accrued to the firm or
to its proprietor, the suit itself is not maintainable in the present form
because the plaintiff No.1/firm had ceased to legally exist when the
RFA No.28/2009                                                    Page 5 of 10

plaintiff No.2 had died. Therefore, by way of unauthorised amendment,
the substituted legal heirs of plaintiff No.2 had tried to mask the defect by
way of unauthorized amendment. It is further submitted that the omission
in the plaint was a designed omission and was not a mistake because in
the evidence on affidavit, the appellant had projected that the plaintiff
No.1 had been in existence and that the appellants are the substituted
legal representatives of plaintiff No.2.     Hence, it is submitted that the
defect of non-joinder of original plaintiff No.1/firm as necessary party was
tried to be suppressed and therefore, the appeal is liable to be dismissed.
It is further submitted by way of alternative submission that the suit was
dismissed against the defendants No.1 to 4 by the order dated 23.11.2004
and when the suit was restored, it was restored without notice to them.
Therefore, present defendants No.1 & 2 did not get an opportunity to
cross-examine the PWs, as such, if this Court is inclined to allow the
appeal, then it should be only by way of remand, as the respondents were
not heard by the trial court and the trial was held behind their back
without notice of restoration of the suit.
13.     Owing to the submissions made by the learned counsels for both
sides and on perusal of the materials on record, the only point of
determination before this Court is as to whether unauthorised striking out
of the name of respondent No.1 (M/s R.R. Mazumdar) is fatal in the
present case or not.
14.     In this connection, it is seen that the learned trial court while
deciding the issue No.1, which was, whether the plaintiff is entitled to get
a decree as prayed for, had examined the effect of allowing the
substitution of the present appellants as the legal representatives of the
deceased/plaintiff No.2 (Ranjit Ranjan Mazumdar).         It is observed that
there was no mention about the plaintiff No.1 in the amended plaint.
RFA No.28/2009                                                    Page 6 of 10

Hence, the learned trial court found the plaint defective, further it was
held that court cannot grant any relief to the plaintiff on such defective
plaint.
15.     On perusal of the record of the trial court, in Petition No. 2118/01
dated 26.07.2001, it is seen that in cause-title, the parties names were
shown as – R.R. Mazumdar vs. Zenith Pharmaceuticals and others. The
statements made in paragraphs, 1, 2 and 4 and the prayer are quoted
below:
                      “1. That the predecessors in interest of the
                      petitioners Late Ranjit Ranjan Mazumdar filed a suit
                      before this Hon’ble Court being Money Suit No.-325
                      of 1998 against the opposite party and the same is
                      pending disposal before this Hon’ble Court.
                      2.      That during the pendency of the suit before
                      this Hon’ble Court the plaintiff Ranjit Ranjan
                      Mazumdar expired on 29-6-2001 at International
                      Hospital, Guwahati.
                              .....
                      4.      That the names of the legal heirs of the Late
                      Ranjit Ranjan Mazumdar needs to be substituted in
                      the suit.
                              ......
                                     In the premises aforesaid it is most
                              humbly prayed that Your Honour may be
                              pleased to pass necessary order for
                              substitution of the legal heirs of Late Ranjit
                              Ranjan Mazumdar as mentioned in paragraph
                              3 of the application under provisions of Order
                              22 Rule 4 C.P.C. and be further pleased to
                              pass necessary order for amendment of the
                              plaint accordingly or may be pleased to pass
                              such other order or orders as to Your Honour
                              may deem fit and proper.”
16.     Accordingly, the substitution was allowed and the amended plaint
was required to be filed. The present appellants had not projected in their
substitution petition that there was a plaintiff No.1 and also they had
unauthorizedly striked out the name of the firm (M/s R.R. Mazumdar) and
RFA No.28/2009                                                   Page 7 of 10

impleaded themselves as plaintiffs No.1(a) to 1(d). There is nothing on
record to show that the plaintiff No.1/firm which is a proprietorship
concern had survived even if on the death of the original plaintiff No.2.
Therefore, the substituted legal heirs of plaintiff No.2 has to take
responsibility of the unauthorized deletion of the name of the firm and the
blame cannot be shifted on the learned counsels of the plaintiffs for such
mistake. There is nothing on record to show by which the appellants had
questioned to the steps taken by their counsels. Therefore, on the basis of
oral argument advanced by the learned counsel for the appellants, it
would be difficult to accept that there was a mistake committed by the
learned counsel of the plaintiffs. Even assuming that the counsels for the
appellants/plaintiffs had made the mistake, the said situation could have
been salvaged at the trial stage by adding the said firm as party even on a
later stage by filing application under Order I Rule 10(2) CPC.        In this
connection, it is seen that the appellants had filed their notes of argument
before the learned trial court and they proceeded as if the firm existed in
the array of parties.
17.     Under such circumstances, this Court is inclined to accept the
argument advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents that the
striking out the name of the firm was not a mistake but it was a calculated
move on the part of the counsel of the appellants to salvage the situation
by an unauthorized deletion of the plaintiff No.1 from the array of parties
because the proprietorship firm has not been in existence on the death of
its proprietor. Therefore, this point of determination is decided against the
appellants and in favour of the respondents by holding that the non-
arraying of the firm (M/s. R.R. Mazumdar) as plaintiff, was fatal because
there is nothing on record to show that debts and liabilities of the said firm
had devolved on the present appellants. In that view of the matter, this
Court is inclined to hold the issue No.1 was correctly decided by the
learned trial court.
RFA No.28/2009                                                   Page 8 of 10

18.     As regards the issue No.2, framed by the learned trial court, it
appears that there was no relief sought for against the State Bank of India
and therefore, they are unnecessarily made parties in the suit, therefore,
this issue was also correctly decided by the learned trial court.
19.     With regard to the referred case of Pratibha Singh (supra), this
Court is of the view that in the said case the issue was the non-filing of
the map of the suit property and the Hon’ble Apex Court deemed it fit to
direct that the provisions of Order VII Rule 3 CPC would be applied to
insist on a map of the suit property to be filed in the plaint. However,
while an amended plaint is filed, the civil court is not required to scrutinize
the plaint to find out if any unauthorized deletion is made, and therefore,
the plaintiff who had done the mischief has to suffer the consequences.
Hence, the facts of this case is different from the facts of Pratibha Singh’s
case (supra).    For the reasons as stated above, this Court is of the view
that the proprietorship firm has no legal existence on the death of the
proprietor.    Therefore, the suo-motu striking of plaintiff No.1 is not
permissible when the trial court could not have allowed the deficiency to
be rectified because there was no deficiency at all and the firm had lost its
existence on the death of plaintiff No.2.
20.     The other case of Smt. Lachi Tewari (supra) relates to non-
appearance of the counsel at the time of hearing and therefore, the
Hon’ble Apex Court had allowed the appeal on the ground that client
should not be made to suffer on the default of the lawyer, which is not a
case in hand.
21.     As indicated above, there is no material on record to sustain the
allegation that the counsel for the plaintiffs/appellants had committed a
RFA No.28/2009                                                    Page 9 of 10

mistake before the learned trial court. Therefore, both the cases do not
appear to help the case of the appellants in any manner.
22.    In view of above, the appeal is found to be devoid of merit.
Consequently, the same is dismissed.
23.    There shall be no order as to costs.
24.    Return back the LCR.
                                                              JUDGE
MKS
RFA No.28/2009                                               Page 10 of 10


