                                              REPORTED
*   IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                    RFA NO. 18/1997
NATIONAL SMALL INDUSTRIES CORP. LTD. …... Appellant
                     Through:    Mr. S.S. Saluja, Advocate.
              versus
SHRI DIL KISHORE AND ANR.                            ..... Respondents
                     Through:
%                         Date of Reserve : November 10, 2010
                          Date of Decision : November 29, 2010
CORAM:
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REVA KHETRAPAL
1. Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed
   to see the judgment?
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?
3. Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
                          JUDGMENT
                              29.11.2010
: REVA KHETRAPAL, J.
       This appeal is directed against the judgment and decree dated
19th September, 1996 passed in Suit No. 870/1994 whereby and
RFA No. 18/1997                                              Page 1 of 13

whereunder the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi, decreed the
suit of the appellant for ` 2,09,674/- with 10% interest on the
principal amount from the date of the filing of the suit till the
realization of the amount.
2.     The facts leading to the filing of the suit briefly delineated are
that the respondent no.1 as the proprietor of M/s. Mahabir Plastic
Industries submitted an application for obtaining certain machines
from the plaintiff under a Hire-Purchase Scheme. The respondent
no.2 stood as a guarantor under the said Scheme. Along with the
application, the respondent no.1 supplied the details of the machines
and the name of the supplier from whom the machines would be
purchased. The respondent no.1 also furnished a declaration in the
said application regarding the terms and conditions governing the
supply of machinery under the aforesaid Scheme of the appellant.
Earnest money was paid by the respondent no.1 to the appellant and
the order was placed by the appellant on the suppliers of the
respondent no.1’s choice for the supply of the requisite machines.
RFA No. 18/1997                                              Page 2 of 13

3.     According to the terms of the Hire-Purchase agreement entered
into between the parties on 21st April, 1988, the respondent no.1 was
required to pay the installments of hire on the dates stipulated in the
Agreement. The hire-purchase value of the machines was fixed at
` 3,78,703/-. The first hire installment was to be in the sum of
` 27,599/- payable on the 1st of November, 1989, followed by twelve
half-yearly installments of ` 27,609/- each payable on the 1st of May
and the 1st of November, i.e. after every six months till the whole of
the hire-purchase value amount was paid.
4.     In terms of the aforesaid Hire-Purchase agreement, executed
between the appellant and the respondent no.1, the following
machines were supplied by the defendant no.1: -
   (a) 65 mm Extruder machine
   (b) Take Off Unit with 6 Rubber Rolls.
   (c) High Speed Mixture
   (d) Scrap gruder 12”
   (e) One Air Compressor 200 Lbs.
RFA No. 18/1997                                            Page 3 of 13

5.     According to the clause 6 of the Hire-Purchase agreement, the
respondent no.1 was required to pay the half-yearly installments on
the due dates, failing which the respondent no.1 would be liable to
pay interest @ 2% per annum over and above the normal rate of
interest of 13% per annum on such defaulted installments or part
thereof, as the case may be, until payment.
6.     Clause 3 of the Hire-Purchase agreement stipulated that the
respondent no.1 could exercise the option of purchasing the machines
supplied by the appellant after three years of the date of the
Agreement by paying the entire amount of hire-purchase value of the
machines, but till such time the machines would remain the sole
property of the appellant and the respondent no.1 would remain a
hirer and a mere bailee thereof. The relevant part of the Clause 3 of
the said Agreement is reproduced hereunder: -
              “3. The Owner and the hirer, hereby covenant
              as follows :
              (i)    Provided that the obligations under this
                     Agreement have in the meanwhile been
                     duly performed by the Hirer, the Hirer may
                     become the owner of the said property by
                     paying such sums as hire-rent as will in the
RFA No. 18/1997                                              Page 4 of 13

                    aggregate amount to Hire-Purchase Price
                    as also the sales-tax or general tax or
                    purchase-tax or any tax levied or leviable
                    on such transaction by any law for the time
                    being in force, and all other dues, if any,
                    payable by the hirers under this agreement
                    and the Hirer has obtained a clear receipt in
                    writing from the Owner admitting the
                    payment by the Hirer of all the above
                    amount and fulfillment of all the Hirer’s
                    obligation and liabilities under the
                    agreement, and stating that the Hirer has
                    become entitled to the ownership of the
                    said property and thereupon this
                    Agreement shall determine, but until such
                    time the property shall remain the sole
                    property of the owners and the hirer a mere
                    bailee thereof.
                    Provided further that the Hirer shall not be
                    entitled to exercise his aforesaid option of
                    purchase in respect of the said property for
                    a period of 3 years from the date hereof.
              (ii)  A metal plate showing that the said
                    property belongs to the Owner shall be
                    affixed there-on and the same shall not be
                    removed by the Hirer so long as the said
                    property remains the property of the
                    owner.
              (iii) No indulgence, delay or relaxation on the
                    part of the Owner in enforcing the terms
                    and condition of these presents shall
                    constitute a notice or waiver of any breach
                    of the terms and conditions hereof, nor
RFA No. 18/1997                                             Page 5 of 13

                    shall it in any way prejudice or effect the
                    rights of the owners under theses presents.
              (iv)  The hirer agrees that the owner may in it
                    sole discretion in any manner appropriate
                    or adjust any payment(s) received from the
                    hirer against any instalment(s) of hire-rent
                    and/or any dues or amount outstanding
                    against the hirer not withstanding the
                    hirer’s instruction in that behalf to the
                    country. The hirer further agrees that the
                    Owner may in its sole direction,
                    appropriate and adjust any excess amount
                    lying to the credit of the hirer under this
                    agreement against the instalment(s) of hire-
                    rent or any other dues or any amount
                    outstanding against the hirer under any
                    other hire-purchase agreement(s) between
                    the owner and the hirer.”
7.     The appellant’s case, as set out in the plaint, is that inspite of
repeated demands, the respondents failed to pay the installments of
hire on the due dates as laid down in the hire-purchase agreement, and
thereby the respondents defaulted in the payment of the appellant’s
dues. The appellants also alleged that the respondent no.1 committed
breach of the Agreement by shifting the machines to a place which
had no shed or roof, where the machines were put in a dismantled
condition.    This was despite the covenant in the Hire-Purchase
RFA No. 18/1997                                              Page 6 of 13

Agreement whereby the respondent no.1 had undertaken not to sell,
mortgage, pledge, assign, let or otherwise deal with or part with the
possession of the hired machines [clause 2 (iv)].
8.     The appellant alleged that the respondents having failed to pay
a sum of ` 2,09,674/- (rupees two lakh nine thousand six hundred
and seventy four) as arrears of installments of hire and of interest
thereon due to the appellant from the respondent no.1 on account of
the fifth to the tenth installments, the appellant terminated the Hire
Purchase Agreement by a legal notice dated 4th October, 1994, calling
upon the respondent to handover the possession of the hired machines
along with a sum of ` 4,67,867/- inclusive of interest. The notice
having gone unheeded, the appellant filed a suit for recovery of `
2,09,674/- as arrears of installment and for possession of the
machines, claiming possession under clause 2(v) of the Agreement
with the prayer that in case the respondent had damaged or destroyed
the machines or had removed them, or for any reason, the machines
could not be handed back to the appellant in a sound condition, the
appellant be in the alternative held entitled to a decree in the sum of `
RFA No. 18/1997                                               Page 7 of 13

2,58,674/-, being the residual value of the machines, in addition to
the amount claimed towards the hire installments.
9.     The suit was filed on 27th October, 1994. The notice of the
filing of the suit was served upon the respondents no.1 and 2. The
said respondents, though initially appeared and sought time for filing
written statement, were subsequently proceeded ex parte in default of
appearance, leading to an ex parte judgment being rendered by the
learned trial court, whereby the suit of the plaintiff was decreed in the
sum of ` 2,09,674/- with costs of the suit, against the respondents,
who were held jointly and severally liable to pay the amount with
interest.
10.    Aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment of the learned
trial court, the present appeal was preferred by the appellant. Notice
of the appeal was served upon the respondents who did not care to
appear and the appeal was accordingly heard ex parte.
11.    The main thrust of the learned counsel for the appellant was
that the learned trial court while decreeing the suit in the sum of
` 2,09,674/-, which was an amount due to the appellant for default in
RFA No. 18/1997                                              Page 8 of 13

payment of hire money under the Hire Purchase Agreement,
completely lost sight of the prayer of the appellant for possession of
the machines valued at ` 2,58,674/-.
12.   In this context, Mr. S.S. Saluja, the learned counsel for the
appellant invited my attention to the sub-clause (v) of clause 2 of the
Hire Purchase Agreement which reads as under: -
              “2. The Hirer hereby covenants with the
              Owner as follows;-
              (i)   XXX                 XXX
                    XXX
              (ii)  XXX                 XXX
                    XXX
              (iii) XXX                 XXX
                    XXX
              (iv)  XXX                 XXX
                    XXX
              (v)   If the Hirer shall make default in payment
                    of any sum herein provided as and when
                    the same shall have become due or shall
                    fail to observe and perform any of the
                    terms and conditions of this agreement or
                    if the Hirer shall be adjudicated insolvent
                    or has any receiving order or any other
                    order under an Insolvency Act and made
                    against him or he wound up whether
                    voluntarily or otherwise or if execution
                    shall be levied or threatened to be levied
RFA No. 18/1997                                             Page 9 of 13

                upon the said property or upon any
                premises where the said property may be
                or upon the Hirer’s effect for rent, rates or
                taxes or if the execution shall be levied
                upon the Hirer’s effect or if the Hirer shall
                allow any judgment against him remain
                unsatisfied then and in each and every
                such case the Owner shall forthwith
                become entitled to immediate possession
                of the hired property, (the “Dejure”
                possession shall always remain with the
                Owner and the Hirer being only entitled to
                work the said property in terms of this
                agreement) and the Owner may.
                (a)   Without prejudice to any claim for
                      arrears of hire rent or damages for
                      breach of this agreement forthwith
                      and without notice or demand
                      terminate the hiring and retake
                      possession of the property and/or.
                (b)   By written notice either served
                      personally on the Hirer or sent by
                      post or otherwise to the Hirer or to
                      his last known address forthwith for
                      all purpose absolutely determine
                      this agreement and the hiring
                      hereby constituted and thereupon
                      the Hirer shall no longer be in
                      possession of the property with the
                      owner, constent (sic.) nor shall
                      either party thereafter have any
                      rights under this Agreement, but
                      such determination shall not
RFA No. 18/1997                                          Page 10 of 13

                          discharge any pre-existing liability
                          of the hirer to the owners, and the
                          Hirer shall not be entitled to claim
                          any damages, compensation for
                          such termination of the agreement
                          and taking over of possession of the
                          property by the owner or for any
                          loss, damage, inconvenience that
                          the Hirer may directly or indirectly,
                          incur, as a result of such
                          termination of agreement or taking
                          over the said property by the
                          Owner.”
13.    Reliance was also placed by Mr. Saluja, the learned counsel for
the appellant on the decisions rendered by this Court in National
Small Industries Corporation Ltd. vs. Tenmand Engineers and
Ors. 1998 1 AD (DELHI) 526 and The National Small Industries
Corporation Ltd. vs. M/s. Globe Circuits (India) 2005 VI AD
(DELHI) 782 to contend that apart from the arrears of installments of
hire rent and interest on the overdue payments, the appellant was
entitled to a decree for the recovery of possession of the machines
hired and in the event of the failure of the respondents to give re-
possession of the hired machines to the appellant in          a sound
condition to a decree in the sum of ` 2,58,674/-, being the residual
RFA No. 18/1997                                            Page 11 of 13

value of the said hired machines, against the respondents with
pendente lite and future interest @ 15% per annum, which was the
contractual rate of interest.
14.    Indubitably, I find from the judgment of the learned trial court
that the trial court has not at all dealt with the prayer for possession of
the machines by the appellant and in the alternative for payment of
the sum of ` 2,58,674/-, i.e. the value of the machines.           Thus, in
terms of the agreement between the parties, the appellant must be
held entitled to the restoration of the hired machinery, the particulars
whereof are set out in paragraph 1 of the plaint, at serial no.1 (a) to
(e).   In the event of the failure of the respondents to give re-
possession of the aforesaid machinery to the appellant, the appellant
shall be entitled to a decree in the sum of           ` 2,58,674/- for the
residual value of the machines along with costs and interest @ 15%
per annum, which is the contractual rate of interest, from the date of
the institution of the suit till realization.
15.    In the circumstances, it is directed that the respondent no.1
shall restore the machinery mentioned above to the appellant in sound
RFA No. 18/1997                                                Page 12 of 13

condition within one month from today and in case it is not possible
for the respondent no.1 to do so, the respondent no.1 and 2 shall be
jointly and severally liable to pay the residual value thereof in the
sum of ` 2,58,674/- with interest thereon @ 15% per annum.
Needless to say that the respondents no.1 and 2 shall also be jointly
and severally liable to pay a sum of ` 2,09,674/- with costs and
interest @ 15% per annum from the date of the filing of the suit till
the realization of the amount.
16.    The appeal is allowed in the above terms.
                                              REVA KHETRAPAL
                                                       (JUDGE)
November 29, 2010
sk
RFA No. 18/1997                                          Page 13 of 13


