$~2
        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                      Decided on:- 3rd December, 2018
+       CRL.A. 823/2004
        SHUKLA RAM                                  ..... Appellant
                          Through:     Mr. Roshan Lal Saini, Adv.
                                       with Ms. Kavita Saini, Adv.
                          versus
        STATE                                       ..... Respondent
                          Through:     Mr. Amit Ahlawat, APP for the
                                       State with Insp. Hira Lal, PS
                                       Naraina.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R.K.GAUBA
                     ORDER (ORAL)
1.      The appellant was tried by the court of sessions in Sessions
Case No.19/2003 arising out of FIR No.235/2002 of Police Station
Naraina on the charge for the offence punishable under Section 307 of
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC), the incident statedly having occurred
on 25.10.2002. By judgment dated 14.05.2004, he was held guilty as
charged. By order dated 14.07.2004, he was sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment for fourteen years with fine of Rs.5,000/- and in case of
default, to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for one more year.
2.      The said judgment and order on sentence were challenged by
the appeal at hand, the appellant having also taken the plea in the
Crl. Appeal 823/2004                                        Page 1 of 6

course of these proceedings that he was a juvenile on the date of
commission of offence, he having placed reliance on school leaving
certificate (SLC) issued on 09.06.2006 by a District Primary School of
his native place in Dinajpur Karnjora, Raiganj (West Bengal).
3.      By order dated 05.06.2018, a learned Single Judge, then in
seisin of the matter called for verification.      A report under the
signature of Station House Officer of Police Station Naraina it being,
in turn, based on certificate dated 25.08.2018 of the concerned school
has come on record. The same confirms that the date of birth of the
appellant, as per school record, is 17.01.1986. This establishes the
fact that the appellant was less than eighteen years old on the date of
commission of the offence.
4.      The learned counsel for the appellant submits that he does not
press the appeal to question the judgment on merits or as to the
findings recorded regarding his complicity, his only prayer being that
the sentence may be set aside. He places reliance on a decision of the
Supreme Court in Abdul Razzaq vs. State of U.P., (2015) 15 SCC 637.
5.      The offence which is the subject matter of the present case was
committed on 25.10.2002. At that point of time, the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children), Act 2000 governed the field. The
said law has since been replaced by the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015. Be that as it may, in terms of the
law then in force, the expression “juvenile” would mean a person who
had not completed eighteen years of age and the expression “juvenile
in conflict with law” would similarly mean a juvenile who is alleged to
Crl. Appeal 823/2004                                       Page 2 of 6

have committed an offence and had not completed eighteen years of
age as on the date of commission of such offence. By virtue of Section
7A, which was inserted in the Act of 2000, by amendment introduced
with effect from 22.08.2006, the claim of juvenility could be raised
before any court for the benefit of the amended law to be taken at any
time, there being inclusion of a special provision to take care of
pending cases, including at the stage of appeal (Section 20 of the Act
of 2000).
6.      In Abdul Razzaq (supra), the petitioner had been found guilty of
the offences under Section 302 IPC and sentenced to life
imprisonment by the court of Sessions. The conviction and sentence
was confirmed by the High Court in appeal and the special leave
petition, followed by a review petition was dismissed by the Supreme
Court, the last order having been rendered on 20.07.2010. The claim
of the said person being a juvenile on the date of commission of the
offence, upon inquiry, was found to be correct.
7.      Against the above said backdrop, the Supreme Court noted the
ruling in an earlier decision reported as Jitendra Singh alias Babboo
Singh and Anr. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2013) 11 SCC 193 laying
down as under :-
            “80. The settled legal position, therefore, is that in all
            such cases where the accused was above 16 years but
            below 18 years of age on the date of occurrence, the
            proceedings pending in the court concerned will
            continue and be taken to their logical end except that the
            court upon finding the juvenile guilty would not pass an
            order of sentence against him. Instead he shall be
Crl. Appeal 823/2004                                         Page 3 of 6

            referred to the Board for appropriate orders under the
            2000 Act. Applying that proposition to the case at hand
            the trial court and the High Court could and indeed
            were legally required to record a finding as to the guilt
            or otherwise of the appellant. All that the courts could
            not have done was to pass an order of sentence, for
            which purpose, they ought to have referred the case to
            the Juvenile Justice Board.
            81. The matter can be examined from another angle.
            Section 7-A(2) of the Act prescribes the procedure to be
            followed when a claim of juvenility is made before any
            court. Section 7-A(2) is as under:
                    “7-A.Procedure to be followed when claim
                    of juvenility is raised before any court.—
                    (1)***
                    (2) If the court finds a person to be a
                    juvenile on the date of commission of the
                    offence under sub-section (1), it shall
                    forward the juvenile to the Board for
                    passing appropriate order, and the sentence
                    if any, passed by a court shall be deemed to
                    have no effect.”
            82. A careful reading of the above would show that
            although a claim of juvenility can be raised by a person
            at any stage and before any court, upon such court
            finding the person to be a juvenile on the date of the
            commission of the offence, it has to forward the juvenile
            to the Board for passing appropriate orders and the
            sentence, if any, passed shall be deemed to have (sic no)
            effect. There is no provision suggesting, leave alone
            making it obligatory for the court before whom the
            claim for juvenility is made, to set aside the conviction
            of the juvenile on the ground that on the date of
            commission of the offence he was a juvenile, and hence
            not triable by an ordinary criminal court. Applying the
            maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius, it would be
Crl. Appeal 823/2004                                           Page 4 of 6

            reasonable to hold that the law insofar as it requires a
            reference to be made to the Board excludes by necessary
            implication any intention on the part of the legislature
            requiring the courts to set aside the conviction recorded
            by the lower court. Parliament, it appears, was content
            with setting aside the sentence of imprisonment awarded
            to the juvenile and making of a reference to the Board
            without specifically or by implication requiring the
            court concerned to alter or set aside the conviction. That
            perhaps is the reason why this Court has in several
            decisions simply set aside the sentence awarded to the
            juvenile without interfering with the conviction recorded
            by the court concerned and thereby complied with the
            mandate of Section 7-A(2) of the Act.
8.      It was also noted that in Union of India Vs. Ex-GNR Ajeet
Singh, (2013) 4 SCC 186 it was held that :-
            19. The provisions of the JJ Act have been interpreted
            by this Court time and again, and it has been clearly
            explained that raising the age of “juvenile” to 18 years
            from 16 years would apply retrospectively. It is also
            clear that the plea of juvenility can be raised at any
            time, even after the relevant judgment/order has
            attained finality and even if no such plea had been
            raised earlier. Furthermore, it is the date of the
            commission of the offence, and not the date of taking
            cognizance or of framing of charges or of the
            conviction, that is to be taken into consideration.
            Moreover, where the plea of juvenility has not been
            raised at the initial stage of trial and has been taken
            only on the appellate stage, this Court has consistently
            maintained the conviction, but has set aside the
            sentence.
Crl. Appeal 823/2004                                          Page 5 of 6

9.      Following the said rulings, in case of Abdul Razzaq (supra)
while leaving the conviction undisturbed, the sentence awarded
against him was set aside.
10.     On being asked, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor
submitted that he leaves the matter to the discretion of the court as he
has nothing to say in the face of the ruling in Abdul Razzaq (supra).
11.     The facts and circumstances being similar to the case of Abdul
Razzaq (supra), the same dispensation is followed in the present case.
The benefit of amended benevolent law on juvenility has to be
accorded. Thus, while maintaining the conviction, the sentence of the
appellant is set aside.
12.     The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.
                                                       R.K.GAUBA, J.
DECEMBER 03, 2018
vk
Crl. Appeal 823/2004                                       Page 6 of 6


