$~19
        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                         Decided on:- 07th March, 2019
+       CRL.M.C. 3720/2018
        SATENDER SINGH NAKOTI                       ..... Petitioner
                            Through: Ms. Amrit Pal Kaur, Advocate
                            versus
        STATE OF NCT OF DELHI & ANR                 ..... Respondents
                            Through: Mr. Kewal Singh Ahuja, APP for
                            State with SI Rajeshwar
                            Second respondent in person
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE R.K.GAUBA
                       ORDER (ORAL)
1.      The second respondent was married to Jai Inder singh, son of
the petitioner, as per Hindu rites and ceremonies on 02.10.2006. Out
of their cohabitation, a female child named Pearl was born on
12.10.2007.        On 12.11.2014, the second respondent lodged first
information report (FIR) no.547/2014 with police station Palam
Village, South West Delhi, alleging offences punishable under
Sections 498A, 406, 34 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC) against her
husband and his father (the petitioner). On conclusion of the
investigation, police filed report (charge sheet) under Section 173 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr. PC) on which cognizance
Crl. M.C. No.3720/2018                                      Page 1 of 8

was taken, the said matter being pending on the file of the
Metropolitan Magistrate.
2.      It is stated that the Metropolitan Magistrate discharged Jai Inder
Singh (husband), the case surviving against the petitioner for offence
under Section 498-A IPC alone. The second respondent and Jai Inder
Singh entered into a memorandum of understanding (MoU) on
30.01.2018 by which they agreed to amicably resolve their disputes,
and to approach as per the timelines indicated, the appropriate forum
for obtaining a decree of divorce, they also having agreed inter alia
for the criminal case arising out of the aforementioned FIR to be
sought to be quashed.
3.      The petition, thus, has been moved before this court invoking
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 seeking
quashing of FIR no.547/2014 under Sections 406, 498A, 34 IPC of
Police Station Palam Village, South West, Delhi.
4.      The second respondent on being served with the notice has
appeared and, pursuant to the directions, has sworn a detailed affidavit
on 16.08.2018 which has come on record on 15.11.2018. Through the
said affidavit, and in person, she has confirmed that she has settled all
the disputes with the petitioner in terms of the above-mentioned MoU,
out of her own free will and volition, without any pressure or coercion.
At the hearing, both sides confirmed that they have already moved the
Family Court by two separate petitions, one after the other, on the
basis of which their marriage has been dissolved by a decree of
divorce by mutual consent granted on 18.05.2018 in HMA 1015/2018
Crl. M.C. No.3720/2018                                       Page 2 of 8

by the Family Court for South-West District. As per the MoU, the
custody of the child is to remain with the second respondent (mother),
the father to have visitation rights, the second respondent to receive
from Jai Inder Singh, a total amount of Rs.35 Lakhs towards all her
claims. It is confirmed by the second respondent that she has already
received Rs.30 Lakhs in the form of two equal instalments at the time
of hearing on the first motion and the second motion petitions for
divorce by mutual consent. At the hearing, Jai Inder Singh, son of the
petitioner, has handed over to the second respondent a demand draft
bearing no.067584 dated 05.03.2019, drawn on Axis Bank Ltd., for
the balance sum of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five lakhs) which she has
received against proper acknowledgement.
5.      Pertinent to note here that offence under Section 498A IPC is
not compoundable. The parties are constrained to move this court for
quashing on the basis of amicable resolution arrived at by them in the
facts and circumstances noted above.
6.      The scope and ambit of the power conferred on this court by
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr. PC) read
with Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, in the particular
context of prayer for quashing criminal proceedings, was examined by
the Supreme Court in B.S. Joshi and Ors. Vs. State of Haryana and
Anr., (2003) 4 SCC 675, against the backdrop of a catena of earlier
decisions.       Noting, with reference to the decision in State of
Karnakata Vs. L Muniswamy, (1977) 2 SCC 699, that in exercise of
Crl. M.C. No.3720/2018                                     Page 3 of 8

this “inherent” and “wholesome power”, the touchstone is as to
whether “the ends of justice so require”, and it was observed thus :
               “10. ... that in a criminal case, the veiled object
               behind a lame prosecution, the very nature of the
               material on which the structure of the prosecution
               rests and the like would justify the High Court in
               quashing the proceeding in the interest of justice and
               that the ends of justice are higher than the ends of
               mere law though justice had got to be administered
               according to laws made by the legislature. ...that the
               compelling necessity for making these observations is
               that without a proper realization of the object and
               purpose of the provision which seeks to save the
               inherent powers of the High Court to do justice
               between the State and its subjects, it would be
               impossible to appreciate the width and contours of
               that salient jurisdiction.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
7.      The Supreme Court in B.S. Joshi (supra) further noted as
under :-
                    “What would happen to the trial of the case where
                    the wife does not support the imputations made in
                    the FIR of the type in question. As earlier noticed,
                    now she has filed an affidavit that the FIR was
                    registered at her instance due to temperamental
                    differences and implied imputations. There may be
                    many reasons for not supporting the imputations.
                    It may be either for the reason that she has
                    resolved disputes with her husband and his other
                    family members and as a result thereof she has
                    again started living with her husband with whom
                    she earlier had differences or she has willingly
                    parted company and is living happily on her own
                    or has married someone else on the earlier
                    marriage having been dissolved by divorce on
Crl. M.C. No.3720/2018                                         Page 4 of 8

                    consent of parties or fails to support the
                    prosecution on some other similar grounds. In
                    such eventuality, there would almost be no chance
                    of conviction. Would it then be proper to decline to
                    exercise power of quashing on the ground that it
                    would be permitting the parties to compound non-
                    compoundable offences? The answer clearly has to
                    be in the “negative”. It would, however, be a
                    different matter if the High Court on facts declines
                    the prayer for quashing for any valid reasons
                    including lack of bona fides.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
8.      Holding that “special features in ...matrimonial matters are
evident” and that it is “the duty of the court to encourage genuine
settlements of matrimonial disputes”, referring to Madhavrao
Jiwajirao Scindia Vs. Sambhajirao Chandrojiroo Angre, (1988) 1
SCC 692, it was further observed that :
                “11. ... Where, in the opinion of the court, chances
                of an ultimate conviction are bleak and, therefore,
                no useful purpose is likely to be served by allowing
                a criminal prosecution to continue, the court may,
                while taking into consideration the special facts of
                a case, also quash the proceedings.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
9.      In Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab and Anr. (2012) 10 SCC 303,
the Supreme Court contrasted the request for quashing of criminal
proceedings on the basis of settlement with the possibility of
compounding of an offence and observed thus :-
                “57. Quashing of offence or criminal proceedings
                on the ground of settlement between an offender
                and victim is not the same thing as compounding of
Crl. M.C. No.3720/2018                                         Page 5 of 8

                 offence. They are different and not interchangeable.
                 Strictly speaking, the power of compounding of
                 offences given to a court under Section 320 is
                 materially different from the quashing of criminal
                 proceedings by the High Court in exercise of its
                 inherent jurisdiction. In compounding of offences,
                 power of a criminal court is circumscribed by the
                 provisions contained in Section 320 and the court is
                 guided solely and squarely thereby while, on the
                 other hand, the formation of opinion by the High
                 Court for quashing a criminal offence or criminal
                 proceeding or criminal complaint is guided by the
                 material on record as to whether the ends of justice
                 would justify such exercise of power although the
                 ultimate consequence may be acquittal or dismissal
                 of indictment.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
10.     The above views in the context of matrimonial disputes
resulting in criminal proceedings have been consistently followed over
the years, as may be further illustrated by the decision of a bench of
three Hon’ble Judges of the Supreme Court in Jitendra Raghuvanshi
and Ors. Vs. Babita Raghuvanshi and Anr., (2013) 4 SCC 58, the
following observations summarising the philosophy succinctly :-
                “15. In our view, it is the duty of the courts to
                encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial
                disputes, particularly, when the same are on
                considerable increase. Even if the offences are non-
                compoundable, if they relate to matrimonial disputes
                and the Court is satisfied that the parties have settled
                the same amicably and without any pressure, we hold
                that for the purpose of securing ends of justice,
                Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
                exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or
                the subsequent criminal proceedings.
Crl. M.C. No.3720/2018                                         Page 6 of 8

                16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial
                disputes in recent times. The institution of marriage
                occupies an important place and it has an important
                role to play in the society. Therefore, every effort
                should be made in the interest of the individuals in
                order to enable them to settle down in life and live
                peacefully. If the parties ponder over their defaults
                and terminate their disputes amicably by mutual
                agreement instead of fighting it out in a court of law,
                in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
                matters, the courts should be less hesitant in
                exercising their extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite
                to state that the power under Section 482 should be
                exercised sparingly and with circumspection only
                when the Court is convinced, on the basis of material
                on record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
                would be an abuse of process of court or that the ends
                of justice require that the proceedings ought to be
                quashed...”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
11.     In a case where criminal proceedings arise essentially out of
matrimonial dispute and the parties have decided to bury the hatchet,
the court must examine if there is any likelihood of the criminal
prosecution resulting in conviction. In fact-situation wherein the
matrimonial relation has been brought to an end by mutual consent
and the parties are eager to move on with their respective lives seeking
closure and if there is nothing to indicate lack of bonafide on the part
of any side, denial of the prayer for quashing the criminal case would
restore acrimony rather than bring about peace. Allowing continuance
of the criminal action would be fruitless and clearly an abuse of
judicial process.
12.     The case at hand passes the muster of the above-noted tests.
Crl. M.C. No.3720/2018                                        Page 7 of 8

13.     In the above facts and circumstances, the petition is allowed.
The crime registered by the police vide FIR 547/2014 under Sections
406, 498A, 34 IPC of Police Station Palam Village, South West Delhi,
and the proceedings emanating therefrom are hereby quashed.
14.     The petition is disposed of accordingly.
        Dasti to both sides.
                                                    R.K.GAUBA, J.
MARCH 07, 2019
yg
Crl. M.C. No.3720/2018                                   Page 8 of 8


