                                 1
                 IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
 (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                     ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
              (PRINCIPAL SEAT AT GUWAHATI)
                      RSA No. 163/ 2007
Sri Rameswar Singha,
Son of late Thambotal Singha,
village- Satragaram, P.O. Patharkandi,
P.S. Patharkandi, District- Karimganj, Assam.
             ………………..Appellant/ Principal Defendant.
                   -Versus-
1. On the death of respondent No. 1, Kula Chandra Sinha,
His legal heirs:-
1(a) Smti Sarjakala Sinha,
1(b) Smti Swapna Sinha,
1(c) Sri Rabindra Sinha,
1(d) Smti Sufala Sinha,
1(e) Smti Panchali Sinha
(as per Court’s order dated 14.2.2013,
Passed in MC No. 1511/2008)
2. On the death of respondent No. 2 Indra Sena Sinha,
His legal heirs:-
2(a) Smti Rubi Sinha (wife),
2(b) Smti Pinky Sinha (daughter),
2(c) Sri Pranab Sinha (son),
(as per court’s order dated 16.5.2011,
Passed in MC No. 1315/2011)

                                 2
All are residents of village –Montrigram,
P.O. Kalkalighat, P.S. Patharkandi,
District- Karimganj, Assam
                 ……………. Plaintiffs/ Respondents.
Advocate for the appellant:               Mr. N. Dhar,
                                          Mr. S. Chakraborty,
                                          Mr. B. Malakar,
                                             …….      Advocates.
Advocate for the respondents:             Mr. B. Sinha,
                                          Mr. R. Islam,
                                          ……. Advocates.
                            -BEFOR E–
    HON’BLE M R. JUSTI CE P RASANTA KUM AR DEKA
              Date of hearing             : 27.04.2017
       Date of judgm ent & order          : 09.06.2017
                  JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)

                                 3
      Heard Mr. N. Dhar, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of
the appellant/ defendant and Mr. B. Sinha, learned counsel,
appearing on behalf of the plaintiffs/ respondents.
2]         The present appellant is the defendant in Title Suit
No. 165/2001 filed by the plaintiffs/ respondents for declaration
of the right, title, interest and possession in their favour
alongwith the relief for confirmation of possession and for
permanent injunction. The original plaintiff/ respondent Nos. 1
and 2 died during the pendency of this appeal and their
respective legal heirs were substituted vide order dated
14.2.2013, passed in M.C. No. 1511/2008 and order dated
16.5.2011, passed in M.C. No. 1315/2011 respectively.
3]         Within a very short radius, the facts leading to filing
of the suit by the plaintiffs/ respondents is that the suit land
described in the schedule of the plaint alongwith its adjacent
land measuring 5 (five) Kathas was the jote land of late Kamal

                                  4
Sinha, the paternal grandfather of the plaintiffs/ respondents
under the mirasdar, Kunja Bihari Choudhury and on the death of
said mirasdar, the said jote right was renewed by the wife of the
said mirasdar by way of a Patta Patra on 15th Baishak, 1314
Bengali year in favour of the said Kamal Sinha. His son Tambi
Sena Sinha inherited the jote right in the aforesaid 5 Khatas of
land and the plaintiffs/ respondents inherited and possessing the
same by acquiring the status of the land holder.
4]           After construction of the E&D bundh on the western
side of the land, towards the eastern side of bundh, the
plaintiffs/ respondents are possessing an area of 1½ (one and
half) Kathas of the land described in the schedule of the plaint.
The said land is under the cultivation of the plaintiffs/
respondents. The defendant/ appellant without any right, title,
interest and possession over the suit land is trying to dispossess
the plaintiffs/ respondents denying their right, title, interest and

                                  5
possession in respect of the suit land and as such the suit has
been filed for the relief mentioned hereinabove.
5]            The defendant/ appellant contested the claim of the
plaintiffs/ respondents by filing his written statement denying the
claim. It is the defence of the defendant/ appellant that the land
described in the schedule of the written statement, originally
belonged to mirasdar Tambi Sena Sinha under whom one Nabin
Namasudra was the jotedar in respect of the said land. The said
Nabin Namasudra possessed the said land by paying revenue to
the aforesaid mirasdar and to the Government, the original land
holder. The settlement record of the said land was also prepared
in the name of Nabin Namasudra and and on his death, his son,
Aswini Namasudra inherited the same and enjoying the title
thereof. The defendant/ appellant purchased the said land from
Aswini Namasudra vide registered deed No. 1841 dated 4.8.2000
and on delivery of possession, the defendant/ appellant
continued the same and enjoyed his right, title and interest

                                        6
thereof. On the basis of the said defence, the defendant/
appellant has prayed to dismiss the suit.
6]            Upon pleadings of the parties, following issues
alongwith the additional Issue No. 6 were framed:-
                      “ISSUES
       1.     If there is any cause of action for the suit?
       2.     If the suit is bad for defect of parties?
       3.     Whether the suit is barred by Limitation?
       4.     If the plaintiffs have right, title, interest and possession over
              the suit land?
       5.     To what relief/ reliefs, the plaintiffs are entitled?
              Additional Issue
       6.     Whether the suit land has been properly and correctly
described in the schedule of the plaint?”
7]            The parties to the suit adduced their respective
evidence and relied on the following exhibits. The plaintiff side
exhibited the following documents:-
       Ext. 1 :       Order dated 18.1.1977 passed in the Eject Case No. 1
       of 1976/77 between Reboti Devi, wife of Lahava Singha Vs. Kula
       Chandra Singha and others.

                                        7
      Ext. 2:        Unregistered Patta Patra purportedly shown to be
      executed by Bilash Manjari Dashi, wife of late Kunja Bihari
      Choudhury, dated 15 Baishak, 1314 Bengali year.
      Ext. 3:        Working Khatian showing the names of various
      possessors.
      Ext. 4:        Revenue Paying Challans dated 19th May, 1942.
8]            The defendant side exhibited the following exhibits:
      Ext-A:         Registered sale deed bearing No. 1841, dated 4.8.2000
      shown to be executed by Aswini Namasudra, son of late Nabin
      Namasudra in favour of the defendant/ appellant.
       Ext. B:      The final Khatian No. 107 issued in favour of Nabin
      Namasudra of land covered by Dag No. 137 mentioning the issuance
      of the same after the right acquired by the Government under the
      Assam State Acquisition of Zamindari Act, 1951 under notification
      dated 10.3.1964.
      Ext. C:        Trace map issued by the Revenue officials.
      Ext. D:        Draft Patta showing number as 54 issued in favour of
      Nabin Namasudra pertaining to Dag No. 323
      Ext. D Series:        Land revenue paying challans issued by the
      office of the Circle Officer, Patharkandi Tahsil, Karimganj.
9]            The learned trial court vide judgment and decree
dated 24.4.2004, dismissed the suit mainly by deciding the
additional Issue No. 6 and Issue No. 4. While deciding additional

                                  8
Issue No. 6 with regard to the identity of the land, the learned
trial court examined the defence taken by the defendant/
appellant to the effect that without disputing the Dag No. 137 of
the suit land and the eastern and southern boundary of the suit
land, the western and northern boundary of the suit land was
not correctly described by the plaintiffs/ respondents. As the
plaintiffs/ respondents stated that E&D bundh is situated on the
western boundary but according to the defendant/ appellant it is
the land of Lehuba Singh. The plaintiff/ respondent No. 1 as the
PW 1 had admitted in his cross-examination that a plot of land in
between E&D bundh and the suit land is under occupation of the
Lehuba Singh under Dag No. 136. PW 1 admitted the land of
Lehuba Singh is situated on its western side of the suit land.
Similarly the learned trial court considered the cross examination
of the PW 1, the defence taken by the defendant/ appellant that
on the southern side of the suit land, there is paddy land of Sena
Singha. So the learned trial court came to the finding that the
suit land had not been described correctly.

                                 9
10]          While deciding Issue No. 4, the learned trial court on
the basis of the pleading held that the plaintiffs/ respondents
claim over the suit land that their predecessors were the jotedar
of the suit land under mirasdar Kunja Behari Choudhury. So after
the enforcement of the Acquisition of Zamindari Act in the State,
there must be a jote khatian under the settlement operation and
the same must have been published in the name of the
predecessor of the plaintiffs/ respondents showing them as land
holders. However, no such documentary evidence is on record to
hold Kunja Bihari Choudhury was the mirasdar/ or owner of the
suit land prior to the enforcement of Acquisition of the Zamindari
Act by the State. With respect to Ext. No. 2 it was not taken into
consideration by the trial court as the same cannot be
appreciated in evidence. The Ext. 3 working khatian covering the
suit land under Dag No. 137 was not taken into consideration by
the learned trial court as the suit land is the jote land as per the
pleadings of the plaintiffs/ respondents and as against the said

                                 10
pleading the name of Tambi Sena Singha i.e. the father of the
plaintiff/ respondents has been shown as mirasdar.
11]           Appreciating the Ext. B, which is the final khatian of
the suit Dag No. 137, the learned trial court, accepted the same
as the name of Nabin Namasudra has been shown as the jote
Khatiandar. Discarding the revenue paying challans, Ext. 4, the
learned trial court held that the same cannot be considered
being devoid of any dag number and further discarded Ext. 1 as
the same does not support the title of the plaintiffs/
respondents. Finally considering the admission of the PW 1 in his
cross-examination that over the suit land there was a house of
Nabin Namasudra about 40 years back came to the conclusion
that the said evidence supports the contention of the Ext. B
which has not been able to be rebutted by the plaintiffs/
respondents. Therefore, the said Issue No. 4 was decided
against the plaintiffs/ respondents.

                                  11
12]         The plaintiff/ respondents thereafter preferred Title
Appeal No. 46/2004 in the court of the learned Civil Judge (Sr.
Division), Karimganj and the said first Appellate Court vide
judgment and decree dated 6.6.2007 reversed the judgment and
decree passed by the trial court.
13]         The first Appellate Court framed the point for
determination as follows:
      “Point for determination:-
      (1)   Whether the suit land is identifiable to execute the
            decree if any passed in favour of the plaintiff.
      (2)   Whether the plaintiff has possession over the suit
            land.
      (3)   If so, whether the title of the suit land has been
            established in their favour.”
14]         The learned first Appellate Court while determining
the point No. 1 held as follows:

                                  12
       “Moreover, all the PWs and DWs including defendant in
       their deposition very specifically deposed that they could
       identify the suit land. Hence, in my considered view though
       the western boundary was not described properly, the suit
       land can be easily identifiable if the plaintiffs obtained
       decree. So the land described in schedule of plaint with a
       slight modification in the western boundary as per my
       finding it can be easily be executed by keeping in mind the
       evidence on record that the suit land does not attract strip
       of land pertaining to Dag No. 136 between the E&D bundh
       on western side of the suit land”.
15]          The learned first Appellant Court while deciding the
point for determination Nos. 2 and 3, came to the finding that as
the source of title was not proved by the defendant, the Ext. A
cannot create any right, title over the suit land. On the other
hand, the defendant admitted that the father of the plaintiffs
was mirasdar of the land described in Ext. A and as such it was
presumed that story of the plaintiffs regarding acquiring title by
his father is believable. However, in the next breathe the learned

                                13
first Appellate Court came to the finding that as the final khatian
was prepared in the name of Nabin Namasudra as such, he
agreed to the finding of the learned trial court that final khatian,
is a document of possession. However, considering the strong
evidence adduced by the plaintiffs/ respondents regarding their
source of title and possession of the suit land which the
defendant/ appellant failed in adducing convincing evidence so
far the father of his vendor is concerned, in acquiring title over
the land mentioned in Ext. A,         hence both the point for
determinations were decided in favour of the present plaintiffs/
respondents. Holding so, the first Appellate Court passed a
decree in favour of the plaintiffs/ respondents reversing the
findings of the trial court.
16]          Being aggrieved by the said judgment and decree
dated 6.6.2007, passed in Title Appeal No. 46/2004 by the
learned Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Karimganj, the defendant/

                                 14
appellant has preferred this second appeal, which was admitted
on 10.3.2008 on the following substantial questions of law:-
      “(1)         Whether the impugned judgment and decree of
      reversal passed by the learned lower Appellate Court and
      findings in deciding Issue No. 4 and thereby decreeing the
      suit filed by the plaintiffs/ respondents ignoring the
      working Khatian (Exhibit 3) and final khatian (Exhibit B)
      and evidence of PW 1, PW 2 and PW 3 in the nature of an
      admission that the boundaries of the suit land were not
      described    correctly  and   there   were   non-joinder    of
      necessary     parties  in   the  suit   are   perverse     and
      unsustainable in law?
      (2)   For that substantial question of law arises as to
      whether the impugned judgment and decree of reversal
      passed by the learned lower Appellate Court and findings
      in deciding Issue No. 6 holding that if the plaintiff obtained
      decree with a slight modification in the western boundary
      of the suit land then it can be easily executed and thereby
      decreeing the suit filed by the plaintiffs/ respondents by
      travelling beyond the pleadings made in the plaint are
      perverse and unsustainable in law?”

                                  15
17]          Mr. Dhar, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of
the appellant submits that the first Appellate Court while holding
that there were strong evidence adduced by the plaintiffs/
respondents and that too on the face of the evidence of PW 1,
PW 2 and PW 3 admitting the case of the defendant/ appellant is
totally perverse finding. The learned first Appellate Court failed
to take note of Section 4 of the Assam State Acquisition of
Zamindari Act, 1951 and wrongly decreed the suit in favour of
the plaintiffs/ respondents. It is further submitted that Ext. 3 i.e.
working Khatian coupled with the final Khatian Ext. B shows that
the title of the defendant/ appellant originated from the Ext. B
and if the Ext. 3 working khatian is considered, wherein there
are names of about 9 (nine) possessors with respect to the land
covered by Dag No. 137, the suit is bad for non-joinder of the
necessary parties which the learned first Appellate Court failed to
consider and as such the substantial question of Law No. 1 is to
be decided in favour of the defendant/ appellant.

                                  16
18]           Mr. Dhar also submits that the finding with respect to
additional Issue No. 6 given by the learned first Appellate Court
is totally unsustainable under the law. It is submitted that the
plaintiffs/ respondents until and unless amended the schedule of
the suit land, no executable decree could be passed. But even
then, the learned first Appellate Court even after holding that the
boundary of the suit land was described incorrectly came to the
finding that if the plaintiffs obtained the decree, the same could
be easily executed by keeping in mind the findings on record
that the suit land does not attract the land covered by Dag No.
136 between the E&D bundh and the western side of the suit
land thus,      another instance of perversity made by the first
Appellate Court while passing the impugned judgment and
decree.
19]           It is also submitted that there are glaring evidence
on record that the defendant/ appellant has been possessing the

                                 17
suit land which had been deposed by none other than the
witnesses of the plaintiffs/ respondents’ side. Submitting such,
Mr. Dhar finally submits that the substantial question of law No.
2 is to be decided in favour of the defendant/ appellant.
20]         Per contra, Mr. Sinha submits that the substantial
questions of law so formulated are not relevant to decide the
present appeal inasmuch as it is a fact that the plaintiffs/
respondents are able to prove their case including their title over
the suit land on the basis of the Ext. Nos. 1 to 4. Mr. Sinha
submits that Ext. No. 1 shows that the plaintiffs/ respondents
were possessing the land covered by Dag No. 137 of Khatian No.
107 which is the suit land wherein vide order dated 18.1.1977, it
was held that the first Party Reboti Devi had no tenancy right
over the suit land under Mahal No. 24135/84 of erstwhile
permanent settlement area. It is also submitted that vide Ext.
No. 2, the Patta Patra, the grandfather of the respondent held
the possession and as a result the working Khatian Ext. 3 was

                                  18
granted showing the name of Tambi Sena Sinha, the father of
the plaintiffs/ respondents as one of the possessors of the suit
land. On the other hand, the defendant/ appellant failed to show
any such piece of evidence supporting his claim that Nabin
Namasudra had the title to possess the suit land as claimed by
the defendant/ appellant. Thus, Mr. Sinha submits that the
appeal is liable to be dismissed.
21]          Both the substantial questions of law are discussed
jointly. The findings of the learned trial court with respect to
Issue No. 4 that if the predecessor-in- interest of the plaintiffs/
respondents were jotedar in respect of the suit land under the
mirasdar, Kunja Bihari Choudhury, a jote Khatian during the first
settlement operation ought to have been published in the name
of the predecessors of the plaintiffs/ respondents showing them
as land holders is a correct finding. Section 4 sub section (6) of
the Assam State Acquisition of the Zamindari Act, 1951 stipulates
that every Rayat or non-agricultural tenant holding land or any

                                   19
estate which is vested in the State shall hold the same directly
under the State on same terms and conditions as immediately
before the date of vesting and all rents etc and other dues
accruing in respect of the land comprised in such vested or
tenure on the date of vesting shall be payable to the State
Government. The said Section 4 sub-section (6) provides that
the State Government shall be entitled to apply the Assam Land
and Revenue Regulation 1886 in any area, if the tenants residing
in it and apply any right to exchange their right under the
Goalpara Tenancy Act, 1929 or the Sylhet Tenancy Act, 1936 for
granting right under the Assam Land Revenue Regulation Act,
1886.
22]          The case of the plaintiffs/ respondents as apparent
from the plaint itself is that after the death of Kamal Singha, who
was a jote tenant under one Kunja Bihari Choudhury (mirasdar),
his son Tambi Sena Singh, the predecessor-in-interest of the
plaintiffs/ respondents became the jotedar of the land including

                                 20
the suit land. So it is the duty on the part of the plaintiffs/
respondents to show that the plaintiffs/ respondents or their late
father was endowed with the status within the ambit and scope
of the Assam State Acquisition of Zamindari Act, 1951. But no
such piece of evidence is on record in order to hold the title of
the plaintiffs/ respondents as per the pleading over the suit land.
23]          On the other hand, it is the case of the defendant/
appellant that Tambi Sena Singh was the mirasdar and late
Nabin Namasudra was the jotedar under the mirasdar with
respect to the suit land alongwith other land. The said Nabin
Namasudra became the owner of the aforesaid land enjoying the
status/ right as land holder. The said land was under Khatian No.
107, which was possessed by Nabin Namasudara and Ext. B,
Khatian No. 107 was issued by striking out the name of Tambi
Sena Singha and said Nabin Namasudra as apparent from Ext-B
was possessing the land covered by Dag No. 137. Ext. D series
shows the payment of land revenue and the Ext. D supports the

                                 21
fact of issuance of Patta in the name of Nabin Nomasudra as per
the provision of Section 4, sub-section (6) of the Assam State
Acquisition of Zamindari Act, 1951.
24]          In addition to that, PW 1 Kula Chandra Sinha
(deceased respondent No. 1) in his cross-examination deposed
that over the suit land, the house of Nabin Namasudra existed
about 40 years back. It is admitted by the said PW 1 that the
final Khatian of the suit land was issued in the name of Nabin
Namasudra. PW 3 Horidas Sinha specifically deposed in his
cross-examination     that    Rameswar   Singha,  the   present
defendant/ appellant is possessing the suit land. On the other
hand, the evidence adduced by the defendant/ appellant remains
unshattered. The defendant/ appellant as the DW 1, specifically
deposed that Aswini Namasudra had the homestead over the
suit land which he had purchased and the same is classified as
homestead land. It is also admitted that on the western
boundary of the suit land, the name of Tambi Sena Sinha has

                                 22
been stated in the Ext. A and he is not aware with regard to dag
number of the land of the plaintiffs/ respondents. He also denied
the fact that Ext. A sale deed is a forged one.
25]         Under such overwhelming evidence in support of
appellant/defendant, the finding of the first Appellate Court that
the plaintiffs/ respondents have strong evidence is totally
perverse finding and as such the substantial question of law No.
1 is decided in favour of the defendant / appellant.
26]         With regard to finding of the first Appellate Court,
additional Issue No. 6, the same is not wrong finding in as much
as both the parties to the suit are claiming the land covered by
Dag No. 137 though the same has subsequently been changed
after issuance of Patta in favour of the defendant/ appellant.
The finding of the first Appellate Court that leaving aside the
land covered by Dag No. 136, the decree if any, passed in favour
of the plaintiffs/ respondents would be an executable one.

                                23
27]         Order VII Rule 3 of the CPC stipulates that when the
subject matter of the suit is immovable property, the plaint shall
contain a description of the property sufficient to identify it and
in case such property can be identified by the boundary or
numbers in a record of settlement or survey, the plaint shall
specify such boundaries or numbers. Herein the present case,
there is no dispute with regard to Dag No. 137 and as referred
herein above, both the parties are aware with respect to dag
number of the suit land and as such the substantial question of
law No. 2 is decided against the defendant/ appellant.
28]         Accordingly, this second appeal is allowed by setting
aside the judgment and decree dated 6.6.2007, passed by the
learned Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Karimganj in Title Appeal No.
46/2004 without interfering with regard to the finding on the
point of determination No. 1. The suit of the plaintiffs/

                               24
respondents is accordingly dismissed. A decree be drawn up
accordingly. No costs.
29]         Send back the LCR.
                                              JUDGE..
 Eam/…


