                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
         (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                       Case No:         RSA 166/2017
                    Vante Sumedhananda Bhiku                 ……      Appellant
                                       -Versus-
                    Dibrugarh Buddha Samity and another      ..... Respondents
                                    :: BEFORE ::
            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
                For the Appellant             :      Mr. AK Purkayastha
                                                             Advocate
                For the Respondents           :      Mr. M Nath
                                                             Advocate
                Date of Hearing               :      27.07.2017
                Date of delivery of
                Judgment and Order            :      27.07.2017
                   JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
        Heard Mr. AK Purkayastha, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. M
Nath, learned counsel for the respondents.
2.       This second appeal arose out of the judgment and decree passed by the
learned Civil Judge, Dibrugarh in Title Appeal No. 67/2013 dated 03.02.2017. The
present appellant is the defendant in Title Suit No. 53/2009 filed by the plaintiffs/
respondents for declaration and injunction. The plaintiff/ respondent No. 1 is a
registered body established in the year 1936 to propagate the Buddhist religion,
                                                                          Page 1 of 6
RSA 166/2017

its philosophy etc. in the society. It has its own constitution for discharging the
business of the society. The plaintiff/ respondent No. 1 samity was constituted by
a general meeting for a period of 2 years. The priest/ monk known as Bhiku was
also appointed to look after the religious functions of the Buddha Mandir situated
in the premises covering land measuring 3K 9L situated at Graham Bazar ward,
Dibrugarh town. It is further contended by the plaintiffs/ respondents that the
Purbanchal Bhikku Sangha at Margherita having its affiliation under All India
Bhikku Sangha recommended the name of the defendant/ appellant. On such
recommendation, the plaintiff committee appointed the defendant/ appellant as
the priest of the Buddha Mandir run by the plaintiff Committee. It was contended
that the defendant/ appellant used to act as sole supervisor of the entire Samity
and misused the property of the Samity and some illegal activities inside the
Buddha Mandir was committed by him. The Committee was constituted by the
general meeting dated 12.09.2008 by electing Sri Sunil Kumar Baruah and Sri
Ujjal Baruah as its President and Secretary respectively and asking the
defendant/ appellant to hand over all the proceeding books and accounts of the
Samity which he refused to hand over. The defendant/ appellant with his
manpower obstructed the members of the plaintiff Committee to enter into the
Buddha Mandir. In the aforesaid background, the plaintiffs/ respondents filed the
suit praying for declaration that the Committee constituted on 12.09.2008
headed by Sri Sunil Kumar Baruah and Sri Ujjal Baruah as its President and
Secretary respectively is the genuine one and for a direction to the defendant/
appellant to hand over the proceeding books and accounts of the Samity to the
newly constituted Committee as well as perpetual injunction restraining the
                                                                          Page 2 of 6
RSA 166/2017

defendant/ appellant from interfering the activities of the plaintiffs/ Samity in any
manner.
3.       The defendant/ appellant through his written statement denied the
contentions made by the plaintiffs/ respondents. It is the defence taken by the
defendant/ appellant that since the day of its inception, the management of the
Dibrugarh Buddha Samity has been appointing a high priest with the approval of
All Assam Vikkhu Sangha and not by the Purbanchal Vikku Samity. It is further
contended that the Secretary, Sri Ujjal Baruah in collusion with 9 (nine) other Ex-
officials of the Samity had been trying to dispossess the defendant/ appellant for
fulfilment of their mala fide intention which they failed to do so. The plaintiffs/
respondents published certain defamatory statements in the local daily against
which the defendant/ appellant has preferred a criminal petition. The officials of
the earlier committee forcibly took away the official papers and as such, there is
denial on the part of the defendant/ appellant with respect to the plea that he
has taken the papers of the Committee. Accordingly, he prayed for dismissal of
the suit.
4.       On the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial court framed as many as
8 (eight) issues which are quoted below:-
          1.     Whether the suit is maintainable in law and in facts?
          2.    Whether there is cause of action for the suit?
          3.     Whether the Managing Committee of the plaintiff headed by Sri
                 Sunil Kumar Baruah anad Sri Ujjal Baruah was duly constituted?
          4.     If so, whether the defendants and their men are not bound to
                 deliver the possession of the office premises, Library, Accounts
                 etc. to the Committee?
          5.     Whether the appointment of the monk of the mandir was made
                 with the forwarding of Purbanchal Vikkhu Sangha or that of All
                 Assam Vikkhu Sangha?
                                                                           Page 3 of 6
RSA 166/2017

          6.    Whether the defendant No. 1 has any right to act as a monk of the
                mandir?
          7.    Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief claimed for?
          8.    To what relief/s the parties are entitled to in the facts and
                circumstances of the case?
5.       The learned trial court decreed the suit vide judgment and decree dated
11.11.2013. Against the said judgment and decree, Title Appeal No. 67/2013 was
preferred by the defendant/appellant in the court of learned Civil Judge,
Dibrugarh. The said title appeal was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated
03.02.2017. Thereafter, the present second appeal has been preferred by the
defendant/ appellant.
6.       Mr. Purkayastha, learned counsel for the appellant, submits that the relief
sought for by the plaintiffs/ respondents, under no circumstances, could be
granted, inasmuch as, the relief of permanent injunction cannot be considered at
all. As per the constitution, Article 14(D) of the Samity, the term for a Samity is
for a period of 2 years. In such a situation, granting of relief for perpetual
injunction would amount to violation of the said clause of the constitution which
is still governing the management of the Buddha Mandir. Accordingly, Mr.
Purkayastha submits that the judgment and decree passed by the learned courts
below is liable to be set aside only for the said ground.
7.        Mr. Nath, learned counsel for the respondents, opposing the submissions
of Mr. Purkayastha, submits that though the Committee was elected during the
pendency of the suit but the same could not function owing to various orders
passed by the courts below during its tenure. As against the relief of permanent
injunction, Mr. Nath submits that though the term ‘perpetual injunction’ has been
mentioned in the plaint but it is needless to mention that the same would remain
                                                                             Page 4 of 6
RSA 166/2017

valid till the expiry of the term of the said Committee which was elected duly and
constitutionally. It is further submitted and clarified by Mr. Nath that the
plaintiffs/ respondents have not challenged any of the provisions of the
constitution rather, the plaintiffs/ respondents are enforcing the provisions
stipulated in the constitution whereby the authority is given to the Committee to
manage the Buddha Mandir. Thus, Mr. Nath submits that the issue raised by Mr.
Purkayastha cannot at all be entertained by this court, inasmuch as, the same is
beyond the pleadings of the appellant/ defendant.
8.         Considered the submissions of the learned counsels for the parties.
Perused the judgments and decrees passed by the learned courts below. The
learned first appellate court has examined the findings given by the learned trial
court issue wise. With respect to the finding of Issue No. 2, the learned first
appellate court had entered into the material piece of evidence on record and
rightly upheld the finding of the learned trial court. It is pertinent to mention
here that after filing of the suit as per the direction of the learned trial court vide
order dated 19.10.2009, a new committee was formed. The said direction of the
learned trial court was challenged by the defendant/ appellant and finally, this
court vide order dated 29.04.2011 in CRP No. 137/2011 upheld the said direction
of the learned trial court. As on date, the said Committee is still in existence as
submitted by Mr. Nath. Finally, the learned first appellate court held that the
Committee which was formed as per the direction of the learned trial court,
suffers no constitutional irregularity and upheld the findings of issues No. 3 and 4
of the learned trial court.
                                                                             Page 5 of 6
RSA 166/2017

9.       After holding the findings of issues No. 3 and 4 to be correct, the learned
first appellate court accordingly, decided issues No. 7 and 8 in favour of the
plaintiffs/ respondents. From the submissions of both the learned counsels and
on perusal of the judgments, it is clear that the findings of both the learned
courts below are as per the issues evolved out of the pleadings of the parties to
the suit. The said issues arose on the basis of the pleadings and on the basis of a
particular cause of action with respect to the said suit. At this point, Mr.
Purkayastha submits that whether the term of the existing committee would be
extended beyond the period prescribed by the constitution. This submission
cannot be considered by this court, as second appellate court, inasmuch as, this
court is confined to the findings given by the learned courts below and on the
basis of the said concluding facts the decisions arrived at by the learned courts
below are correct or not. If not, whether there is any substantial question of law
involved in the said findings and the answer to the said substantial question of
law would have a substantial bearing on the rights of the parties to the suit.
Keeping that in view, this court finds that no substantial question of law is
involved in this second appeal. Accordingly, this second appeal stands dismissed.
                                                                           JUDGE
BiswaS
                                                                           Page 6 of 6
RSA 166/2017


