                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
         (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                       Case No:          RSA 106/2004
                    On the death of Thuleswar Das his legal heirs -
                    Smti. Monu Das and others                  ……      Appellants
                                        -Versus-
                    Md. Hasmat Ali alias Hasu and others       ..... Respondents
                                    :: BEFORE ::
            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
                For the Appellants              :       Mr. MA Sheikh
                                                               Advocate
                For the Respondents             :       None Appears
                Date of Hearing                 :       18.07.2017
                Date of delivery of
                Judgment and Order              :       18.07.2017
                   JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
        Heard Mr. MA Sheikh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant. So far the respondents are concerned, services on them are complete.
But none has entered appearance as apparent from the record. However,
considering this appeal to be of the year 2004, the same is taken up for disposal.
2.      The present appellant is the plaintiff in Title Suit No. 45/2001 in the court
of learned Civil Judge (Jr. Divn.) No. 1, Nagaon. The plaintiff/appellant filed the
suit for declaration of his right, title and interest over the suit land, for recovery
of possession by evicting the defendants/ respondents from the suit land. The
                                                                             Page 1 of 7
RSA 106/2004

case of the plaintiff/ appellant is that one Bakhar Keot was the original owner
and possessor of the suit land measuring 3 B 1K 13L covered by Dag No. 827 of
PP No. 152 of Khatowal Mouja and Ouana Kissam described fully in the schedule
of the plaint. On his death, the land was inherited by his wife amongst others
and she maintained her possession over the suit land. Partition took place
amongst the family members of Bakhar and subsequently by way of a registered
deed bearing No. 7393/1970 on 19.11.1970 (Exhibit-1) the wife of Bakhar sold
the land to the plaintiff/ appellant at a consideration of Rs. 2,000/-. The name of
the plaintiff/ appellant was mutated over the suit land and he maintained his
possession over the same by digging a pond covering more or less ½ B of land.
The defendant/ respondent No. 1 was requested by the plaintiff/ appellant to
look after the fishery who resided just adjacent to the suit land. The defendant/
respondent No. 1 agreed to the request of the plaintiff/ appellant and later on by
taking permission from the plaintiff/ appellant, the defendant/ respondent No. 1
constructed a house on the bank of the pond. The said defendant/ respondent
No. 1 extended his construction and allowed the other defendants/ respondents
to reside therein. Having found the acts and deeds on the part of the defendant/
respondent No. 2 violative to the agreed proposal, the plaintiff/ appellant on
06.01.2001 asked the defendants/ respondents to vacate the suit land along with
the houses. The defendants/ respondents denied the title of the plaintiff/
appellant over the suit land. Accordingly, the plaintiff/ appellant was compelled to
file this suit for the reliefs so prayed for.
3.       The main defendants/ respondents No. 1, 2 and 3 contested the suit by
filing their written statement. On the other hand, the other defendants/
                                                                          Page 2 of 7
RSA 106/2004

respondents No. 4 to 7 did not contest the same. It is the case of the
defendants/ respondents that originally the suit land was covered under Dag No.
420 and PP NO. 127 and they admitted the ownership of Bakhar Keot as its
original pattadar and possessor. Later on, the periodic patta number was
changed to 152 along with the Dag number which was changed to 827. On the
death of Bakhar Keot, his only son Banamali Das sold the land vide registered
deed No. 16/1949 to one Rustom alias Rusmat Kha, the grandfather of the
defendants/ respondents No. 1 and 2. The said Rustam Kha dug a pond and
constructed 4 houses over the suit land and started residing with his family
thereon till his death. On the death of Rustom Ali, Sohrab Ali, the father of the
defendants/respondents No. 1 and 2 owned and possessed the land by right of
inheritance and on his death, the present defendants/ respondents No. 1 and 2
owned and possessed the land along with the houses and the pond by right of
inheritance. The said defendants/ respondents No. 1 and 2 allowed the
defendants/ respondents No. 3 and 4 to reside on a portion of the suit land as
licensee. It is also stated in the written statement that the remaining defendants/
respondents are in no way connected with the suit land nor they possessed the
same. They disputed the Exhibit-1, sale deed, by bringing the pleadings that the
wife of Bakhar Keot died 40 years back and the fact that Exhibit-1 was executed
by the wife of Bakhar is not at all believable. The said Exhibit-1 is a fraud one
and the plaintiff/ appellant never possessed the suit land. In addition to that, the
defendants/ respondents also took the plea of adverse possession, however,
without any pleading with regard to the requisite ingredients to that effect.
                                                                          Page 3 of 7
RSA 106/2004

4.      Based on the pleadings, the learned trial court framed the following
issues:-
             1. Whether there is cause of action for the suit?
             2. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of parties and as such liable to be
                dismissed?
             3. Whether the suit is barred by adverse possession?
             4. Whether the defendant No. 1 is a licensee under the plaintiff in respect of
                the suit land?
             5. Whether the plaintiff has right, title and interest over the suit land?
             6. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree as prayed for?
             7. To what relief, if any parties are entitled?
5.      The plaintiff/ appellant examined himself as PW 1 and on the other hand,
the defendants/ respondents did not adduce any evidence nor any of the said
defendants graced the witness box nor did cross examine the plaintiff / appellant
at the time of deposition of PW 1. The learned trial court considered the issues,
discussed the same on the materials available on record and finally decreed the
suit of the plaintiff/ appellant. While discussing the issues, the learned trial court
rightly held that though the defendants/ respondents had filed their written
statement but they never graced the witness box and as such their pleadings/
defence cannot be considered as none of the defendants/ respondents came to
the witness box in support of their defence.
6.      Being aggrieved by the judgment and decree dated 30.09.2002 passed in
Title Suit No. 45/2001 by the learned Civil Judge (Jr. Divn.) No. 1, Nagaon, the
defendants/ respondents preferred title appeal No. 32/2003 in the court of
learned Civil Judge (Sr. Divn.), Nagaon. The learned first appellate court took up
the appeal for hearing and vide judgment and decree dated 24.06.2004
remanded the appeal by holding as follows:-
                                                                                    Page 4 of 7
RSA 106/2004

                       “Now, the vital question is that if the defendants would have given
               an opportunity to cross examine the witness and to adduce the evidence
               from their side to substantiate his plea by way of evidence definitely the
               fact of the case would come out to arrive at proper decision.
                       Under the circumstances, I am do not like to enter into merit of
               the case. As defendant was ill which was held by this Court at the time of
               considering condonation petition, I am inclined to believe the submission
               of the learned counsel of the Appellant that the Appellant failed to appear
               to Cross examine the witness and to adduce evidence on that reason and
               the Suit was also finally decided by the Court.
                       According to my opinion, it is a fit Case to remand to the Learned
               Trial Court for a fresh Trial.
                       In the result, the Appeal is allowed on contest. No cost is allowed.
               the Judgement and decree passed by the Learned trial Court is set aside.
               This Suit is remanded back to the Learned Court concerned with the
               direction to allow to adduce evidence both the parties and to give a fresh
               Judgment on the issue mentioned above if necessary by framing any
               additional issue. However, Learned Trial Court is also directed to dispose
               this Suit as early as possible i.e. within the period of 3 months from the
               date of the receipt of the record.”
7.      The plaintiff/ appellant thereafter preferred this appeal challenging the
judgment and the remand order dated 24.06.2004 which was registered as RSA
No. 106/2004 though it ought to have been registered as second appeal against
order (SAO). This second appeal was admitted on 10.08.2004 on the following
substantial question of law:-
                       Whether the order of remand passed by the learned first
                   appellate Court setting aside the judgment and decree of the
                   trial Judge without addressing the issues framed in the Suit on
                   merit is sustainable in law?
                                                                                Page 5 of 7
RSA 106/2004

8.      Mr. Sheikh submits that the learned first appellate court totally failed to
consider the provisions under Order XLI Rule 31 of the Code of Civil Procedure,
inasmuch as, the learned first appellate court never even examined the findings
of the learned trial court, issue wise on the available materials on record. On the
other hand, the learned first appellate court simply on some mere assumptions
set aside the judgment and decree of the learned trial court and remanded the
same directing the learned trial court to allow to adduce evidence by both the
parties and thereafter ordering to pass a fresh judgment on the issues by giving
further liberty to the learned trial court to frame any additional issues.
Accordingly, Mr. Sheikh submits that the order of remand impugned, is liable to
be set aside by answering the substantial question of law so formulated in favour
of the plaintiff/ appellant.
9.       Considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the
appellant. Perused the judgment passed by the learned first appellate court
wherefrom it is apparent that there is a gross violation on the part of the learned
first appellate court of the provisions stipulated under Order XLI Rule 31 of the
Code of Civil Procedure. Further, the learned first appellate court ought to have
examined the findings of the learned trial court issue wise and ought to have
given a finding with regard to the correctness of the decisions against the issues
and that too, on the basis of the materials available on record. Non examination
of the issues by the learned first appellate court is a clear case of non-application
of mind by the learned first appellate court which is totally uncalled for, moreso
when the learned first appellate court is the final court of facts. If there is any
deficiency in framing of issues by the learned trial court, a duty was cast upon
                                                                           Page 6 of 7
RSA 106/2004

the learned first appellate court to specify the said issue. Merely, giving liberty to
the learned trial court by way of a bald remand order is not called for, if
considered within the parameters of Order XLI Rules 23A to 25 of the Code of
Civil Procedure. Considering the same, the substantial question of law is decided
in favour of the plaintiff/ appellant and as a result, this appeal succeeds. The
impugned remand order passed by the court of learned Civil Judge (Sr. Divn.),
Nagaon in Title Appeal No. 32/2003 on 24.06.2004 is set aside and the appeal is
remanded back to the learned first appellate court to decide it afresh as per the
requirements under Order XLI Rule 31 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
        Send back the lower court records.
10.     On receipt of the LCRs, the learned first appellate court shall issue notice
to the parties to the appeal and thereafter shall make an endeavour to dispose of
the same preferably within a period of 6 (six) months from the date of receipt of
LCRs.
        No order as to costs and the appeal is disposed of.
                                                                           JUDGE
BiswaS
                                                                           Page 7 of 7
RSA 106/2004


