                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
        (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                       Case No:        RSA 105/2005
                   Smti. Ayita Begum Chaudhury and others……         Appellants
                                      -Versus-
                   Sri Kumar Kanti Sinha and another        ..... Respondents
                                   :: BEFORE ::
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
               For the Appellants            :      Mr. N Dhar
                                                            Advocate
               For the Respondents           :      Mr. BK Jain
                                                            Advocate (R-3)
                                                    Mr. BK Purkayastha
                                                            Advocate (R-1 & 2)
               Date of Hearing               :      09.03.2017
               Date of delivery of
               Judgment and Order            :      19.06.2017
                    JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
       Heard Mr. N Dhar, learned counsel for the appellants, Mr. BK Jain,
learned counsel for the respondent No. 3 and Mr. BK Purkayastha, learned
counsel for the respondents No. 1 and 2.
2.     One Sirajul Haque Choudhury, the predecessor-in-interest of the
appellants/ plaintiffs preferred title suit No. 297/1982 against the present
respondents as the defendants for declaration of the right, title and interest of
                                                                        Page 1 of 17
RSA 105/2005

the plaintiffs, confirmation of possession and for perpetual injunction over the
suit land described in the plaint.
3.      The case of the plaintiff who, was substituted by his legal heirs as
appellants, in brief is that late Khan Bahadur Abdul Mazid Choudhury and Khan
Saheb Abdul Karim Choudhury had maliki right in equal share over the land
described in the schedule of the plaint along with other land on the contiguous
east of the scheduled land comprising a total area of 3 Powa 4 Jasti 8 Pon and 9
Gondas. Out of the said area of land, Khan Bahadur Abdul Mazid Choudhury and
Khan Saheb Abdul Karim Choudhury granted lease of 2 Powa and 6 Jasti of land
from its eastern part to the owner of Bhagawan Talkies, a cinema hall, for limited
purpose on which the said cinema hall was standing and the remaining part on
the western side including suit land, measuring an area of 5 Jasti 8 Pons and 19
Gondas remained in exclusive possession of the owners late Khan Bahadur Abdul
Mazid Choudhury and Khan Saheb Abdul Karim Choudhury. Subsequently, by
amicable partition between the two owners western half of the above stated 5
Jasti 8 Pon and 19 Gondas of land i.e. the suit land fell in the share of Khan
Saheb Abdul Karim Choudhury and the eastern half fell in the share of Khan
Bahadur Abdul Mazid Choudhury. Thus, Abdul Karim Choudhury acquired 19
annas title over the suit land and due to the implementation of the State
Acquisition of Zamindary Act, 1951, Abdul Karim Choudhury acquired the status
of land holder in respect of suit land and had been maintaining possession over
the same.
4.      The plaintiff, (the predecessor-in-interest of the present appellants) was
the grand-son of late Abdul Karim Choudhury. During the life time of Abdul Karim
                                                                        Page 2 of 17
RSA 105/2005

Choudhury, he gifted the suit land along with other land to the plaintiff and
delivered khas possession and accordingly, the plaintiff became the absolute
owner of the suit land and maintained possession over the same. The cinema
hall, namely, Bhagawan Talkies was subsequently purchased by the defendants/
respondents in the first part of 1962 and thereafter the defendant/ respondent
No. 2 approached Abdul Karim Choudhury for granting him lease of 50% share of
the above stated land of 2 Powa and 6 Jasti over which the cinema hall was
established. Late Abdul Karim Choudhury, granted lease to the defendant/
respondent No. 2 in respect of his share i.e. 1 Powa 3 Jasti of land situated on
the contiguous east of the remaining part of 5 Jasti 8 Pons and 19 Gondas of
land including the suit land which remained outside the lease settlement.
5.       The defendants/ respondents have no right, title over the suit land nor
were, they ever in possession of the suit land. They were attempting to
dispossess the plaintiff from the suit land. Hence, the suit was filed for the reliefs
as referred hereinabove.
6.       By way of an amendment, the relief of recovery of khas possession of the
suit land by evicting the defendants/ respondents along with the standing
structures was introduced after striking out the prayer portion of confirmation of
possession.
7.       The defendants/ respondents contested the suit by filing the written
statement. The defendants/ respondents specifically took the plea that the
plaintiff had no right, title and interest over the suit land and the gift was void in
law and on the basis of the said gift no right, title and interest can be said to be
vested on the plaintiff and as such the suit is liable to be dismissed. The
                                                                           Page 3 of 17
RSA 105/2005

defendants/ respondents pleaded that the defendant/ respondent No. 1
purchased the cinema hall previously known as Bhagawan Talkies together with
the leasehold right of the land measuring 2 Powas 6 Jasti in an auction sale held
by the court of Sub-ordinate Judge at Silchar which was confirmed on
07.05.1962. The delivery of possession was also through the court. The said land
was joint and undivided property of late Abdul Karim Choudhury and Abdul Mazid
Choudhury Wakf Estate. The defendant/ respondent No. 2 took lease of 50% of
the auction purchased land of 1 Powa 3 Jasti from late Abdul Karim Choudhury
on 18.03.1962 for himself and for the respondent/ defendant No. 1. Remaining
50% of the said auction purchased land was taken settlement by the defendants/
respondents in terms of the registered Solenama from the Wakf Estate. By the
said solenama, further area of 3 Jasti 2 Pons and 12½ Gondas of land was also
taken on lease from Abdul Mazid Choudhury and the defendants/ respondents
also occupied and possessed further area of 3 Jasti 2 Pons and 12½ Gondas of
land which comprised of an undivided area and acquired the right by prescription
over the said area. The defendants/ respondents were also granted khatian by
the Government in recognition of the ownership and possession over the suit
land and other land. In the year 1964, the right, title and interest of the
predecessor-in-interest of the plaintiff, Abdul Mazid Choudhury and Abdul Karim
Choudhury Wakf Estate Zamindary, other than the land owned and possessed by
the defendants/ respondents were acquired under the Acquisition of the
Zamindary Act, 1951 and as such the plaintiff cannot have right, title and interest
as the estate acquired was free from encumbrances and there was no
conveyable interest which could be transferred to the plaintiff. In the additional
                                                                        Page 4 of 17
RSA 105/2005

written statement, the defendants/ respondents denied the alleged dispossession
of the plaintiff from the suit land during the pendency of the suit in the middle
part of 1983. It was specifically pleaded that the suit land was never under the
possession of the plaintiff.
8.      On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the learned trial court framed
the following issues:-
             1. Is there any cause of action for the suit?
             2. Whether the plaintiff has got right, title, interest and possession over the
                suit land?
             3. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get relief as prayed for?
             Additional issues:-
             4. Is the suit barred by limitation?
             5. Is the suit bad for defect of parties?
             6. Is the plaintiff entitled recover to khas possession of the suit land by
                evicting the defendants there from?
9.      In support of the case of the plaintiff/ appellants, 2 (two) witnesses were
examined. However, the plaintiff did not grace the witness box in order to
support his claim. On the other hand, the defendants/ respondents examined 3
(three) witnesses. The learned trial court vide its judgment and decree dated
15.03.1993 dismissed the suit.
10.     The learned trial court while taking up the issue No. 2 held that the
evidence of the PW 1 (Sakib Ahmed Choudhury) deposed that the alleged gift
was oral one. The defendants/ respondents challenged the alleged gift as void in
law and on the basis of the said gift no right, title and interest had accrued on
the plaintiff. The learned trial court discussed the 3 (three) essentials of a gift as
per Section 149 of Mullah’s Principles of Mahomedan Law and came to the
                                                                                 Page 5 of 17
RSA 105/2005

finding that plaintiff did not examine himself to prove the said 3 (three)
essentials of a Mahomedan gift. It was also held that there must be some
acceptance of the gift by the done, expressed or implied, and there was no
evidence to show, where and how declaration of alleged gift was made.
Acceptance of the oral gift must be proved which may be expressed or implied.
Donee must establish that the gift was accepted by him. Evidence of PW 1 was
not sufficient to prove delivery of possession of the suit land by Abdul Karim
Choudhury, the donor, to the plaintiff, who is the donee. By examining the
burden of proof, the learned trial court held the same is upon the plaintiff who,
did not appear before the court as a witness. The PW 1 is an employee of the
plaintiff and the court cannot come to a conclusive finding as to the validity of
the alleged gift. It was held that the said PW 1 was not present at the relevant
time of making the alleged gift.
11.      While considering the case of the defendants/ respondents, the learned
trial court took note of the various exhibits including the records of DP Case of
1963-64 marked as Exhibits A to Z. The said exhibits were admitted in evidence
without any objection. It was also taken note of by the learned trial court, that
there was no averment in the plaint as to when partition took place between
Abdul Karim Choudhury and Abdul Mazid Choudhury. The PW 1 admited in his
evidence that there was no document to show the fact of partition as stated in
the plaint. The PW 1 deposed that the suit land is covered under Dag No. 4827.
He admitted in his evidence that a new dag No. 4827/6846 was created out of
dag No. 4827 but he could not say on which boundary of the cinema hall the said
land covered by dag No. 4827 falls. The learned trial court also took note of
                                                                        Page 6 of 17
RSA 105/2005

Exhibit F, an application filed by Abdul Karim Choudhury and the plaintiff, against
the SDO, PWD, Karimganj in respect of Dag No. 4827 claiming their share of land
to be recorded as their khas but after the death of Abdul Karim Choudhury, the
matter was not pursued by his successors. Exhibit N reveals that the defendants/
respondents were found in possession of the land equal to the area settled by
Abdul Mazid Choudhury with the defendants/ respondents and finally relying on
Exhibit F, the learned trial court came to the conclusion that the claim made by
the plaintiff over dag No. 4827 falls within the land of the PWD as road side land.
12.     The learned trial court accepted the final khatian recorded in the name of
defendant/ respondent No. 2 in respect of Dag No. 4828, Exhibit L the final
khatian recorded in the name of defendant/ respondent No. 1 in respect of Dag
No. 4828 and Exhibit M, the final khatian recorded in the name of defendant /
respondent No. 1 in respect of Dag No. 4827/6846. Accordingly, the learned trial
court held the said issue No. 2 against the sole plaintiff/ appellants (his legal
heirs) by disbelieving the act of dispossession of the plaintiff by the defendants/
respondents. It was also held by the learned trial court that the plaintiff/
appellants failed to prove the title by way of the said gift. Accordingly, the
learned trial court dismissed the suit of the plaintiff/ appellants.
13.     Being aggrieved, the present appellants preferred Title Appeal No.
21/1993 in the court of Adhoc Additional District Judge at Karimganj. The learned
first appellate court after hearing both the parties also dismissed the Title Appeal
No. 21/1993 vide judgment and decree dated 13.05.2003. Thereafter, the
present second appeal was preferred by the legal heirs of plaintiff which was
admitted on 18.09.2006 on the following substantial question of law:-
                                                                         Page 7 of 17
RSA 105/2005

              1.   Whether the courts below were justified in holding that the
                   evidence of attorney was not acceptable in respect of the
                   declaration of oral gift and delivery of possession?
14.     Mr. Dhar, learned counsel for the appellants, submits that the learned
first appellate court failed to discuss each and every issue so framed by the
learned trial court and straightway upheld the findings of the learned trial court.
It is submitted that had the rest of the issues been decided properly, in such a
situation, there was every possibility of reversal of the findings of the learned
trial court. Mr. Dhar referred to the Exhibit 2 which is the evidence of the
predecessor-in-interest of the defendants/ respondents who deposed in Title Suit
No. 230/1979, filed by the said predecessor-in-interest in which the predecessor-
in-interest of the present appellants was not a party. Referring to the said
deposition of Sukhamoy Singh, the predecessor-in-interest of the defendants/
respondents, Mr. Dhar took this court to the cross examination of the said
evidence. He submits from the said cross examination that the said witness
deposed that he was unaware if any land belonging to the predecessor-in-
interest of original plaintiff is situated on the western side of the auction
purchased land. It is also submitted that the said witness was unaware if there
was any land covered by Dag No. 4827 within the settled area of land. It is also
submitted that Abdul Mazid Choudhury filed a suit against Radhika Ranjan Das
for eviction and a decree was obtained by Abdul Mazid Choudhury. As against
the said decree, Kumar Kanti Singha, the present respondent/ defendant No. 1,
filed a suit in the year 1962 in the court of Sub-Judge, Silchar for setting aside
the said decree in favour of Abdul Mazid Choudhury and the said suit was
                                                                        Page 8 of 17
RSA 105/2005

decreed on compromise. The said compromise consisted of the lands in addition
to the land of the wakf estate. It is also further stated that out of the said land a
portion was given to the PWD authority. Accordingly, Mr. Dhar submits that the
defendants/ respondents are unaware of the land which is situated on the
western side belonging to the wakf estate and they have no land on the western
side of the cinema hall as the same was already delivered to the PWD. In such a
situation, the claim of the defendants that the plaintiff is not the owner of the
land, cannot be considered at all.
15.     Mr. Dhar further argues that the PW 1 is the ‘Naib’ who is involved in all
the official acts and deeds of the properties under the plaintiffs/ appellants. He is
the best person to know about the gift so carried out, inasmuch as, all the official
works pertaining to the Zamindar i.e. the predecessor-in-interest of the plaintiff/
appellants. Merely as the plaintiff himself did not come to the witness box to
depose in support of his case, cannot be a ground to disbelieve the gift so
pleaded in the plaint. It is also submitted that the learned trial court has a duty
cast upon it while scrutinising the plaint, to point out the omission and insisted
on its rectification. This argument is made by the learned counsel against the
finding of the courts below that there was no averment in the pleading with
regard to the date and time on which the oral gift took place and in whose
presence. In order to consider a plea in any pleading, the whole plaint/ pleading
is to be taken into consideration together with the true spirit behind the plea
taken in the pleading. It is also submitted that the learned first appellate court
ought to have decided all the issues because it is the mandate of the Hon’ble
Apex Court to discuss each and every issue so discussed by the learned trial
                                                                          Page 9 of 17
RSA 105/2005

court in order to scrutinise the findings of the learned trial court. Having not
done so, there is mistake on the part of the learned first appellate court in
rejecting evidence of the PW 1, more specifically, with regard to the gift so
alleged in the plaint.
16.      Mr. Dhar, learned counsel for the appellants, relies on the following
cases:-
         Pratibha Singh & anr. vs. Shanti Devi Prasad & anr. (2003) 2 SCC 330,
         Sitaram acharya vs. Gururajacharya                  AI R 1997 SC 806,
         Santosh Hazari vs. Purushottam Tiw ari              (2001) 3 SCC 179,
         Syed Dastagir vs. T.R. Gopalakrishna Setty          AI R 1999 SC 3029(1)
         Avadh Kishore Dass vs. Ram Gopal & ors.             AI R 1979 SC 861.
17.      Relying the ratio (2003) 2 SCC 330 (supra), Mr. Dhar submits that the
learned courts below held that there was no pleading with regard to the requisite
ingredients of an oral gift including the date, place and in whose presence the
same took place. The learned courts below, more specifically, the trial court had
a duty cast upon to point out the omission to the plaintiff and insisted on its
rectification. Relying the ratio of AIR 1997 SC 806 (supra), Mr. Dhar referred to
the cross examination as apparent from Exhibit-2 wherein the predecessor-in-
interest of the defendants/ respondents clearly admitted that some portion of his
land was taken by the PWD, which ought to have been treated as the evidence
against the defendants/ respondents in support of the fact that some portion of
their land was taken by the PWD, following which there was an encroachment by
the defendants/ respondents thereby dispossessing the plaintiff/ appellants in
order to reclaim the land so taken by the PWD. Mr. Dhar relying the ratio of the
decision reported in (2001) 3 SCC 179 (supra), submits that the learned first
                                                                        Page 10 of 17
RSA 105/2005

appellate court ought to have discussed all the issues so framed in the suit as a
duty was cast upon the learned first appellate court to that effect and non-
compliance of the said ratio has caused prejudice to the plaintiff/ appellants. Mr.
Dhar further submits that the learned courts below failed to appreciate the
pleadings of the plaint in its proper perspective to gather the true spirit behind
the plea taken by the plaintiff/ appellants in their plaint. Non-construing the
pleadings had caused prejudice to the plaintiff/ appellants.
18.      For the aforesaid reasons, the learned courts below failed to gather the
actual dispute between the parties and simply disbelieved the plea of oral gift
adduced by the PW 1, who is a Naib (employee) of the estate of the plaintiff/
appellants under the Zamidari system. Thus, Mr. Dhar submits that the
substantial question of law so formulated is to be answered in the affirmative
favouring the plaintiff/ appellants.
19.      Mr. BK Jain, learned counsel for the respondent No. 3, submits that
admittedly the possession of the suit land is with the defendants/ respondents.
In such a situation, in order to get the relief of recovery of possession by the
plaintiff/ appellants, heavy burden is cast upon them to prove the title vested on
them to show the paramount title on the basis of which they are entitled for the
recovery of possession by ejecting the defendants/ respondents. There is
deficiency in the pleadings in order to substantiate the claim of the plaintiff/
appellants with regard to the oral gift. The fact of an oral gift under the
Mahomedan Law is to be proved by leading cogent evidence of the requisite 3
(three) essential ingredients referred to by the courts below. As per the
pleadings, there is no mention that in presence of the PW 1, Naib, the said oral
                                                                       Page 11 of 17
RSA 105/2005

gift took place. Even if it is assumed that the said PW 1 was the constituted
agent of the sole plaintiff, then also his evidence supporting the fact of oral gift
cannot be accepted by the courts below until and unless the same is pleaded
specifically in order to have its evidentiary value. Relying on the case of Janki
Vashdeo Bhojw ani and another vs. IndusInd Bank Ltd. and others
reported in (2005) 2 SCC 217 , Mr. Jain submits that the PW 1 is authorised to
depose with respect to the acts he carried out in pursuance of the authority
given to him. But that does not mean that the said PW 1 can depose the facts
which are supposed to be within the knowledge of the plaintiff himself.
Accordingly, no such material piece of evidence supporting the gift is on record,
thereby giving the plaintiff the status of land holder with respect to the suit land
from which it can be inferred to that effect. Until and unless the plaintiff himself
comes to the witness box and supports his claims made in his pleadings, no oral
gift can be presumed in his favour. Accordingly, Mr. Jain submits that there is no
illegality in passing the judgment against the plaintiff/ appellants by the courts
below.
20.      Mr. BK Purkayastha, learned counsel for the respondents No. 1 and 2,
supporting the submissions of Mr. Jain, learned counsel for the respondent No. 3,
submits that in a suit for declaration of title and possession, the burden is always
on the plaintiff to establish his case irrespective of whether the defendants prove
their case or not. In support of the said submission, Mr. Purkayastha relies on
the case of Union of India and others vs. Vasavi Cooperative Housing
Society Lim ited and others reported in (2014) 2 SCC 269 . Finally, he
submits that the second appeal is liable to be dismissed.
                                                                        Page 12 of 17
RSA 105/2005

21.      Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels for the parties
to the appeal. Perused the judgments passed by the learned courts below.
Before entering into the scrutiny of the findings of the learned trial court, the
point for determination by the first appellate court has been rightly picked up
considering the dispute between the parties to the suit and the submissions of
the learned counsels before it. Thereafter, the first appellate court bringing into
the reference of various issues, more specifically, the issues No. 2, 3 and 6 at
first, examined the pleadings of the parties to the suit and entered into the
evidence adduced by the parties to the suit. From the examination of the
pleadings made in the plaint, the learned first appellate court observed that there
was no specific pleading with regard to the manner in which the oral gift took
place and in whose presence, and thereafter upheld the findings of the learned
trial court.
22.      In order to decide the substantial question of law, this court entered into
the pleadings, examined it and came to the conclusion that nowhere in the
pleading in the plaint there is mention of the presence of Sakib Ahmed
Choudhury (Naib, PW 1) at the time of the oral gift, which allegedly took place so
far the suit land is concerned. Thus, it can be inferred that the 3 (three) essential
ingredients to form a valid gift as referred to by the learned courts below is
presumed to be within the knowledge of the plaintiff himself, but none others.
The said fact of gift is a special fact known to the plaintiff only. Under Section
103 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the burden of proof as to any particular
fact, lies on that person who wishes the court to believe in its existence unless it
is provided by any law that the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular
                                                                         Page 13 of 17
RSA 105/2005

person. The oral gift so pleaded and on the strength of which the plaintiff/
appellants prayed for the relief is an affair between the donor, Abdul Karim
Choudhury and the donee i.e. the plaintiff and the persons who witnessed the
said gift. As already stated, the presence of PW 1 was never pleaded at the time
of the said oral gift, nor names of any other persons are also pleaded who
witnessed the said gift. In such a situation, the burden lies upon the plaintiff
himself to come to the witness box to support his claim including that particular
fact of gift.
23.      Behind such backdrop, the evidence of PW 1 is examined. In his
deposition, he deposed that he was working as a Naib under the plaintiff and
looking after the properties of the plaintiff. As per the direction of the plaintiff, he
came to depose on behalf of the plaintiff. In his cross examination, he denied the
suggestion that he had no deed of power of attorney. But he failed to produce or
exhibit any such deed of power of attorney. He even failed to depose over which
Dag number the cinema hall was settled. He even failed to say whether the
plaintiff had any claim beyond the land covered under Dag No. 4827. However,
he admitted that there was no mention about the date, year on which, plot of
land was gifted to the plaintiff by Abdul Karim Choudhury.
24.      Perused the Exhibit-A, the order sheet of DP Case No. 19/1964 of
Karimganj town. From the order dated 06.10.1966 in DP objection No. 19 under
Section 119 of the Sylhet Tenancy Act of Karimganj town, it is apparent that
Abdul Karim Choudhury filed an objection claiming that his share of land be
recorded as his khas one. From the said finding it can be concluded that at least
during the life time of Abdul Karim Choudhury, he never gifted the same to
                                                                           Page 14 of 17
RSA 105/2005

anyone, not to speak of the plaintiff, inasmuch as, it is also recorded therein that
on his death his claim was not pursued by his successors. This piece of evidence
clearly shows that no gift was carried out by Abdul Karim Choudhury during his
life time nor his successors, including the plaintiff/ appellants pursued the said
matter claiming the said share to be the gifted one to the said plaintiff.
25.     Considering the aforesaid piece of evidence it can be concluded at least
that the claim of the plaintiff over the suit land to be gifted to him is not tenable.
In (2005) 2 SCC 217 (supra), the Hon’ble Apex Court held as follows:-
                        “13. Order 3 Rules 1 and 2 CPC empower the holder of power of attorney
               to “act” on behalf of the principal. In our view the word “acts” employed in Order
               3 Rules 1 and 2 CPC confines only to in respect of “acts” done by the power-of-
               attorney holder in exercise of power granted by the instrument. The term “acts”
               would not include deposing in place and instead of the principal. In other words,
               if the power-of-attorney holder has rendered some “acts” in pursuance of power
               of attorney, he may depose for the principal in respect of such acts, but he
               cannot depose for the principal for the acts done by the principal and not by him.
               Similarly, he cannot depose for the principal in respect of the matter of which
               only the principal can have a personal knowledge and in respect of which the
               principal is entitled to be cross examined.
                        18. The aforesaid judgment was quoted with approval in the case of Ram
               Prasad v. Hari N arain reported in AI R 1998 Raj 185. It was held that the
               word “acts” used in Rule 2 of Order 3 CPC does not include the act of power-of-
               attorney holder to appear as a witness on behalf of a party. Power-of-attorney
               holder of a party can appear only as a witness in his personal capacity and
               whatever knowledge he has about the case he can state on oath but he cannot
               appear as a witness on behalf of the party in the capacity of that party. If the
               plaintiff is unable to appear in the court, a commission for recording his evidence
               may be issued under the relevant provisions of CPC.”
26.     From the ratio of the said decision it can be concluded that an attorney
holder cannot depose for the principal in respect of the matter of which only the
principal can have a personal knowledge and in respect of which the principal is
entitled to be examined. It is also held that the word ‘acts’ used in Rule 2 of
Order 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure does not include the act of power of
attorney holder to appear as a witness on behalf of a party. Considering the said
                                                                                    Page 15 of 17
RSA 105/2005

view of the Hon’ble Apex Court, the learned courts below had rightly rejected the
evidence of the PW 1 to the fact that his principal i.e. the plaintiff was gifted with
the suit land by Abdul Karim Choudhury.
27.     Coming to the submission of Mr. Dhar that there was an admission by the
predecessor-in-interest of the defendants/ respondents No. 1 and 2 that a
portion of his land was taken by the PWD and the ratio of the decision, AIR 1997
SC 806 (supra) relied on by Mr. Dhar, it is held that the said admission is not
conclusive proof of the facts admitted, but they do raise an estoppel and shifted
the burden of proof on to the person making them or his representative in
interest and unless shown or explained to be wrong, they are the efficacious
proof of the facts admitted. But the same is of no help to the plaintiff/ appellants,
inasmuch as, if the ratio held in the case reported in (2014) 2 SCC 269 (supra)
wherein it was held that in a suit for declaration of title, the burden always lies
on the plaintiff to make out and establish a clear case for granting such a
declaration and the weakness, if any, of the case set up by the defendants would
not be a ground to grant relief to the plaintiff.
28.     So, in the case in hand, the plaintiff has failed to prove his title over the
suit land on the basis of the gift so alleged. There is an admission on the part of
the predecessor-in-interest of defendants/ respondents No. 1 and 2 that out of
the portion of his land some land was taken by the PWD. But that itself cannot
strengthen the case of the plaintiff even if, he has failed to prove his title over
the suit land.
29.     Under the said circumstances, the substantial question of law is decided
against the appellants inasmuch as the courts below were justified in discarding
                                                                          Page 16 of 17
RSA 105/2005

the evidence of the PW 1. The submission of Mr. Dhar that the learned first
appellate court failed to discuss all the issues also cannot be considered
inasmuch as from the judgement of the learned first appellate court it reflects its
conscious application of mind and the findings recorded are supported by
reasons on all the major issues. Accordingly, the said submission cannot be
considered. Thus, the present second appeal is dismissed.
30.    Send down the lower court records.
       No order as to costs.
                                                                        JUDGE
BiswaS
                                                                     Page 17 of 17
RSA 105/2005


