                                  1
                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
     (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                      ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                          PRINCIPAL SEAT
                         RSA No. 175/ 2017
Sri Ram Kumar Mahatoo
                                       ………. Appellant/Defendant
                                 -VERSUS -
Sri Raj Kumar Mahatoo & Ors.
                                       …..….… Respondents/ Plaintiffs
Advocate for the appellant:            Mr. S. Dutta, Sr. Adv.
                                       Mr. S. Dutta,
                                                ……. Advocate.
Advocate for the Respondents            Mr. C. Baruah, Sr. Adv,
                                        Mr. D. Baruah,
                                           ………... Advocates.
                            -BEFOR E–
        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
               Date of hearing                : 01.08.2017
               Date of judgment & order       : 01.08.2017
                    JUDGMENT & ORDER (Oral)
              Heard Mr. S. Dutta, learned senior counsel, assisted by
Mr. S. Dutta, learned counsel, appearing for the appellant/ defendant

                                     2
and Mr. C. Baruah, learned senior counsel, assisted by Mr. D. Baruah,
learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondents/ plaintiffs.
2]             The present appellant is the defendant in TS No.
114/2007 filed by the plaintiffs/ respondents praying that they are
equally entitled to the shares of the rent in respect of the suit premises
and for restraining the present defendant/ appellant from collecting the
rent from the suit premises from the tenant therein.
3]             It is pleaded that the plaintiffs/ respondents are the joint
owners of the suit premises along with Durga Prasad Mahato (since
deceased). Durga Prasad Mahato, being the Karta of M/s. Sitaram
Mahato and Sons, a Hindu Undivided Mitakshara Family Firm, let out
the suit premises to proforma defendant Nos. 2 and 3, on promise to
pay Rs. 1,200.00 per month as tenants under him and the terms of the
tenancy were stipulated by way of registered deed of agreement
bearing deed No. 979/2005, dated 23.06.2005.
4]             Durga Prasad Mahatoo died on 12.04.2007 leaving
behind the plaintiffs/ respondents and defendants/ appellants as his
legal heirs. The defendants/ appellants since the death of his father
collected the rent being the eldest son from the tenants against the

                                   3
consent of the plaintiffs/ respondents and misused the same for his
personal use. Though the plaintiffs/ respondents requested the
defendants/ appellants to distribute the rent equally amongst the legal
heirs of Durga Prasad Mahato, but the defendants/ appellants did not
comply it. Notices were issued which were replied by the defendants/
appellants.
5]            It is also pleaded that the plaintiffs/ respondents could
come to know that a clause was stipulated in the lease deed thereby
authorizing the defendant/ appellant to collect the rent. The plaintiffs/
respondents stated such introduction of the stipulation was a foul play
on the part of the defendant/ appellant. The plaintiffs/ respondents
being deprived from their legitimate shares of rent being the joint
owners of the said tenanted premises, they have filed suit for the relief
as mentioned hereinabove.
5]            The appellants/ defendants contested the suit by filing his
written statement. It is the defence taken by the defendants/
appellants that he is also a joint owner alongwith the plaintiffs/
respondents with respect to the suit premises and Durga Prasad
Mahato stipulated in the agreement that during his life time he would
collect the rent and on his death, the same would be collected by the

                                     4
defendants/ appellants. Durga Prasad Mahatoo as Karta of the HUF
had made the said arrangement during his life time and executed the
said registered lease deed. The proforma defendant (tenant) defaulted
in paying the rent following which the ejectment suit was filed which
was however compromised on 29.7.2005.
6]             It is the claim of the defendants/ appellants that he
borne out all the litigation expenses for the suit premises. He however
denied that he is using the said rent for his personal expenses. Rather
it is stated that he looked after and maintained his mother and the
sister. Further it is pleaded that Durga Prasad Mahatoo during his life
time sold a plot of land to Biswambar Paul and out of the said sale
proceedings, the plaintiffs/ respondent Nos. 2 and 3 constructed a
three storied building and as such he prayed for dismissal of the suit.
7]            On the basis of the pleadings, following issues were
framed:-
        (1)   Whether the suit is maintainable in law and facts?
        (2)   Whether the defendant No. 1 deprived the plaintiffs of
              their legitimate share of the rent being joint owners in
              respect to the suit premises as alleged?

                                     5
        (3)   Whether defendant No. 1 has any right to collect rent in
              respect to the suit premises from proforma defendants?
        (4)   Whether plaintiff is entitled to get decree as prayed?
        (5)   To what other relief(s) parties are entitled to?
8]            The trial court after considering the evidence adduced by
the parties to the suit decreed the same in favour of the plaintiffs/
respondents. However, while deciding the Issue No. 3, the trial court
held that the defendants/ appellants had the right to collect rent from
the tenant over the suit premises.
9]            Being aggrieved by the said judgment and decree passed
by the trial court, the present defendants/ appellants preferred T.A.
No. 30/2009 in the court of the learned Civil Judge, Dibrugarh. The
said first appeal was accordingly dismissed vide judgment and decree
dated 20.09.2014.
10]           Subsequent thereto the said judgment and decree passed
in T.A. No. 30/2009 is challenged in the present second appeal, which
is taken up for hearing under Order 41 Rule 11 CPC.

                                    6
11]            Mr. Dutta leaned senior counsel submits that the
plaintiffs/ respondents sought for reliefs that they are entitled to the
shares of the rent in respect arising out of the suit premises and
permanent injunction restraining the appellants/ defendants from
collecting rent from the tenant in the suit premises. However, both the
courts below came to the findings that the defendants/ appellants is
entitled to collect the rent from the tenants in the suit premises. In
such a situation, though both the courts below had decreed the suit
but in fact the findings in Issue No. 3 itself goes to show that the suit
ought to have been dismissed as the vital issue involved in the said suit
for the relief of permanent injunction restraining the defendants/
appellants from collecting the rent from the suit premises was negated
by the courts below which is the consequential relief on the basis of
the declaration sought for by the plaintiffs/ respondents.
12]            Having decided the said issue No. 3 in favour of the
defendants/ appellants, mere declaration on the part of the courts
below in favour of the plaintiffs/ respondents is totally an ineffective
decree which has no bearing on the relief claimed by the plaintiffs/
respondents in the suit. As such Mr. Dutta submits that the findings of
the court below ought to be reversed and to that effect a substantial
question is to be framed.

                                    7
13]            Mr. Baruah, learned senior counsel, appearing for the
plaintiff/ respondents submits that the court below rightly held that the
plaintiff/ respondents are equally entitled to the shares of the rent in
respect of the suit premises. Mere finding of Issue No. 3 that the
defendants/ appellants is entitled to collect the rent arising out of the
suit premises only cannot be considered that the suit of the plaintiffs/
respondents ought to have been dismissed. He submits that the
findings of both the courts below are concurrent findings in nature.
This court cannot enter into the facts which attained its finality and
considering the concluded facts, there is no wrong in the findings given
by both the courts below and as such no substantial question of law is
involved in the present second appeal.
14]            Considered the submissions of both the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the parties. On one hand, if the submission of
Mr. Dutta, the learned senior counsel is considered, it can be
concluded that until and unless the defendants/ appellants is restrained
from collecting the rent, the mode of distribution amongst the
plaintiffs/ respondents sought for by them is not at all effective. On the
other hand, if the submission of Mr. Baruah, learned senior counsel is
considered in the light of findings given in the Issue No. 3, it amounts

                                     8
to a suit decreed without any consequential relief flowing out of the
said declaration. It seems that the plaintiffs/ respondents ought to
have sought for further consequential reliefs in the manner of partition
which the plaintiff/ respondents failed to do so.
15]            Considered the findings on record of the courts below. It
is apparent that whatever decree has been passed in favour of the
plaintiffs/ respondents, the same would remain simply a paper decree,
there being no substantial benefit derived by the parties, more
specifically the plaintiffs/ respondents.
16]            In view of the said discussions, this court holds that no
substantial question of law is involved in order to resolve the dispute
between the parties on the basis of the concluded facts arrived at by
both the court below. Accordingly, this second appeal is dismissed.
However, considering the findings given by the courts below, the
parties are at liberty to file a suit afresh with a proper consequential
relief.
        The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
                                                        JUDGE

     9
Eam/


