                                     Page No.1
                        IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
  (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                               RSA 168 of 2004
   1. Siraj Uddin Laskar,
       S/O Late Ahmed Ali
   2. Riaj Uddin Laskar
   3.  Safique Uddin Laskar,
       S/O Late Abdul Haque
   4. Ataur Rehman,
       S/o Late Rahmat Ali.
   5. Rafique Uddin Laskar,
       S/o Late Abdul Haque
   6. Mulim Uddin Laskar,
       S/O Late Abdul Haque
   7. Mudazil Ali Laskar,
       S/O Late Abdul Latif
   8. Islam Uddin,
       S/O Abdul Kadir
   9. Aklim Uddin,
       S/o Abdul Haque
   10. Kutub Uddin,
       S/o Lt. Akil Ali
   11. Nazim Uddin Laskar,
       S/o Abdul Haque
   12. Jalal Uddin Laskar,
       S/o Abdul Kadir
   13. Abdul Sattar,
       S/o Late Nasir Ali
RSA 168 of 2004

                                              Page No.2
     14. Abdul Rajak,
         S/o Late Moin Uddin
     15. Abdul Kyum,
         S/o Late Moin Uddin
     16. Nurul Haque Laskar
         S/o- Late Moin Uddin.
                                                               - Appellants/plaintiffs
                                        Versus-
1.   The State of Assam to be represented by the Collecter, Hailakandi.
2.   Senior Asstt. Settlement Officer, Hailakandi.
3.   Asstt. Settlement Officer, Hailakandi.
4.   Deputy Commissioner, Hailakandi, Dist- Hailakandi, Assam.
                                                        - Respondent/Defendants
                                             BEFORE
                      HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
         Advocate for the appellant Mr. M H Rajborbhuiyan
         Advocate for the respondent Mr. S P Choudhury
         Date of hearing & Judgment: 18th July, 2017
                                  JUDGMENT AND ORDER
                                            (ORAL)
         Heard Mr. M H Rajborbhuiyan, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellants. Also heard Mr. S P Choudhury, learned Government advocate appearing on
behalf of the respondents.
2.         The plaintiffs/appellants preferred Title Suit No.19/1994 in the Court of Civil Judge
(Junior Division) No.1 Hailakandi against the respondent state for declaration of their right,
title and interest over the suit land covered under encroachment Case No.1/1992-93 and
permanent injunction restraining the respondent/state from evicting the plaintiffs/appellants.
RSA 168 of 2004

                                              Page No.3
It is the case of the plaintiffs/appellants that they were the owners of 32Bs of land covered
by 2nd RS patta No.2 Dag No.2,4, 5 of Boijayantipur Mouza Part-1, Hailakandi which was
washed away by the river Katakhal the said land reappeared. The predecessors of the
plaintiffs/appellants had been possessing the suit land continuously by constructing dwelling
house etc. and acquired right, title and interest over the suit land. The plaintiffs/appellants
prayed     for  settlement    of   the   suit  land     in their respective names     but   the
defendants/respondents instead of granting settlement, carved out new 2nd R.S. Patta No.
329/331/332 and new dag No.6/321 and started encroachment Case No.1/1992-93 and
issued notice under Rule 18 of the Assam Land and Revenue Regulations on 16th July, 1992
directing them to vacate the land and threatened to demolish the structures. It is also
pleaded that the defendants/respondents realized touzi bahi revenue from them.
Apprehending demolition of house and standing crops, plaintiffs/appellants filed the present
suit with the prayers hereinabove stated.
3.       The defendants/respondents contested the suit by filing written statement thereby
raising the plea of non maintainability of the suit inasmuch as, the Civil Court has no
jurisdiction to try the suit and further denied the long continuous possession of the
plaintiffs/appellants or realization of touzi revenue from them. It is the defence of the
defendants/respondents that the plaintiffs/ appellants are habitual encroachers of the suit
land and it was further pleaded that they were evicted in encroachment Case No.5/1958-59
from the suit land under Dag No.6/320 and the appeal No.52/1958-59 against the said
encroachment case was rejected on 26.12.1960 by the Deputy Commissioner, Cachar.
Subsequent to that, another re-encroachment Case No.15/1964-65 was started against the
plaintiffs/appellants and their ejectment was ordered on 13.11.1964 and the subsequent
appeal was also rejected on 28.11.1964. Thereafter, the SDO, Hailakandi reserved 11B 18K
4C’s of land under Dag No.6/321 for grazing ground and 2 Bigha 1 Chataks of land which
was kept reserved as the “gobat”. Subsequent thereto demarcation pillars were raised. Even
RSA 168 of 2004

                                               Page No.4
after such demarcation, the plaintiffs/appellants preferred appeal No.4/1979-80 which was
also rejected. Thereafter the plaintiffs instituted Title Suit No.18/1998 in the court of Munsiff
No.1, Hailakandi which was dismissed for default. Thereafter, Mudras Ali and others applied
to the Deputy Commissioner, Cachar for giving effect to the order of the Revenue court.
Objection was raised by the plaintiffs which was rejected by the ADC, Hailakandi and
thereafter encroachment Case No.1/1992-93 was started. It was urged before the learned
trial court that the plaintiffs/appellants have filed the suit misleading the actual facts and as
such the defendants/respondents prayed for dismissal of the suit. On the basis of the
pleadings, the learned trial court framed the following issues.
        “1. Is there any cause of action for the suit?
        2. IS the suit maintainable?
        3. Is the suit bad for multifariousness?
        4. Is the suit barred u/s 154 of A.L.L.R.?
        5. Is the suit bad for non compliance of notice u/s 80, CPC?
        6. Is the suit undervalued?
        7. Whether the plaintiffs have exclusive possession and right over the suit land?
        8. To what relief or reliefs the plaintiffs are entitled?
        Addl. Issues
             1. Is the suit barred by res-judicita in view of dismissal of earlier suit No.TS 18 of
                1988?
             2. Is the possession of plaintiffs are adverse to that of the defendants?”
4.      The plaintiffs/appellants adduced three witnesses and on the other hand the
defendants/respondents adduced only one witness. The learned trial court after hearing the
parties vide its judgment and decree dated 16.02.2002 decreed the suit. While discussing
issue Nos. 4 and 7, the learned trial court came to the finding that the plaintiffs/appellants
were in continuous physical possession over the suit land for the past 15 years which was
admitted by the DW-1. Putting the burden on the defendants/respondents, the learned trial
court held that the defendant side failed to show any document to substantiate their claim
that the plaintiff/appellants were duly evicted. Considering the revenue receipts exhibited by
the plaintiffs/appellants, the learned trial court came to the findings that revenue receipts
supports to the said fact of uninterrupted possession of the plaintiffs/appellants. It was also
RSA 168 of 2004

                                                Page No.5
held that the original suit land was alleviated by river Katakhal and as such it was held that
the plaintiffs/appellants were original owners having possession of the land covered by
disputed patta. Giving much stress on the submission of the plaintiffs/appellants that they
openly constructed houses over the suit land, the learned trial court made a presumption
that such acts created a bonafide right, title and interest over the suit land. The duration of
occupation was considered by the learned trial court in the light of the provisions of the
Limitation Act and indirectly the learned trial court declared the right, title and interest on
the basis of the long possession of the plaintiffs/respondents over the suit land. After
discussing so, the learned trial court gave its findings that bar under Section 154 of the
Assam Land Revenue Regulation has no effect to the instant suit and decided the said issue
in favour of the plaintiffs/appellants.
5.      Being aggrieved, the defendants/appellants preferred Title Appeal No.3/2002 in the
court of learned Civil Judge, Senior Division, Hailakandi. The said first appellate court vide its
judgment and decree dated 08.04.2004 reversed the findings of the trial court and dismissed
the suit of the plaintiffs/appellants. The said judgment passed by the First Appellate Court is
put under challenge in this Second appeal. The second appeal was admitted on 17.11.2004
on the following substantial questions of law.
        “1. Whether the finding of learned lower appellate court is right and proper in
        declaring that the suit is barred by Section 154 of the Assam Land Revenue
        Regulation while setting aside the judgment and decree of the learned trial court
        declaring plaintiffs’ acquired an indefeasible right, title and interest over the suit land
        based on the admitted facts that the appellants/plaintiffs have been in continuous
        possession for last 50/60 years over the suit land?
        2. Whether on the face of the evidence of DW-1 regarding the continuous possession
        of plaintiffs over the suit land, the findings of the learned lower appellant court is not
        perverse that the appellants/plaintiffs are not in possession of the suit land?
        3. Whether mere mutation of the suit land mentioning government khas land
        deprives the appellants/plaintiffs who have been in continuous possession thereof for
        last 50/60 years with permanent structure thereon and the respondents having
        realized Touzi revenues from them?”
6.      Mr. Borbhuiyan in support of the claim of the plaintiffs/appellants submits that the
findings of the trial court was based on the material piece of evidence on record. The
RSA 168 of 2004

                                             Page No.6
revenue receipts on the basis of which the trial court gave its decision with respect to the
uninterrupted long and continuous possession of the plaintiffs/appellants is a finding based
on the evidence laid before the court. Moreover as held by the trial court that the
plaintiffs/appellants openly constructed over the suit land itself goes to show that the
plaintiffs/appellants had been possessing the suit land to the adverse interest of the
Government and in such a situation there is no bar in granting the settlement to the
plaintiffs/appellants which is not at all unknown to the rules of settlement as prescribed in
the Assam Land Revenue Regulation. Mr. Borbhuiyan also submits that the predecessor in
interest of the plaintiffs/appellants in fact, purchase the suit land in the year 1889 and
against such a backdrop, if the plaintiffs/appellants are thrown out from the suit land it
would cause serious prejudice to them. Accordingly, Mr. Borbhuiyan also submitted that a
chance be given to adduce such piece of evidence by the plaintiffs/appellants.
7.       Coming to the finding of the First Appellate Court, Mr. Borbhuiyan submits that the
learned First Appellate Court wrongly appreciated the material piece of evidence on record.
The finding that the plaintiffs/appellants miserably failed to adduce any convincing evidence
in support of their claim of possession is a perverse finding inasmuch as the said revenue
receipts taken into consideration by the trial court, itself is sufficient to show the possession
of the plaintiffs/respondents over the suit land. Further, Mr. Borbhuiyan submits that the
burden cast upon the plaintiffs/appellants, by the First Appellate Court, that they failed to
establish that their suit land is covered by the original RS Patta No.2 or the same had
reappeared is wrong, as it is not disputed by the defendants/respondents that the suit land
originally was not covered under RS Patta No.2 by any piece of material evidence. With
regard to the bar under Section 154 of Assam Land Revenue Regulation, Mr. Borbhuiyan
submits that the matter is purely a declaration of the title of the plaintiffs/appellants and that
too on the basis of the materials already placed before the trial court from the custody of the
plaintiffs/appellants and the dispute is not for fresh settlement. In fact, the matter is for
RSA 168 of 2004

                                              Page No.7
declaration of the title which the plaintiffs/appellants had already been endowed with and
derived from their predecessors in interest and that too on the strength of purchase by
registered sale deed in the year 1889. So the question involved in the suit is with respect to
the declaration of the title of the plaintiffs/respondents which they had already possessed
and have been possessing but for, the actions of the defendants/respondents the same has
been clouded. So, there is no question of bar under Section 154 of the Assam Land Revenue
Regulations. Accordingly, Mr. Borbhuiyan submits that the second appeal be allowed.
8.       Per contra, Mr. S P Choudhury appearing on behalf of the respondents submits that
the findings of the First Appellate Court cannot be unsettled inasmuch as the First Appellate
Court after considering the materials on record came to the correct finding that the
plaintiffs/appellants had failed to discharge their burden as required under Section 101 of the
Indian Evidence Act. It is further submitted that the plaintiffs/appellants failed to show
before the courts below that they are claiming a status which was earlier endowed to them
and to their predecessor in interest on the strength of the purchase and the action on the
part of the respondents had clouded the status which they have been enjoying prior to
initiation of the encroachment case. It is submitted further that the respondents/defendants
had taken up for the eviction of plaintiffs/appellants under the proper rules as prescribed
under the Assam Land Revenue Regulation and the Civil court cannot throttle the process
eviction of the plaintiffs/respondents by filing this civil suit. There is specific bar under
Section 154 of the Assam Land Revenue Regulation and as such the learned First Appellate
court has rightly passed the judgment. Accordingly, Mr. Choudhury submits that the second
appeal is liable to be dismissed.
9.       Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels. Mr. Choudhury in order to
support his argument relies Moosa (Md) and Anr. Vs. State of Assam and Ors reported in
2007 (1) GLT 400. From the pleadings of the plaintiffs/appellants it is very much clear and
apparent that being aggrieved at the initiation of the encroachment Case No.1/1992-93 by
RSA 168 of 2004

                                              Page No.8
the respondents/defendants they have come before the Civil Court seeking for a relief of
declaration of their right, title and interest over the suit land i.e. the land from which they
are proposed to be evicted by the defendants/respondents. It is also apparent that the
plaintiffs/appellants had sought for the relief of permanent injunction thereby restraining the
respondents/defendants from evicting them from the suit land. In order to substantiate their
claim, there is no material piece of evidence in support of the claim of plaintiffs/appellants
for title over the suit land. The revenue receipt which the trial court had considered, in order
to bring home the submission of the plaintiffs/appellants in support of their contention of
long possession, are nothing but the receipt of the fine paid by the plaintiffs/respondents for
possessing the Government land. The same goes to show that respondent state imposed
penalty on plaintiffs/appellants for the wrongful possession of the suit land. However, that
cannot be concluded that the Government had accepted their possession to be lawful one. It
is the defence taken by the respondents/defendants that the said land, from which the
plaintiffs/appellants are supposed to be ejected, is the land covered by gazing reserve and in
such a situation the Government has every right to eject the plaintiffs/appellants. Behind the
said backdrop the plaintiffs/appellants had sought for the reliefs of declaration of right, title
and interest and permanent injunction.
10.      In 2007 (1) GLT 400 (supra), this court in para 20 held as follows:
         “20. The above aspects of the matter, on being agitated by the appellant in
         the first appeal as erroneous and contrary to the evidence on records, the first
         appellate court has reversed the findings of the trial court in respect of issue
         No. 1 and 5. Section 154(2) of the above quoted Regulation clearly says that
         jurisdiction in respect of matters enumerated under Section 154(1) shall rest
         with the revenue authorities only. Section 154(1) (c) bars the jurisdiction of
         civil court in matters relating to formation of the records of right, or the
         preparation, signing or alteration of a document contained therein. Section
         154(1) exempts the jurisdiction of civil court relating to questions as to the
         validity or effect of any settlement, or as to whether the conditions of any
         settlement are still in force.”
RSA 168 of 2004

                                              Page No.9
         The ratio of the said decision, which is similar with regard to the issue before this
Court, can well be concluded that the trial court by granting the decree in favour of the
plaintiffs/appellants converted itself into the revenue court, thereby declaring the right, title
and interest of the plaintiffs/appellants over the suit land on the face of the Encroachment
case No.1/1992-93. This cannot be permitted, inasmuch as Section 154 of the Assam Land
Revenue Regulation is specific, that no Civil Court shall exercise jurisdiction in any question
as to the validity or affect of any settlement or as to whether the conditions of any
settlement are still in force.
11.      As already submitted and considered by this Court, that the plaintiffs/appellants had
failed to show that prior to filing of the suit and initiation of the Encroachment case
No.1/1992-93 they enjoyed the status of “land holder” as defined under Assam Land
Revenue Regulation and the action of the respondents/defendants had clouded their status
of “land holder” with respect to the suit land, this Court comes to the conclusion that the
findings of the First Appellate Court that the instant suit is barred under Section 154 of the
Assam Land Revenue Regulation is upheld. Accordingly, the substantial question of law No.1
is decided against the plaintiffs/appellants.
12.      With regard to the substantial question of law No.2, this Court finds no perversity in
the finding of the First Appellate Court and regarding the substantial question No.3, the
same is also decided against the appellants. It is pertinent to mention here that the
plaintiffs/appellants preferred an application under Order 41 Rule 27 of the CPC for adducing
additional evidence and vide order dated 14.07.2015, the appellants were allowed to file
application seeking amendment of the plaint, inasmuch as, without pleadings no additional
evidence could be permitted. Finally, vide order dated 07.04.2016, the said application was
closed as the same was not pressed by the appellants/petitioners.
RSA 168 of 2004

                                           Page No.10
13.    Accordingly, this second appeal is dismissed.
14.    Send back the LCR.
15.    No costs.
                                                      JUDGE
Rakhi
RSA 168 of 2004


