                                 1
                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
     (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                     ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                         PRINCIPAL SEAT
                         RSA No. 30/2004
Sri Lokeswar Dutta,
Son of late Gunaram Dutta,
Ward No. 2, Mariani Town,
P.O. Mariani, District-Jorhat, Assam.
                                      ………. Appellant/Defendant
                               -VERSUS -
The Senior Manager,
Hunuwal Tea Estate, Mariani,
Jorhat, Assam & Ors.
                                      …..….… Respondents/ Plaintiffs
Advocate for the appellant:           Mr. DCK Hazarika.
                                               ……. Advocate.
Advocate for the Respondents           Mr. SN Sarma,
                                       Sr. Advocate,
                                      Mr. S. Choudhury,
                                          ………... Advocates.
                           -BEFOR E–
        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
              Date of hearing                : 25.07.2017
              Date of judgment & order       : 25.07.2017
                   JUDGMENT & ORDER (Oral)

                                2
                Heard Mr. DCK Hazarika, learned counsel,
appearing on behalf of the appellant/ defendant and Mr. SN
Sarma,      learned  senior   counsel,  assisted  by   Mr.   S
Choudhury, learned counsel, appearing for the respondents/
plaintiffs.
2]            The present appellant is the defendant in T.S.
No. 157/1994 (new)/ T.S. No. 37/1987 (old) in the court of
the learned Civil Judge, (Junior Division) No. 1 Jorhat, which
was filed by the plaintiffs/ respondents for declaration of its
right, title and interest, ejectment and recovery of the
possession of the suit land mentioned in the schedule of the
plaint. The case of the plaintiffs/ respondents as pleaded in
the plaint is that the Plaintiff No. 2/ respondent No.2 is a
registered company having its registered office at Kolkata
and Hanuwal Tea Estate is the unit of the aforesaid
company. The plaintiff/ respondent No. 1 is the Senior
Manger of the said Tea Estate. The defendant/ appellant was
an employee of the said Tea Estate and as per the service

                               3
rule, he was provided a garden quarter. The subject matter
of the suit is the said garden quarter and the land
appurtenant to it.
3]          The    defendant/    appellant   came    into  the
occupation of the suit property in the year 1975 alongwith the
said quarter. The defendant/ appellant had also occupied the
adjoining plot of land measuring 2 Bighas 4 Kathas and 10
Lechas and used the same as kitchen garden. However,
claiming possession of the suit land, the defendant instituted
T.S.    No.    109/80     which      was     dismissed.   The
defendant/appellant also failed to get any favourable order
even before the appellate court. The plaintiffs/ respondents
pleaded that on 2.8.1983, the defendant/ appellant was
dismissed from service after initiation of a departmental
proceeding. The defendant/ appellant made a reference
before the Labour Court, Dibrugarh and the learned Labour
Court, Dibrugarh affirmed the order of the dismissal. Even
after the order of his dismissal from service, the defendant/

                                4
appellant continued to occupy the suit land and the plaintiffs/
respondents vide registered notice dated 4.12.1986 asked
the defendant/ appellant to vacate the suit house. Though
the said notice was duly received, the defendant/ appellant
failed     to    comply    with     the   demand       of   the
plaintiffs/respondents. Thereafter, the plaintiffs/ respondents
instituted T.S. No. 37/1987 for eviction of the appellant/
defendant from the suit house and the land. Later on, the suit
was renumbered as T.S. No. 157/1994.
4]            The defendant/ appellant resisted the suit by
filing his written statement. It is claimed by the defendant/
appellant that the Moriani Medical Association was the owner
of the suit land and the house. The said Association became
defunct and the Tea Estate had tried to acquire the suit land
and the house. But denying the right title and interest of the
owner, he has been occupying the suit land adversely since
1969. It is denied by the defendant/ appellant that he was
allowed to occupy the suit house as ancillary to his service. It

                                5
is further claimed that in T.S. No. 73/1987 pending in the
said court, the plaintiffs/ respondents admitted that the suit
land is a part of ceiling surplus land acquired by the
Government vide Gazette Notification dated 22.1.1976. The
said ceiling surplus land measuring 12 Bighas was under the
occupation of the appellant/ defendant, one Sri Tuwaram
Dutta and one Mir Ali and others, but the plaintiffs/
respondents influenced the District Authority and tried to
review the area of the said ceiling land measuring 8 Bighas 7
Lechas from the actual area of 12 Bighas. Denying the right,
title and interest of the plaintiffs/ respondents over the suit
land and the house, the appellant/ defendant pleaded that
suit was bad for non-joinder of the State of Assam, who
acquired the suit land as ceiling surplus land and he had
already taken steps before the Government to get settlement
of the suit land. Final pleading was that there is no cause of
action for the suit, same being barred by law of Limitation.
Accordingly, he prayed for dismissal of the suit.

                                   6
5]           On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the
following issues and additional issues were framed by the
learned trial court.
      1.     Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to the suit land
      and the house standing thereon?
      2.     Whether the defendant was inducted therein by
      the plaintiffs as their employee in accordance with the
      prevailing service conditions?
      3.     Whether in view of the defendant’s removal from
      plaintiffs’ service, he is liable to be evicted?
      4.     To what other relief/ reliefs the parties are entitled
      in law and equity?
      Additional issues:
      1.     Whether there is any cause of action for the suit?
      2.     Whether the suit has been filed by an authorized
             person?
      3.     Whether the suit is competent and maintainable
             in law?

                               7
       4.   Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of the
            State of Assam?
6]          Both the parties adduced their evidence in
support of the respective pleading by examining the
witnesses and exhibiting documents. The learned trial court
after hearing the counsels of the parties decreed the suit with
cost.
7]          Being aggrieved, the plaintiff/ appellant preferred
T.A. No. 25/2002 against the decree dated 5.6.2002, passed
in T.S. No. 157/1994 by the learned trial court in the court of
the Civil Judge (Senior Division) Jorhat. The first appellate
court vide judgment and decree dated 1.10.2003 dismissed
the said T.A. Appeal No. 25/2002.
8]          The defendant/ appellant thereafter preferred this
second appeal, which was admitted on 19.2.2004 by this
court framing the following substantial questions of law:-

                                8
       (1)   Whether the suit of the plaintiffs is barred under
       Section 65 of the Limitation Act, 1963?
       (2)    Whether the court below erred in law in holding
       that the defendant was not entitled to claim ceiling
       surplus land under the provisions of the Assam Land
       (Holdings on Ceiling), 1956?
9]           Mr. Hazarika, learned counsel, appearing for the
appellant/ defendant submits that the court below failed to
appreciate the various documents, especially the Ext. No. 21
relied by the plaintiffs/ respondents which is an order dated
12.3.2001, passed by the Additional Deputy Commissioner,
Jorhat in Misc. Case No. 2/2000. By the said order, the
Additional Deputy Commissioner, Jorhat illegally reverted the
suit land covering the house from the purview of ceiling. As
apparent from the said order, though the said land was freed
from the purview of ceiling process, but the settlement order
dated 26.6.1990 in favour of the appellant/ defendant was
not set aside. Under such circumstances, Mr. Hazarika

                                 9
submits that the settlement order Ext. “ga” dated 26.6.1990
in favour of the appellant is still in existence covering the suit
land and on the other hand both the courts below had
declared the right, title and interest over the suit land in
favour of the plaintiffs/ respondents which is contradictory. It
is further submitted that the land ceiling notification of the
land of the plaintiffs/ respondents was published in the year
1976 but the plaintiffs/ respondents never even bothered to
challenge the draft publication of the land ceiling statement.
Finally, the said draft statement took its final form whereafter
the Govt. acquired the same and settled with the defendant/
appellant vide Ext. “ga”.
10]          Mr. Hazarika further submits that the order
passed vide Ext. 21 by the Additional Deputy Commissioner,
Jorhat is totally without jurisdiction. He submits that the final
order against such acquisition after completion of the ceiling
process can be challenged before the District Judge as
prescribed under provisions of the Assam Fixation of Ceiling

                                 10
on Land Holding Act, 1956 (herein after referred to as the Act
of 1956), which was not done by the plaintiffs/ respondents.
Rather after filing of the suit and on the submission of the
written statement by the defendant/appellant, the plaintiffs/
respondents moved the Additional Deputy Commissioner,
Jorhat and collusively obtained the Ext. 21. The order as per
Ext. 21 is totally an illegal order passed by a wrong forum
and as such it has got no value in the eye of law.
11]           Non-consideration of the said order with regard to
its validity itself, shows that the whole judgment and decree
passed by both the courts below has no legal sanctity.
12]           Mr. Hazarika further submits that the defendant/
appellant is all along in possession of the suit land since
1969 and the process of ceiling was initiated in the year 1976
and during the process itself the prescribed period of 12
years under the Limitation Act, 1963 for recovery of
possession of the suit land by the plaintiffs/ respondents

                                11
expired. The possession of defendant/ appellant over the suit
land is adverse to the interest of the plaintiffs/ respondents
and as such the suit is hit under the provision of Section 65
of the Limitation Act, 1963. Finally, Mr. Hazarika submits that
the substantial questions of law so formulated are to be
decided in favour of the appellant/ defendant.
13]           Mr. Sarma, learned senior counsel, appearing on
behalf of the respondents/ plaintiffs submits that both the
courts below have rightly passed the impugned judgment
and decree. It is submitted that the appellant/ defendant was
an employee of the plaintiffs/ respondents and as per the
service rules, the defendant/appellant was allotted the suit
house as his official quarter and as such, entry into the said
house and the land appurtenant to it, is nothing but a
permissive one and under no circumstances he could claim
right, title and interest over the suit property. It is submitted
that the appellant/ defendant filed T.S. No. 109/1980
claiming injunction and recovery of compensation against the

                               12
plaintiffs/ respondents. The said suit was dismissed vide Ext.
9, the decree passed by the learned Munsiff No. 1, Jorhat.
The said decree was passed on 20.2.1986. Prior to passing
of the decree, the present appellant/ defendant was
dismissed from his service on 2.8.1983. The said dismissal
of the appellant was challenged before the learned Labour
Court, Dibrugarh, which was upheld by the said Labour
Court. Thereafter the appellant preferred a writ petition
before this court and the said writ petition was disposed of
directing the appellant to vacate the suit house and on the
part of the plaintiffs/ respondents, it was directed to pay a
sum of Rs. 45,000.00 (Rupees forty-five thousand) only to
the defendant/ appellant. The plaintiffs/ respondents paid the
said amount as per the direction of the Gauhati High Court,
but on the part of the appellant/ defendant, he failed to
vacate the said house i.e. the official quarter. The eviction
notice was also issued to the appellant/ defendant vide Ext.
11. There was no compliance on his part to vacate the same.
Finally, the suit was filed praying the relief for his ejectment

                                  13
from the suit house and suit land and also for declaration of
right, title and interest of the plaintiffs/ respondents thereon.
14]             Mr. Sarma further submits that vide Ext. 2(1), the
plaintiff/ respondents had already surrendered 1024 Bighas
of land covered under various Dag numbers to the
Government within the purview of the said Act of 1956. After
such surrender of the excess land, 8 Bighas 12 Lechas of
land under the redeem Patta No. 155 was released by the
Government in favour of the plaintiffs/ respondents and to
that effect a certificate was issued which is Ext. 3. The
defendant/ appellant is possessing the land within the said 8
Bighas 12 Lechas of land of redeem Patta No. 155. Under
such circumstances, Mr. Sarma submits that the existence of
the settlement order in favour of the defendant/ appellant has
nothing      to   do,  so   far  the    plaintiffs/respondents are
concerned. The settlement order favouring the defendant/
appellant must be with respect to the Government land, but
not on the land of the plaintiffs/respondents.

                               14
15]          Having declared by the competent authority that
the suit land is within the said 8 Bighas 12 Lechas of land,
the settlement order in favour of the defendant/ appellant
cannot be a bar in passing the judgment and decree in
favour of the plaintiffs/ respondents declaring his eviction. It
is further submitted by Mr. Sarma that no wrong findings
have been given by both the courts below and as such this
second appeal is liable to be dismissed.
16]          Considered the submissions of both the learned
counsels. Perused the case record alongwith the exhibits
relied by both the parties to this appeal. Under Section 32 of
the Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1956, it
has been specifically stipulated that except as otherwise
expressly provided in the Act, no decision or order made in
exercise of any power conferred by or under the Act of 1956
shall be called in question in any Court. Further Section 31 of
the said Act of 1956 prescribes that the appellate authority is

                                15
the District Judge, or the original order when no appeal is
preferred, shall be final.
17]           In the present case in hand, the dispute is mainly
with respect to the suit land which the plaintiffs/ respondents
claimed to be ceiling free land and on the other hand, the
defendant/ appellant claimed that as the settlement order
vide Ext. ‘ga’ still remains in existence, under such
circumstances, the suit land which is ceiling surplus land is
the land settled to him as per Ext. ‘ga’. There is no dispute
that the order as per the Ext. ‘ga’ remains as it is and the
land shown therein remains as it is as because no specific
boundary has been mentioned demarcating the land settled
with the appellant. Ext. 3 clearly supports the claim of
plaintiffs/ respondents that the land over which the said suit
house is situated alongwith the land appurtenant, falls within
8 Bighas 12 Lechas of land which is certified to be ceiling
free land. On the other hand, the settlement order in favour
of the defendant/ appellant still exists which is not disputed

                                 16
by the plaintiffs/ respondents, but to provide settlement on
the strength of Ext. ‘ga’ is a matter within the jurisdiction and
competencey of the concerned Revenue Department and
that too within Government land as per the provisions of the
Assam Land Revenue Regulation, 1886.
18]           So far the civil courts are concerned, it is the duty
of the civil court to declare the civil rights of any litigants with
respect to the subject matter of the suit. Both the courts
below came to the findings that the suit land is beyond the
purview of the Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings
Act, 1956 and the same is ceiling free land.
19]           In such a situation, the courts below declared the
right, title and interest of the plaintiffs/ respondents with
respect to the suit land which as per the record is not a
ceiling surplus land. The substantial question of law No. 2 in
the true sense is not at all substantial so far the dispute
between the parties is concerned. It is not the case before

                                 17
the courts below that the defendant/ appellant is not entitled
to claim ceiling surplus land under the provisions of the
Assam Fixation of Ceiling on Land Holdings Act, 1956 but it
is the case of the plaintiffs/ respondents that they are entitled
to the suit land as it belongs to them and as such they
sought for right, title and interest over the suit land. It is the
defence taken by the defendant/ appellant that he was
settled with the ceiling surplus land under the said Act of
1956. In such a situation, the act of providing any settlement
to any person is upon the Government and the ceiling
surplus land on which the settlement is given, definitely must
be Government land duly acquired under a statute. The
courts below after going through the materials on record
came to the conclusion that the suit land is not ceiling
surplus land under the provision of the said Act of 1956 and
as such, declaring the right, title and interest of the plaintiffs/
respondents over the suit land, both the courts below held
that the defendant/ appellant is not entitled for settlement of
the suit land and house, which does not fall within ceiling

                                 18
surplus land under the said Act. Accordingly, there is no error
in the findings of both the courts below with respect to the
substantial question of law No. 2.
20]           With regard to the second substantial question of
law,    the   pleadings   of   the  defendant/ appellant   are
contradictory. On one hand, he is claiming right, title and
interest on the basis of the adverse possession without there
being any pleading with regard to the ingredients, so far
adverse possession is concerned. On the other hand, the
plaintiffs/ respondents stated that the land upon which he
claims adverse possession is ceiling surplus land. The
pleading of adverse possession never comes over the ceiling
surplus land inasmuch as when the Government acquires
said ceiling surplus land, the same is done without any
encumbrance or encumbrances whatsoever and in what
manner the same are created. Accordingly, the other
substantial question of law No. 1 is decided against the
defendant/ appellant. As the entry of the appellant to the suit

                              19
land and house is a permissive one and the appellant failed
to show anything that he had been possessing the suit land
with the intent to dispossess the plaintiffs/ respondents at
least from the date on which the suit land was released from
the purview of ceiling process vide Ext. 3. Moreover, there is
no pleading as to from which point of time, the possession of
the defendant/appellant had become adverse.
21]         Finally, this second appeal is dismissed. Send
back the LCR. No cost.
                                                JUDGE
Eam/..


