                  IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
        (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                      Case No:        RSA 39/2007
                  Sri Sarudhan alias Khagen Rajkhowa & others
                                                            ……      Appellants
                                     -Versus-
                  Sri Debeswar Bora                          ..... Respondent
                                  :: BEFORE ::
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
              For the Appellants             :      Mr. P Mahanta
                                                            Advocate
              For the Respondent             :      None appears
              Date of Hearing                :      25.04.2017
              Date of delivery of
              Judgment and Order             :      23.06.2017
                   JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
       Heard Mr. P Mahanta, learned counsel for the appellants. However, none
has entered appearance on behalf of the sole respondent.
2.     The present respondent, as plaintiff, preferred Title Suit No. 11/2002 in
the court of learned Civil Judge (Jr. Divn.), Biswanath Chariali, against the
present appellants/ defendants. Within a short radius, the case of the present
respondent is that he purchased land measuring 1 Bigha out of 7B 1K 13L
covered by Dag No. 318 (old)/693 (new) of Periodic Patta No. 145 (old)/24 (new)
                                                                        Page 1 of 11
RSA 39/2007

of village Napamua Guadhara under Mouza Kalangpur in the district of Sonitpur.
The said land was purchased by way of registered sale deed No. 1337 dated
30.04.1974 from one Laibhya Bora (deceased) and since then he had been
possessing the land by cultivating the same till the year 1997 as its exclusive
owner. Laibhya Bora, inherited the said land measuring 7B 1K 13L from her
husband along with the present appellant/ defendant No. 2 and proforma
defendants No. 5 and 6. Laibhya Bora died leaving behind her three daughters
i.e. appellant/ defendant No. 2 and the proforma defendants No. 5 and 6. The
defendant/ appellant No. 2 married one Guna Bora and out of the said marriage,
one son, namely, Haren Bora was born to them. Later on, the said defendant/
appellant No. 2 married the present defendant/ appellant No. 1. The present
defendants/ appellants No. 1, 3 and 4 interfered with the peaceful possession of
the plaintiff/ respondent over the said land measuring 1 Bigha which was resisted
by the plaintiff/ respondent. However, on 05.07.1997 the said defendants/
appellants entered into his land illegally and planted Sali crops. An FIR was
lodged on 06.07.1997 whereafter, the plaintiff/ respondent planted Sali crops
and harvested the same. On the basis of the said FIR, a proceeding under
Section 145 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short, Cr.P.C.) was drawn up
by the learned Executive Magistrate and in the said proceeding, possession was
declared in favour of the plaintiff/ respondent on 20.05.1999. Being aggrieved,
the defendants/ appellants preferred a revision petition and vide order dated
05.09.2001, the learned Sessions Judge, Sonitpur at Tezpur allowed the revision
petition by setting aside the order passed by the learned Executive Magistrate in
the proceeding initiated under Section 145 Cr.P.C. Taking advantage of the said
                                                                      Page 2 of 11
RSA 39/2007

judgment passed in the revision, the defendants/ appellants took possession over
the suit land. Thereafter, the plaintiff/ respondent filed the suit for declaration of
his right, title and interest, recovery of possession and permanent injunction.
3.       The defendants/appellants contested the suit by filing their written
statement. In the defence, the defendants/appellants denied that the
plaintiff/respondent ever possessed the suit land and cultivated thereon. It was
also denied that the plaintiff/ respondent became the legal owner of the suit land
during the life time of Laibhya Bora, the vendor. It was also denied that the
plaintiff/respondent was holding the possession of the suit land prior to the
drawal of the proceeding under Section 145 Cr.P.C. It is admitted that after the
order passed by the revisional court, they took possession over the suit land. It is
the case of the defendants/ appellants that one Akanman Keot alias Bogiram
Bora was the exclusive owner of various land including the land covered by Dag
No. 318/693 measuring 7B 1K 13L. After the death of Akanman Bora, his wife
Laibhya Bora and daughters, namely, Smti. Anila Bora (proforma defendant No.
5), Smti. Rohini Bora (proforma defendant No. 6) and Smti. Bhogeswari Bora
(defendant No. 2) became the joint owners of the properties left by Akanman
Bora and each has ¼th share over the total land. Their names were mutated in
Mutation Case Nos. 334/71-72, 335/71-72, 336/71-72 and 172/72-73. The said
proforma defendants No. 5 and 6 sold their respective shares of land vide
registered sale deed in favour of defendant/ appellant No. 2 and her sons.
Subsequently, their names were also mutated in the Records of Rights. Out of
the total land measuring 7B 1K 13L, the defendants/ appellants became the
rightful owners of land measuring 5B 2K 9L under Dag No. 693. One Niranjan
                                                                           Page 3 of 11
RSA 39/2007

Bora (the son born out of the marriage of defendant/ appellant No. 2 with Guna
Bora referred herein above), the grandson of Smti. Laibhya Bora was possessing
her share of land who ultimately vide a registered deed of gift No. 2274/1980
dated 21.08.1980, gifted her land in his favour. Niranjan Bora mutated his name
in the Records of Rights. A plea has also been taken as a defence, that though
plaintiff/respondent purchased the land in the year 1974, he did not have
possession over the suit land at any point of time. It was also pleaded by the
defendants/appellants that there was no formal partition between the co-owners
of the land, but for their own convenience, each of them had their own portion
demarcated. Share of Laibhya Bora was on the north-west boundary of the total
land covered by Dag No. 693 which, at present, is under the possession of
Niranjan Bora. In the gift deed, Laibhya Bora gave her boundary of her share of
land on the north western side of the total land covered by Dag No. 693. Thus,
by way of registered sale deed, executed in favour of the plaintiff/ respondent by
Laibhya Bora, he has not acquired any right, title and interest over the land so
purchased as the vendor had no possession over the land so sold to the plaintiff/
respondent. Further, if any right acquired by the plaintiff/respondent, same has
extinguished long ago due to continuous, uninterrupted and hostile possession of
the defendants/appellants. Accordingly, they prayed for dismissal of the suit.
4.       On perusal of the pleadings of both the parties, the learned trial court
framed the following issues:-
                1.     Whether the suit is maintainable under the law?
                2.     Whether there is a cause of action for the suit?
                3.     Whether the suit is barred by limitation?
                4.     Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary party?
                                                                             Page 4 of 11
RSA 39/2007

                5.       Whether the plaintiff was in possession of the suit land at any
                         point of time?
                6.       Whether the plaintiff is entitled to get a decree as prayed for?
                7.       Whether the parties are entitled to get any relief or reliefs as
                         may be deem fit and proper?
5.       The plaintiff/respondent examined 3 (three) witnesses including himself
as PW 1. On the other hand, the defendants/ appellants examined 3 (three)
witnesses and documents were also exhibited by both the parties. The learned
trial court after hearing the parties, decreed the suit in favour of the
plaintiff/respondent.
6.       While deciding the issue No. 5, the learned trial court came to the finding
that the plaintiff/ respondent had possession over the suit land till he was
dispossessed in the year 1997. In order to come to the said finding, the learned
trial court took into consideration the deposition of the PW 3, one Tankalal Sonari
who in his evidence stated that he cultivated the suit land for the period 1995 to
1997, whereafter the plaintiff/respondent was dispossessed by the defendants/
appellants. It was also taken into consideration by the learned trial court that the
defendants/appellants in their written statement had clearly admitted at
paragraph 15 that after the order passed in the revision petition, they entered
into possession of the suit land. Accordingly, the learned trial court disbelieved
the fact of their possession over the suit land against the claim of the
plaintiff/respondent.
7.       In respect of the mutual settlement arrived at by the legal heirs of Late
Akanman Bora alias Bogiram, as pleaded in the written statement, the learned
trial court disbelieved the same, inasmuch as, the defendants/appellants failed to
produce any document in support of the said claim. Against the plea taken by
                                                                                 Page 5 of 11
RSA 39/2007

them in the written statement that the share of Laibhya Bora stood on the north
western portion of the entire land of Dag No. 693, the same was disbelieved and
the learned trial court came to a finding that the suit land forms part of the total
land covered by Dag No. 693. Thus, the learned trial court disbelieved the fact of
mutual settlement nor any partition thereof the suit land. While discussing the
issues No. 6 and 7, the learned trial court came to the finding that Laibhya Bora,
the vendor of the plaintiff/ respondent being the mother of the three daughters
used to cultivate the land including the suit land and further held that Laibhya
Bora executed sale deed in favour of the plaintiff/respondent and delivered
possession of the suit land to the plaintiff/respondent. With regard to non-
mutation of the name of the plaintiff/respondent, the learned trial court came to
the finding that owing to objections, raised by the defendants/appellants, his
name was not mutated by the concerned official which finds support from the
deposition of PW 1, the plaintiff. The gift deed in favour of Niranjan Bora
executed by Laibhya Bora has not been challenged as the land covering the gift
deed is situated on the north western boundary of the entire land covered by
Dag No. 693. Non-mutation of the name of the plaintiff/respondent in the
Records of Rights cannot affect the title of the plaintiff/respondent as per the
finding of the learned trial court. Accordingly, as the plaintiff/respondent has
proved the right, title and interest over the suit land, so the learned trial court
decreed the suit.
8.      Being aggrieved, the defendants/appellants preferred Title Appeal No.
6/2005 in the court of learned Civil Judge, Sonitpur at Tezpur. The learned first
appellate court vide judgment and decree dated 12.12.2006 dismissed the appeal
                                                                        Page 6 of 11
RSA 39/2007

by upholding the findings of the learned trial court against each and every issues.
Thereafter, the present second appeal has been preferred by the defendants/
appellants. This second appeal was admitted on 14.05.2007 on the following
substantial question of law:-
                       “Whether the learned Courts below erred in decreeing the
               suit of the respondent/plaintiff by overlooking that the land
               demised by Ext. 1, in his favour included a share of the
               appellant/defendant No. 2, heir of late Bogiram Bora @
               Akanman?”
9.      Mr. Mahanta, learned counsel for the appellants, submits that both the
courts below failed to consider the admission of the plaintiff/respondent to the
fact that at the time of execution of the registered sale deed No. 1337 dated
30.04.1974 (Exhibit-1), his vendor, Laibhya Bora informed him that the suit land
forms a part of the joint patta land which was partitioned amongst herself and
her three sisters who have been possessing their respective shares. Under such
circumstances, a duty was cast upon the plaintiff/respondent at least to verify
the share of the vendor, inasmuch as, the said vendor gifted her share of land
subsequently in the year 1980 to her grandson, Niranjan Bora which is situated
on the north western corner of the total land covered by Dag No. 693. On the
other hand, the plaintiff/respondent claimed the suit land which he purchased on
the southern side of the total land covered by Dag No. 693 wherein the share of
the defendant/appellant No. 2 is situated. It is also submitted that the learned
courts below came to a wrong finding that the plaintiff/respondent maintained
his possession since the date of purchase till the date of dispossession in the
year 1997. Mr. Mahanta further questioned the findings of the learned courts
                                                                        Page 7 of 11
RSA 39/2007

below that there was no document/documents to show that a partition took
place between the legal heirs of the said Akanman alias Bogiram Bora i.e. the
parties to the suit. A mutual family settlement was entered into amongst the
legal heirs of late Akanman alias Bogiram Bora whereafter Laibhya Bora, the
vendor of the plaintiff/ respondent gifted her entire share of the land on the
north western side to her grandson. Thus, being fully aware of the fact that there
was a partition which took place between the legal heirs of late Bogiram Bora
alias Akanman, both the courts below had erred in decreeing the suit, inasmuch
as, such passing of the decree has caused prejudice to the defendant/appellant
No. 2, being one of the legal heirs of late Bogiram Bora alias Akanman. Finally,
Mr. Mahanta submits that non consideration of the fact of partition is vital and as
such, the substantial question of law, so formulated, is to be decided in favour of
the appellants thereby setting aside the judgment and decree passed by both the
courts below.
10.     Considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellants.
Perused the pleadings of both the parties and the evidence led by various
witnesses of the parties to the suit. The plaintiff/respondent, as PW 1, in his chief
deposed that at the time of purchase of the suit land, the defendant No. 2 along
with the proforma defendants No. 5 and 6 were not in possession of any part of
the land covered by Dag No. 693 including the suit land. There was no partition
amongst the legal heirs of Bogiram Bora alias Akanman. In the cross examination
he deposed that, at the time of purchase, Laibhya Bora informed that there was
a partition amongst legal heirs of Bogiram Bora but the fact as to their shares
was never informed. However, it has been deposed that the total land was under
                                                                         Page 8 of 11
RSA 39/2007

the possession of Laibhya Bora. He admitted the possession of Niranjan Bora.
However, it has been denied that Laibhya Bora had given 1 Bigha of land out of
her share to Niranjan Bora by way of registered gift deed. It is also deposed that
he filed the suit for the southern portion of the land covering the suit land out of
the total land covered by Dag No. 693. The suit land is possessed by the
defendant/ appellant No. 1. Laibhya Bora, his vendor, delivered possession on
the southern boundary of the total land.
11.     The PW 3, Tankalal Sonari, in his cross examination, described the suit
land correctly as per the boundaries mentioned in the schedule of the plaint and
it was further deposed that for the period from 1995 to 1997, he cultivated
thereon and prior to that, the plaintiff/respondent cultivated thereon. This piece
of evidence could not be shaken by the defendants/appellants. The defendant/
appellant No. 1, as DW 1 in his chief, deposed that the defendant/appellant No. 2
is his wife and her share is under his possession. He also admitted that the suit
land was purchased by the plaintiff/respondent in the year 1974 by way of
registered sale deed. He also admitted that the land of Niranjan Bora is situated
on the north western side from his land. He also deposed that along with his
wife, the proforma defendants No. 5 and 6 had their shares each measuring 1B
3L. However, he deposed that no Lat Mandol had measured the said land and
delivered possession to each of them.
12.     The DW 2, Sri Phatik Kath Hazarika who is the boundary man of the suit
land, deposed that after the death of the husband, Laibhya Bora looked after her
land and admitted that the plaintiff/ respondent possessed the suit land. It is also
deposed that during the life time of Laibhya Bora, the partition took place of the
                                                                          Page 9 of 11
RSA 39/2007

land. He admitted, while describing the boundary of the suit land that on the
northern side of the suit land, it is the land of Laibhya Bora. The DW 1 further
deposed that he has no document to show that there was family settlement
and/or partition. Rather, he exhibited the copies of Jamabandi whereby it is
shown that the names of the legal heirs of Bogiram Bora have been shown jointly
as co-owners over the land covered by the patta, consisting the suit Dag No.
693.
13.     Thus, from the discussions hereinabove, it is concluded –
        (a)     that Laibhya Bora by way of Exhibit-1, the registered sale deed,
                transferred land measuring 1 Bigha which is the suit land;
        (b)     that after purchase, the plaintiff/ respondent possessed the suit
                land and he carried out cultivation through the PW 3 for the
                period from 1995 to 1997 whereafter the dispute took place.
14.     Now if the deposition of PW 1, in his cross examination is considered,
Laibhya Bora informed at the time of sale of the suit land to PW 1 that partition
of the land covered by Dag No. 693 took place amongst the legal heirs, coupled
with the deposition of DW 1, that for their own convenience mutual settlement
amongst the legal heirs of Bogiram alias Akanman Bora was carried out, then it
can be concluded that oral partition took place whereafter defendants/ appellants
are possessing their respective shares. Further, if the deposition of DW 1 in chief
is taken into consideration that he had been possessing the share of his wife,
defendant/ appellant No. 2, then it can very well be arrived that share of land of
defendant/ appellant No. 2 is not covered by the suit land. There is no evidence
to show that Niranjan has been possessing the total share of land of Laibhya
                                                                        Page 10 of 11
RSA 39/2007

Bora so gifted, so far land covered by Dag No. 693 is concerned. The
defendants/ appellants have not challenged the sale deed in order to get it
cancelled on the ground that the plaintiff/ respondent is possessing the share of
land of defendant/ appellant No. 2. This itself indicates that the defendants/
appellants have accepted the title of the plaintiff/ respondent over the suit land.
This has the support from the pleadings of the defendants/ appellants whereby
they even claimed adverse possession over the suit land pleading extinguishment
of the title of the plaintiff/ respondent over the same. This shows clearly as to
why defendants/ appellants and the plaintiff/ respondent never intended to seek
for the relief of partition on the ground of inclusion of the share of the
defendants/ appellant No. 2 in the suit land. Had it been the case of the
defendants/ appellants that the suit land includes the share of the defendant/
appellant No. 2 then there does not arise any occasion for them to take the plea
of adverse possession. So, it can be concluded that no share of land of defendant
No. 2 is under the possession of the plaintiff/ respondent. Accordingly, the
substantial question of law is decided against the appellant.
15.     This second appeal is accordingly dismissed.
        No order as to costs.
16.     Send down the lower court records.
                                                                         JUDGE
BiswaS
                                                                       Page 11 of 11
RSA 39/2007


