                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                        Case No:        RSA 40/2007
                    Bhikari Nunia & others                    ……      Appellants
                                        -Versus-
                    Ram Narayan Chouhan                        ..... Respondent
                                    :: BEFORE ::
            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
                For the Appellants              :     Mr. SP Choudhury
                                                              Advocate
                For the Respondents             :     None appears
                Date of Hearing                 :     25.04.2017
                Date of delivery of
                Judgment and Order              :     01.08.2017
                     JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
         Heard Mr. SP Choudhury, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellants. None appears on behalf of the respondent.
2.       The present appellants are the defendants in Title Suit No. 91/1992 filed
in the court of learned Assistant District Judge No. 1 at Silchar. The plaintiff/
respondent filed the suit for declaration and injunction. It is the case of the
plaintiff/ respondent that the defendant No. 1, Gopi Hazam, the proforma
respondent No. 2 in the present appeal, on 04.04.1985 vide registered deed No.
1383 mortgaged some land measuring 4B 17K 8Ch covered by various Dag
                                                                          Page 1 of 12
RSA 40/2007

numbers of second RS patta No. 136, 137 and 138 described in Schedule 1 of the
plaint after receiving Rs. 10,000/- from the plaintiff/respondent. The possession
was handed over to the plaintiff/ respondent by the said defendant/ proforma
respondent No. 2 with a condition that the plaintiff/ respondent is to retain
possession of the said land for 10 years and to enjoy the usufructs thereon.
Similarly, the deceased proforma respondent No. 3 in the present appeal also
vide registered deed No. 1382 dated 04.04.1985 mortgaged 4B 17K 8Ch of land
covered by various Dag numbers under Second R.S. patta Nos. 136, 137 and 138
described in Schedule 2 of the plaint after receiving Rs. 10,000/- and handed
over possession to the plaintiff/ respondent on the same condition that the
plaintiff/ respondent is to retain possession for 10 years and to enjoy the
usufructs thereon. On delivery of possession, plaintiff/ respondent had been
enjoying the possession over the suit land by way of cultivation. On the last part
of May, 1992, it came to the knowledge of the plaintiff/ respondent that a sale
agreement dated 10.04.1986 was executed by the said defendants/ proforma
respondents No. 2 and 3 in favour of the present defendants/ appellants for
selling Schedule 1 and 2 land by way of a registered agreement for sale bearing
No. 990 dated 10.04.1986. The said defendants/ appellants were trying to evict
the plaintiff/ respondent from the suit land in clear violation of the condition
stipulated in the mortgage deeds both dated 04.04.1985. The defendants/
appellants were also trying to procure sale permission from the concerned
authority. The plaintiff/ respondent is entitled to remain in possession of the suit
land and to enjoy the benefit of the same until the defendants/ proforma
respondents No. 2 and 3 initiated legal proceeding against him as per terms and
                                                                         Page 2 of 12
RSA 40/2007

conditions of mortgage deeds. Therefore, the plaintiff/ respondent preferred the
said suit with the following prayers:-
                     (a) For a decree for declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to remain
             in occupation of the suit lands as per terms and condition of the (Kot kabala)
             Mortgage deed on 4-4-85.
                     (b) For a decree for confirmation of possession in respect of the suit
             lands
                     (c) For a declaration that agreement for sale dt. 10-4-86 is illegal,
             inoperative, void and that the defendants are not entitled to evict the
             plaintiff from the suit lands as per agreement for sale dtd. 10-4-86 in the
             basis of any other documents in respect of the suit lands.
                     (d) For a permanent injunction against the defendant, their men,
             agents, employees, restraining them not to disturb the peaceful possession
             of the plaintiff or to maintain status quo ante or to restrain from taking any
             permission from the competent authorities for purchasing / selling or
             transfer of in any manner of the suit land.
                     (e) Other reliefs
                     (f) Costs of the suit.
                     In all circumstances the suit be decreed in favour of the plaintiff and
             against the defendants with interest.
3.      The present defendants/ appellants filed their written statement denying
the pleadings in the plaint that they were trying to dispossess the plaintiff/
respondent from the suit land. It is pleaded in the written statement that the
proforma respondents No. 2, 3 and 4 executed an agreement for sale in favour
of one Ramdulal Nunia and the present defendants/ appellants on receipt of part
consideration money of Rs. 30,000/- promising to sell the suit land on receipt of
the balance consideration money of Rs. 19,000/- within the year 1993. It was
further pleaded that the said Rs. 19,000/- was kept for redemption of the
mortgage and the proforma respondents No. 2 and 3 entered into the sale
agreement with a promise that they would redeem mortgage and execute the
sale deed in favour of the present defendants/ appellants. The said proforma
respondents in the present appeal delayed execution of the said sale deed by
                                                                                   Page 3 of 12
RSA 40/2007

taking the balance consideration money as per sale agreement dated 10.04.1986
and a suit was filed against them by the defendants/ appellants which was
pending. While the plaintiff/ respondent found that the said proforma
respondents No. 2 to 4 were going to sell the suit land to the defendants/
appellants on redemption of the mortgage within a short period of time, the
plaintiff/ respondent filed the present suit hurriedly in order to create hindrance
in selling the suit land to the defendants/ appellants. Accordingly, they prayed for
dismissal of the suit.
4.       The proforma respondents in the present appeal, as the main defendants
No. 1 to 3, simply filed a petition before the learned trial court stating that in the
event of passing any decree in favour of the plaintiff/ respondent they have no
objection.
5.       On the basis of the pleadings, the learned trial court framed as many as 7
(seven) issues which are quoted below:-
             1.     Is there any cause of action for this suit?
             2.     Is the suit maintainable in its present form?
             3.     Is the suit bad for non-joinder of Kousalya Nunia as necessary
                    parties?
             4.     Is the suit barred by limitation?
             5.     Is the plaintiff entitled to possession of the suit land as per
                    terms and conditions of the mortgage deed (kot Kabala) dt. 4-
                    4-85, as claimed by him?
             6.     Is the plaintiff in possession of the suit land?
             7.     To what relief, if any the plaintiff is entitled?
6.       Both the parties adduced their respective witnesses along with documents
exhibited therein the suit. However, the present proforma respondents did not
adduce any evidence nor they graced the witness box. The learned trial court
                                                                           Page 4 of 12
RSA 40/2007

decreed the suit thereby granting reliefs sought for by the plaintiff/ respondent in
prayers No. (a), (b) and (d) referred hereinabove.
7.       Being aggrieved, the present defendants/ appellants preferred Title
Appeal No. 11/1999 before the learned Additional District Judge, Cachar at
Silchar. The said appeal was dismissed vide judgment and decree dated
12.12.2006. The learned first appellate court while deciding issues No. 5 and 6
came to the finding that the present defendants/ proforma respondents No. 2 to
4 admitted the entire claim of the plaintiff/ respondent. Secondly, the present
defendants/ appellants also admitted that the suit land was mortgaged to the
plaintiff/ respondent by the defendants/ proforma respondents No. 1 and 2 on
04.04.1985 and since then the plaintiff/ respondent has been possessing the suit
land. The learned first appellate court on perusal of the Exhibits 1 and 2
(mortgage deeds) came to the finding that by way of the said mortgage deeds,
the plaintiff/ respondent paid Rs. 10,000/- each to the defendants/ proforma
respondents No. 2 and 3. The condition of the said mortgage was for 7 years
each w.e.f. 04.04.1985 and after 7 years, the defendants/ proforma respondents
No. 2 and 3 were supposed to redeem the said mortgage within 3 years and if
they failed to redeem within a period of 3 years, the plaintiff/ respondent, as the
mortgagee, be entitled to mutate the land in his favour. It is also observed by
the learned first appellate court that as both the mortgage deeds i.e. Exhibits 1
and 2 are proved, then the contents are also proved.
8.       The learned first appellate court came to the finding that the mortgage is
a usufructory mortgage with conditional sale. The plaintiff/ respondent is to
utilise the rent and profit of the mortgage property against the interest of the
                                                                          Page 5 of 12
RSA 40/2007

loan amount and the mortgagors are entitled to redeem the mortgage after 7
years but within 3 years after the period of 7 years and if they failed to redeem
within the said 3 years time schedule, the plaintiff/ respondent is entitled to get
the land mutated in his name. It is held by the learned first appellate court
further that the plaintiff/ respondent has been possessing the suit land on the
strength of the said mortgage deeds and till filing of the suit, the mortgagors had
not taken any steps to redeem the said mortgage. The mortgage deeds were
executed on 04.04.1985. The period of redemption started from 04.04.1992 and
the right of redemption would lapse on 04.04.1995. As the mortgage was not
redeemed between 04.04.1992 to 04.04.1995, the plaintiff/ respondent acquired
right to get the suit land mutated in his name against the loan paid to the
mortgagors i.e. the defendants/ proforma respondents No. 2 and 3. So, the
learned first appellate court came to the finding that as the suit was filed on
15.06.1992 i.e. after starting of the period of redemption, it is clear that the
plaintiff/ respondent has been possessing the suit land as a mortgagee and
during the said period none of the defendants could dispossess him from the suit
land. Further, the learned first appellate court came to the finding that as the
mortgage is a mortgage by conditional sale and after 04.04.1995, the plaintiff
could get the land mutated in his name as purchaser and as such, the
defendants/ proforma respondents No. 1 and 2 have no right to sale the suit
property to the defendants/ appellants and deliver the possession to them
ousting the plaintiff/ respondent from the suit land and further held that the
defendants/ appellants have also no right to get the possession of the suit land
on the strength of the sale agreement. Thus, it was held that the plaintiff/
                                                                         Page 6 of 12
RSA 40/2007

respondent has right to remain in possession of the suit land until mortgage is
redeemed by the mortgagors within the period specified in the Deeds which is 3
(three) years only which expired on 04.04.1995. Accordingly, the learned first
appellate court upheld the findings of the learned trial court.
9.      The defendants/ appellants thereafter preferred this second appeal
against the judgment and decree of the learned first appellate court which was
admitted on 18.05.2007 on the following substantial questions of law:-
               1.    Whether the learned Courts below misconstrued section
                     61(a) of the Limitation Act, 1963, in holding that the
                     defendants No. 1, 2 and 3’s right of redemption had lapsed
                     on 4/4/1995?
               2.    Whether the learned Courts below misinterpreted the
                     mortgage deed (Exhibits 1 and 2) to brand the transaction
                     therein as mortgage by conditional sale?
               3.    Whether the learned Courts below erred in holding that non-
                     impleadment of Kausalya Nunia, mother of Ramdulal Nunia
                     (since deceased), a signatory in the agreement of sale
                     (Exhibit-3) was not fatal for the suit?
10.     Mr. Choudhury, learned counsel for the appellants, submits that he would
confine his submission with regard to the substantial question of law No. 1 as the
findings of the same has a direct bearing on the outcome of the dispute between
the parties. The learned counsel submits that the question of limitation is a pure
question of facts and law. The present suit being on the basis of a mortgage and
the terms governing the mortgage are to be looked into. The learned courts
below failed to appreciate the same and tried to impose the period of redemption
of 3 years only on the face of the law holding the field as stipulated under Article
                                                                         Page 7 of 12
RSA 40/2007

61(a) of the Limitation Act, 1963 which prescribes a period of 30 years for
redemption or recovers possession of immovable property mortgaged. He also
submits that the said period of 30 years is to be counted when the right to
redeem or recover possession accrues on the mortgagors. Accordingly, he
submits that both the courts below had went wrong in passing the judgment
thereby granting the relief as prayed for by the plaintiff/ respondent in the plaint.
As apparent from the reliefs, so prayed, the plaintiff/ respondent shall maintain
his possession all throughout on the ground that the mortgagors failed to redeem
the mortgage within a period of 3 years as stipulated in the mortgage deeds and
that cannot be the intent and purpose of the stipulations made in the said
agreement rather, Mr. Choudhury submits that the suit is in disguise for
obtaining the relief by way of depriving the defendants/ appellants including the
mortgagors from their right prescribed under the Limitation Act for redemption.
As such, Mr. Choudhury submits that the substantial question of law No. 1 is to
be decided in favour of the appellants.
11.     Considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellants. In
the opinion of this court, both the learned courts below failed to consider the said
period of 3 years for redemption in its proper perspective whether the said
condition is a clog on equity of redemption keeping in view the stipulations of
Section 60 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. Moreover, in the suit the
mortgagors failed to come to depose before the court. Merely a petition was filed
as hereinabove stated which cannot be considered as an admission on the part
of proforma respondents No. 2 and 3 nor the plaintiff/ respondent pressed for
passing any admission decree on the basis of the said petition. In the case of
                                                                         Page 8 of 12
RSA 40/2007

Ganga Dhar v. Shankar Lal and others reported in AIR 1958 SC 770 , the
Hon’ble Apex Court held as follows:-
                      “(7)      The right of redemption, therefore, cannot be taken
               away. The Courts will ignore any contract the effect of which is to deprive
               the mortgagor of his right to redeem the mortgage. One thing, therefore,
               is clear, namely, that the term in the mortgage contract, that on the
               failure of the mortgagor to redeem the mortgage within the specified
               period of six months the mortgagor will have no claim over the
               mortgaged property, and the mortgage deed will be deemed to be a
               deed of sale in favour of the mortgagee, cannot be sustained. It plainly
               takes away altogether, the mortgagor’s right to redeem the mortgage
               after the specified period. This is not permissible, for “one a mortgage
               always a mortgage” and therefore always redeemable. The same result
               also follows from S. 60 of the Transfer of Property Act. So it was said in
               Mohammad Sher Khan v. Seth Swami Dayal, 49 Ind App 60 at p. 65 : (AIR
               1922 PC 17 at p. 19) (C).
                      (8)       Under the section, once the right to redeem has arisen it
               cannot be taken away. The mortgagor’s right to redeem must be
               deemed to continue even after the period of six months has expired and
               the attempt to confine that right to that period must fail. The term in the
               mortgage instrument providing that the mortgage can be redeemed only
               within the period of six months and not thereafter must be held to be
               invalid and ignored. The learned Judicial Commissioner took the same
               view and this has not been challenged in this appeal on behalf of the
               respondents.”
In the case of Pom al K anji Govindji and others v. Vrajlal K arsandas
Purohit and others reported in (1989) 1 SCC 458 , the Hon’ble Apex Court
held as follows:-
                      “26.      Whether in the facts and the circumstances of these
               cases, the mortgage transaction amounted to clog on the equity of
               redemption, is a mixed question of law and fact. Courts do not look with
               favour at any clause or stipulation which clogs equity of redemption. A
                                                                               Page 9 of 12
RSA 40/2007

               clog on the equity of redemption is unjust and unequitable. The
               principles of English law, as we have noticed from the decisions referred
               to hereinbefore which have been accepted by this Court in this country,
               looks with disfavour at clogs on the equity of redemption. Section 60 of
               the Transfer of Property Act, in India, also recognises the same position.”
12.     Keeping the ratio laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court in view, before
entering into the issue involved in the substantial question of law No. 1, it must
be kept in mind that whether the term stipulated in the mortgage deed is a “clog
on the equity of redemption” and for the said purpose, the surrounding
circumstances at the relevant point of time when the mortgage was created and
the subsequent move on the part of the mortgagee is also to be considered. In
the present case in hand, the plaintiff/ respondent filed the suit in order to
enforce the terms stipulated in the mortgage deeds, more specifically, the
stipulation that if there is failure on the part of the mortgagors to redeem the
mortgage within 3 years, he would be entitled to mutate his name. It is also
stipulated in the said mortgage deeds that the mortgagors would execute
registered sale deed. Thus, it is apparent that the plaintiff/ respondent, as the
mortgagee, at the time of lending money and taking the security, entered into an
agreement in such a manner that the stipulations, so made in the said mortgage
deed, clearly indicates the effect by which the mortgagors should have no equity
of redemption.
13.     The said intention is very much clear from the subsequent acts on the
part of the plaintiff/ respondent i.e. filing of the present suit. The agreement for
sale entered into by the present defendants/ appellants clearly stipulates about
the mortgage and it is also stipulated therein that the sale transaction would be
                                                                              Page 10 of 12
RSA 40/2007

completed in the year 1993 i.e. after 7 years of the date of creation of the
mortgage. The vendors, defendants/ proforma respondents No. 2 to 4, failed to
perform their part of contract as per promises made in the said agreement for
sale and as such, the defendants/ appellants preferred the suit for specific
performance of contract. The plaintiff/respondent has no right to interfere so far
the stipulations in the agreement for sale are concerned. The action of filing of
suit itself shows the intention which the plaintiff/ respondent carried at the time
of execution of the mortgage deeds, Exhibits 1 and 2 and it can very well be
prepondered that with an oblique intention stipulations were made in the said
Exhibits 1 and 2 restricting the period of redemption only to a period of 3 years.
The execution of the registered sale deed and mutation of the name of the
plaintiff/ respondent were the prime intention of the plaintiff/ respondent No. 1
and the same was in his mind at the time of execution of Exhibits 1 and 2.
Admittedly, the plaintiff/ respondent pleaded in his plaint that the mortgagors
needed money at that relevant point of time.
14.      The clause of execution of registered sale deed, so stipulated in Exhibits 1
and 2, if arrived at and stipulated in a separate agreement subsequent to the
creation of the mortgage, it could have been easily prepondered that the said
agreement for execution of registered sale deed was not contemporaneous to
the Exhibits 1 and 2, then that would have created a separate view. But as the
same being contemporaneous, this court has nothing but to hold that the said
stipulations are clog on the equity of redemption of the mortgagors.
15.      As held in Ganga Dhar v. Shankar Lal and others (supra), such
stipulations whereby the right of redemption is curtailed, the court has the power
                                                                         Page 11 of 12
RSA 40/2007

to ignore any contract to that effect. Once the right to redeem has arisen, the
said right must be deemed to be continued even after the period of 3 years
stipulated in the said agreement until a decree for foreclosure is obtained by the
mortgagee. From the discussions made hereinabove, it can very well be
concluded that the substantial question of law No. 1, so formulated, wherein the
learned courts below held that the right of redemption had lapsed on
04.04.1995, is totally a wrong finding and as such, the same is answered in the
affirmative. The rest of the substantial questions of law have no bearing in
deciding the substantial dispute between the parties and as such, the submission
of the learned counsel for the appellants is accepted. Accordingly, the judgment
passed by the learned first appellate court upholding the findings of the learned
trial court is hereby set aside and the second appeal accordingly succeeds.
        No order as to costs.
16.     Send down the lower court records.
                                                                         JUDGE
BiswaS
                                                                       Page 12 of 12
RSA 40/2007


