                                           Page No.1
                        IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                   RSA 6 OF 2003
        Rupan Kishan
        S/O- Lt. Ganesh Kishan,
        Vill- Potabill, Mouza-Orang,
        P.O- Shillong Khuti, PS- Mazbat,
        Dist- Darrang (Assam).
                                                           - Appellants/Plaintiffs
                                     Versus-
        2. On the death of respondent no.2, Fesha Ram Das his legal heirs
        2(A) Subhas Das
        2(B) Lao Das
        3(C) Bon Das
              As per Hon’ble Court’s order dated 12.10.2015 passed in MC No.
             1390/2011.
                                            - Respondents/Defendants
                                          BEFORE
                     HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
       Advocate for the appellants Mr. R L Yadav
       Advocate for the respondent Mr. B Koushik.
       Date of hearing        4th May, 2017
       Date of Judgment       9.06.2017
                                JUDGMENT AND ORDER
                                          (CAV)
        Heard Mr. R L Yadav, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant. Also
heard Mr. B Koushik, learned counsel representing the respondents.
2.      This second appeal had arisen out of the judgment and decree dated 30.07.2002
passed by the learned District Judge, Darrang in Title Appeal No.2/2000 dismissing the
appeal and affirming thereby the judgment and decree dated 09.12.1999, passed in Title
Suit No.30/1992 by the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division), Darrang whereby the suit of the
RSA 6 of 2003

                                             Page No.2
plaintiff/respondents for declaration of their right, title and interest over the suit land was
decreed.
3.       The present appellant is the defendant in the said Title Suit No.30/1992 and the
original respondents, Narayan Das, Fesharam Das were the plaintiffs. On the death of the
respondent No.2, Fesharam Das his legal heirs were substituted vide order dated 12.10.2015
passed in MC No.1390/2011. Vide order dated 12.10.2015, the name of respondent/plaintiff
No.1 Narayan Das was struck out. However, present respondents would be classified as the
plaintiffs/respondents in this appeal.
3.       The case of the plaintiffs/respondents in brief, the suit land covered by Dag No.123
of PP No.73/74 in village Patabil, under Orang Mouza was owned by one Smt. Konwar
Gaurani, wife of Lt. Bhagat Singh. The said Narayan Das, original plaintiff No.1 purchased
the same by way of a sale deed No.431 dated 23.01.1974 from the said Smt. Konwar
Gaurani and took possession of the suit land. Having taking over possession of the land, the
plaintiffs/respondents cultivated over same, thereon and paid the revenue assessed by the
concerned authority. On 16.07.1974, the defendant/appellant dispossessd the plaintiffs, who
then, initiated a proceeding under Section 145 Cr. P.C. The said proceeding ended with
declaration of possession in favour of the defendant/appellant. The plaintiffs/respondents
filed a revision and the order, passed by the learned Executive Magistrate declaring the
possession of the suit land in favour of the defendant/appellant was set aside. However, on
being obstructed from enjoying the suit property peacefully by the plaintiffs/respondents
owing to the obstruction of the defendant/appellant and subsequent dispossession, the
plaintiffs/respondents instituted the suit praying for declaration of their right, title and
interest over the suit land, recovery of khas possession thereon and permanent injunction.
 4.      The defendant/appellant alongwith other defendants (who never contested the
present appeal) contested the suit by filing joint written statement. The defence taken by the
RSA 6 of 2003

                                               Page No.3
defendant/appellant       that  the  land    belongs     to  one   Ganesh   Kisan    the  present
defendant/appellant and they have been in occupation of the land for a long time being
“adibashi” people. According to them the plaintiffs/respondents were new faces in the area
and they have no right to purchase the land in the tribal belt. Accordingly, prayer was made
for dismissal of the suit. It was also further taken as defence that the plaintiffs/respondents
are not possessing the suit land after purchase. Smt. Knowar Gaurani had no possession nor
any right title and interest over the suit land.
5.       The learned trial Court framed the following issues on the basis of the pleadings of
the parties :
        “1. Whether there is cause of action for the suit?
        2. Whether the suit is barred by the principles of waiver, estoppels, acquiescence?
        3. Whether the plaintiffs have right, title and interest over the suit land?
        4. Whether the defendants illegally dispossessed the plaintiffs from the suit land?
        5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the reliefs prayed for?
        6. Any other relief/reliefs parties are entitled to?
        Additional Issue:
       1. Whether the suit is barred by limitation and adverse possession?”
6.      The      plaintiffs/respondents     side     examined     four   witnesses     and    the
defendant/appellant also examined four witnesses in support of their respective claims by
submitting various exhibits. The trial court vide judgment and decree dated 9.12.1999
decreed the suit of the plaintiffs/respondents. Thereafter the present defendant/appellant
preferred Title Appeal No.02/2000 in the court of the learned District Judge at Darrang,
Mangaldoi. The said first appellate court vide judgment and decree dated 30.07.2002
dismissed the said appeal.
7.      Being aggrieved, the defendant/appellant has preferred the present second appeal
which was admitted on the following substantial questions of law:
        “1. Whether the learned courts below were justified in holding that the plaintiffs
        acquired title by the sale deed, Ext.1 executed by Konwar Gaurani, without giving any
        evidence that the vendor Konwar Gaurani had title to the land?
RSA 6 of 2003

                                                Page No.4
         2. Whether the transfer of the suit land, which falls within the Tribal Belt, by Ext.1 is
         invalid in view of the provisions of Chapter X of the Assam Land & Revenue
         Regulation?
         3. Whether the learned District Judge was justified in excluding Ext. Ka, the annual
         patta, from consideration?”
8.       This second appeal was taken up for hearing and vide judgment dated 28.02.2007
the same was allowed by this Court by deciding the substantial question of law No.1 in
favour of the defendant/appellant but without giving any decision in the other substantial
questions of law. Being aggrieved by the said judgment dated 28.02.2007 the present
plaintiffs/respondents preferred Civil Appeal No.1933/2020 arising out of SLP(C) No.14657 of
2007. The Hon’ble Apex Court vide order dated 22.02.2010 set aside the judgment dated
28.02.2007 passed by this Court and remanded the same for deciding it afresh including all
the questions of law. Thereafter on 10.11.2016 an additional substantial question of law was
formulated as follows:
         “1. Whether the proof of title of the vendor over the suit land is a sine-qua-non for
         the plaintiff to succeed in a suit for declaration of the title over the suit land?”
9.       Mr. Yadav, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant submits that both
the learned Courts below failed to consider the pleadings of the appellant/defendant wherein
it was specifically pleaded that the vendor of the plaintiffs/respondents had no right, title and
interest over the suit land to sell the same to the plaintiffs/respondents. The exhibit-1, the
Registered Sale Deed No.431 executed on 23.01.1974 bears no specific Dag No and Patta No
to   the effect     of Dag     No.123 of PP         No.73/74 pleaded       in the plaint      by the
plaintiffs/respondents. Moreover, the schedule of the plaint showing the suit land refers to
land covered by KP Patta No.9 consisting of Dag No.161. It is also submitted that there is
cogent evidence on record to show that Smt. Konwar Gaurani was not the owner with
respect to either the suit land described in the plaint or the land purportedly shown to be
covered by Patta No.73-74 and Dag No.123 and under such circumstances and that too on
the specific pleading of the defendant/appellant, a duty was cast upon both the courts below
RSA 6 of 2003

                                              Page No.5
to give a declaration to the effect with respect to the saleable title of the vendor of the
plaintiffs/respondents so far the suit land is concerned. Mr. Yadav also pointed out that the
plaintiffs/respondents in addition to the exhibit-1, sale deed, also relied exhibit-3 a draft
patta showing patta No.4 and the Dag No.123(old) /119 (new) covering the land so
purchased by way of exhibit-1. The said exhibit-3 however, does not tally with the suit land,
described in the plaint which has been specifically mentioned to be the land covered by KP
Patta No.9 and Dag No.161. The materials placed on record by the plaintiffs/respondents are
subsequent to the execution of exhibit-1 but no material had been placed on record to show
that Smt. Konwar Gaurani was the owner with respect to the land which is the subject
matter of exhibit-1.
10.      To a specific query by this Court, that the schedule of the land purportedly shown to
be sold to the plaintiffs/respondents vide exhibit-1, consists of the Dag No.123 and an order
purportedly passed on 01.01.1974 thereby converting the land so sold into periodic patta,
Mr. Yadav submits that there is no proof to show on record that the land so sold vide
exhibit-1 and owned by the vendor was converted to periodic patta. On the other hand, the
defendant/appellant has submitted in the pleadings on the strength of exhibit-ka, the annual
patta No.23 covering land more than the suit land and had been able to show that they
possessed the same. It is also submitted that after purchase of the suit land by the
plaintiffs/respondents vide exhibit-1, dispute arose between the parties to the suit with
regard to possession for which there were proceedings under Section 145 Cr.P.C. The said
dispute clearly shows that the vendor of the plaintiffs/respondents have no title over the suit
land and without such title the same being sold to the plaintiffs/respondents and the
subsequent     move to possess the same led             to the said dispute between the
plaintiffs/respondents and the defendant/appellant. Under such circumstances, none
RSA 6 of 2003

                                              Page No.6
determination of the ownership of the vendor of the plaintiffs/respondents with regard to the
suit land had vitiated the findings of the learned court below.
11.      Mr. Yadav referring to the decision of Union of India and others Vs. Vasavi
cooperative Housing Society Limited and Others reported in (2014) 2 SCC 269 submits that
the plaintiffs have to show all the entries in the record of rights that the plaintiff’s
predecessor had title over the property in question and it is that property which they have
purchased. Referring to the present case in hand, Mr. Yadav submits that the
plaintiffs/respondents except relying exhibit-1, they failed to show the title of the vendor,
Smt. Konwar Gaurani over the land they have purchased. On the other hand, the
defendant/appellant had exhibited exhibit-Ka i.e. the annual patta No.23 showing land
measuring 26B 3K’s in Dag No.48 and 13 B 2K 2L in Dag No.62. Both the courts below never
discussed with respect to the said exhibit-Ka on the grounds that the same could not be
properly read. It is also argued that on being pointed out by this Court, that from the
schedule of the land described in exhibit-1, it is clear that the Dag number is specified as 123
and the said land covered under the said dag was made periodic patta land in the conversion
Case No. 304/73-74 vide order dated 01.01.1974, Mr. Yadav submits that mere quotation of
the said case number along with date of the order is not sufficient to show that the vendor
had right, title and interest over the land so sold. In fact, a duty was cast upon the
plaintiffs/respondents to produce the said order passed in the said Conversion Case. Having
not done so, Mr. Yadav submits that the title of the vendor i.e. Smt. Konwar Gaurani has not
been proved. So it is submitted that the second appeal is liable to be allowed by answering
the questions of law in favour of the appellant. It is pertinent to mention here that Mr. Yadav
submits that he does not want to press the substantial question of law No.2 as the
plaintiff/respondent No.2 has shown that he belongs to the notified class of tribes which is
supported by the certificate issued by the competent authority.
RSA 6 of 2003

                                             Page No.7
12.      Mr.   Kaushik,  the   learned  counsel     for the  respondents   submits     that the
defendant/appellant had failed to show that Konwar Gaurani was not the owner of the suit
land so purchased by the plaintiffs/respondents. It is sufficiently shown in exhibit-1,
registered sale deed, the manner in which the vendor of the plaintiff/respondent No.1 had
acquired title over the land so sold, which is the suit land and there requires no further
evidence to that effect. By producing the said exhibit-1 and the relevant order passed in the
Conversion Case must be presumed to be correct until and unless the defendant/appellant
disproves the said contention made in the sale deed so far the order passed in Conversion
Case number is concerned. In addition to that the DW-4 in his cross-examination deposed
that the plaintiff/respondent No.1 purchased land from Konwar Gaurani about 20/25years
back and the said vendor was possessing almost 18 B’s of land. It is also further stated that
in between the land and the suit land, houses of Rajani Das, Bitan Singh and Kauari Kisan is
situated. Under such circumstances, the further title of the vendor of the plaintiff/respondent
No.1 is not required. In order to support his submission, he relies Amiya Bala Dutta Vs Mukut
Adhikari and Others reported in 1998(4) GLT 137 and submits that that mutation entries
must not be the basis of title yet this mutation entries cannot be brushed aside but receive
due consideration at the hand of the Court. He also submits that on the basis of the said
exhibit-1, subsequently exhibit-3, kachha patta No.4 showing Dag No.123 was issued in
favour of the predecessor and such issuance of the said exhibit-3 itself can be presumed that
the title derived by the predecessor is from the one of the vendor i.e. Konwar Gaurani. Thus,
he submits that there is no merit in this second appeal.
13.      Considered the submissions of the learned counsel. Perused the case record and the
evidence. From the pleadings of the parties it is observed that there is specific denial of
right, title and interest of the vendor of the plaintiff/respondent No.1, who along with his
brother claimed the suit land. The PW-1, Md. Hamid Ali, the deed writer of exhibit-1 in his
RSA 6 of 2003

                                              Page No.8
cross-examination deposed that at the time of sale of the suit land, the same was not
converted to periodic patta. The PW-2, the plaintiff/respondent No.2 deposed in his cross-
examination that at the time of purchasing the suit land the same was under periodic patta
which he confirmed in the office of Lat Mandal. It is also deposed that the vendor Konwar
Gaurani handed over the relevant papers to the deed writer with respect to the subject
matter of the sale deed. The PW-3, the boundary man Sri Bitan Singh, in his chief deposed
that Narayan Das purchased the said land from its owner Konwar Gaurani. The DW-1, Sri
Rupam Kisan in his chief deposed that his father was the annual patta holder of the said
land. The DW-2 deposed in his cross-examination that the suit land is presently in the name
of Ganesh Kissan. On the other hand, the DW-4 deposed in his cross-examination that
Konwari Kissan possessed 18 B’s of land and the plaintiff purchased the suit land from
Konwari Kissan. From the evidence so deposed, it is noticed that there was no specific
question and/or reply disputing the title of the vendor of the plaintiff/respondent No.1. The
said evidence which is on record is to the subsequent events including issuance of patta in
the name of the plaintiff No.2 after the execution of the exhibit-1, sale deed. From the issues
framed by the trial court it is observed that there is no specific issue with regard to right,
title and interest of Konwar Gaurani i.e. the vendor of the plaintiff/respondent No.1.
Similarly, if exhibit-1, sale deed is considered there is a mention of a specific order passed in
a specific case on 01.01.1974 which purportedly indicates that the said land covered by Dag
No. 123 was converted to periodic patta and exhibit-1 was executed on 23.01.1974. If the
said Dag No.123 is considered, and taken up exhibit-3, the katcha patta where in the patta
number has been shown as land measuring 13B 1K 15L’s under Dag No. 123(old) 119 (new),
it can be concluded that the said order mentioned in the exhibit-1 supports the case of the
plaintiffs/respondents. The submission of Mr. Yadav that without proving that particular
order of conversion of the said land to periodic patta, it cannot be presumed the ownership
RSA 6 of 2003

                                            Page No.9
of Konwar Gaurani. As held by the Apex court in (2014) 2 SCC 269 (supra) a burden is cast
upon the plaintiffs/respondents to prove the title of the vendor in order to show that there
was proper derivation of the title from the vendor to the purchaser over the suit land. From
the trend of the evidence as noticed hereinabove, it seems that none of the parties tried to
lead evidence towards the said aspect of the matter. Accordingly, the substantial questions
of law so formulated including the one which was framed subsequently, on 10.11.2016, are
liable to be decided in favour of the appellant/defendant. However, as no issue was framed
by the courts below to that effect for examining the title of the vendor of the
plaintiff/respondent No.1, this Court accordingly set aside the judgment and decree passed
by the learned court of District Judge, Darang at Mangaldoi upholding the judgment passed
by the trial court and remand the matter to the First Appellate Court to frame necessary
issues and decide the appeal afresh by taking recourse to the provision of Order 41 Rule 25
of the CPC by the said First Appellate Court, if required. The parties to this appeal are
directed to appear before the First Appellate Court on 10.07.2017.
15.      Send back the LCR.
                                                                                  JUDGE
Rakhi
RSA 6 of 2003


