                                       Page No.1
                     IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
   (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                RSA 60 OF 2008
        1. ON THE DEATH OF APPELLANT NO.1,NARESWAR HAZARIKA HIS LEGAL
            HERIS
            1(a) RATAN HAZARIKA
            1(b)CHANDAN KR. HAZARIKA
            1(C)CHANDAN KR. HAZARIKA
            1(d) GUNAMONI HAZARIKA
        2. UTTAM HAZARIKA
        3. DILIP HAZARIKA
        4. PRADIP HAZARIKA,
        ALL SONS OF LATE DADHI HAZARIKA,
        OF VILL. BARKHETRI BARNI,
        MOUZA-PAKOWA, PS. BELSOR
                                                       - Appellants
                            Versus-
1. ON THE DEATH OF RESPONDENT NO.1, JOGESH HAZARIKA HIS LEGAL HERIS
1(a) SMTI.ANU HAZARIKA
1(b) ABHIJIT HAZARIKA
1(c)JAHNABI HAZARIKA
1(d) BHASKARJIT HAZARIKA
1(e) PURABI HAZARIKA
2. ANANTA HAZARIKA
3.SARBESWAR HAZARIKA
ALL SONS OF LATE PRITHU HAZARIKA,
OF VILL. BARKHETRI BARNI,
MOUZA-PAKOWA, PS. BELSOR
                                                  - Respondents
                                      BEFORE
                    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
RSA 60 of 2008

                                             Page No.2
         Advocate for the appellants Ms. S Sarma
         Advocate for the respondent Mr. A M Borbhuiya
         Date of hearing and Judgment 8th June, 2017
                                 JUDGMENT AND ORDER
                                           (Oral)
         Heard Ms. S Sarma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants. Also
heard Mr. A M Borbhuiya, learned counsel representing the respondents.
2.       The present appellants are the defendants in Title Suit No.30/1999 passed by the
learned Civil Judge (Jr. Division) No.1, Nalbari. The plaintiffs/respondents preferred the suit
for declaration of their right, title and interest over the B-Schedule land described in the
plaint. Originally the land described in Schedule-A of the plaint was the paternal property of
the fathers of both the parties to the suit. The land described in Schedule-B which is the suit
land curved out of the land mentioned in the Schedule-A, which is the share of the
plaintiffs/respondents. After the death of the father of the plaintiffs/respondents, they used
to live jointly with the father of the defendants/appellants for some years. During the said
period plaintiff/respondent No.2 cultivated the land jointly. Subsequently, owing to
inconvenience it was requested to the defendants/appellants to partition the Schedule-A land
amicably between them on 15.01.1999. The plaintiffs/respondents tried to make partition of
the land but the defendants/appellants denied to give the share as described in the
Schedule-B of the plaint. However, the defendants/appellants ploughed over the entire
Schedule-A land on the plea that they if required, they would deliver the share of the crops.
Accordingly, the suit has been filed with the prayers referred hereinabove.
3.       The defendants/appellants No.1 and 2 contested the suit by filing written statement.
Amongst various defences, a plea was taken that the suit was barred by limitation and also
denied that the Schedule-B belonged to the plaintiffs/respondents. It is the defence raised
by the defendants/appellants that their father and the father of the plaintiffs/respondents
RSA 60 of 2008

                                                 Page No.3
divided the Schedule-A land by way of partition in the year 1967. Denying the jointness of
the families of the parties to the suit and also joint cultivation over the suit land, it is the plea
taken by the defendants/appellants that they were in continuous possession and cultivating
the suit land since 1967 after the partition, so there is no question of further partition. The
father of the defendants/appellants after the partition in the year 1967 continued possessing
the suit land and had acquired title over the suit land by right of adverse possession and the
same title devolved upon the defendants/respondents after the death of their father Dadhi
Hazarika. Accordingly, the plaintiffs/respondents have no right, title and interest and
possession over the suit land. It is also pleaded that on the request of the
plaintiff/respondent    No.1,    Jogesh     Hazarika       (substituted by his  legal   heirs),   the
defendant/appellant No.1 gave away 2K 17L’s of land to the local High School to enable the
wife of Jogesh Hazarika to get appointment in the said school. Thus, pleading that the suit
has been filed on misleading statements, the defendants/appellants prayed for dismissal of
the suit.
4.       The learned trial court on the basis of the pleadings framed the following issues:
         “1. Whether there is cause of action for the suit?
         2. Whether the suit is maintainable in its present form?
         3. Whether the suit is barred by limitation?
         4. Whether proper court fees have been paid?
         5. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder and mis-joinder of necessary parties?
         6. Whether the plaintiffs have got, right, title and interest over the suit land?
         7. Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to get khas possession over the suit land?
         8. To what relief/reliefs plaintiffs are entitled?”
5.       The trial court after hearing the parties and on the basis of the materials available on
record dismissed the suit of the plaintiffs/respondents. In the first appeal, preferred by the
plaintiffs/respondents the same was remanded back whereafter an additional issue was
framed and the same is reproduced below:
         “1(a) Whether the defendants have been possessing the suit land adversely?”
RSA 60 of 2008

                                              Page No.4
6.       After the remand, no fresh witnesses were adduced even after framing of the
additional issue. The learned trial court there after decided issue Nos. 1,2,3,4 and 5 in favour
of the plaintiffs/respondents. However, issue Nos. 6 and 7 along with the additional issue
No.1(a) were decided in favour of the defendants/appellants. Accordingly, the suit was
dismissed. Being aggrieved, the plaintiffs/respondents preferred Title Appeal No.2/2007 in
the court of learned Civil Judge (Junior Division) No.2, Nalbari. The said appellate court
taking up the issue Nos. 6 and 1(a) allowed the appeal thereby decreeing the suit of the
plaintiffs/respondents.
7.          Challenging the said judgment and decree of the First Appellate Court, dated
14.09.2007 passed by the learned Civil Judge (Junior Division), Nalbari in Title Appeal
No.2/2007, the present second appeal has been preferred which was admitted on
26.05.2008 on the following substantial questions of law:
         “Whether the learned Courts below were right in decreeing the right, title and
         interest and recovery of possession of the suit land, even though it has been held
         that there was partition between the plaintiffs and the defendants, without recording
         any finding as to whether the suit land falling to the share of the plaintiff?”
8.       Ms. Sarma submits that the claim of the plaintiffs/respondents cannot be considered
inasmuch as the oral partition took place way back in the year 1967 and thereafter the said
oral partition was acted upon by both the parties to the suit. Relying exhibits-Ka and Kha,
Ms. Sarma submits, it is a fact that there was a partition and the same was acted upon by
the parties which is very much apparent from the said two exhibits. Exhibit-Ka is a registered
sale deed by way of which the plaintiffs/respondents have sold land on their own. Similarly,
exhibit-Kha is gift deed by way of which the defendants/appellants had gifted a portion of
the land out of their share to the local High School in order to get an appointment by the
wife of the plaintiffs/respondent No.1. It is also submitted that the land claimed by the
plaintiffs/respondents was under the possession of the defendants/appellants since the
partition took place, way back in the year 1967 which cannot be claimed back owing to the
RSA 60 of 2008

                                             Page No.5
long possession maintained by the defendants/appellants. Accordingly, Ms. Sarma submits
that the findings of the learned First Appellate Court have no basis and the same needs
interference.
9.      Mr. Borbhuiyan, submits that the plea of adverse possession taken by the
defendants/appellants is not applicable inasmuch as, the requisite ingredients for such
adverse possession have not at all been pleaded. Not only that, they never even raised the
same in their evidence. However, they have admitted that there was a partition way back in
the year 1967 and on the basis of the said partition the defendants/appellants had all along
been maintaining the possession over the Schedule-B land described in the plaint. The plea
of adverse possession itself goes to show that the said Schedule-B land fell in the share of
the plaintiffs/respondents and there is no dispute to that effect. Accordingly, the First
Appellate Court has correctly passed the judgment thereby decreeing the suit in favour of
the plaintiffs/respondents.
10.     Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels. The learned trial Court
while discussing issue No.6, relied heavily on the oral evidence led by the plaintiff’s side. The
learned trial Court on the basis of the evidence of PW-1 came to the finding that there was
an admission on his part with regard to the partition between his father and the father of the
defendants/appellants. In order to hold that there was a partition, the learned trial court
gave much weight in exhibit-Ka which is a certified copy of sale deed whereby the father of
the plaintiffs/respondents sold land measuring 2B 3K 10L to one Nabin Ch. Talukdar.
Similarly, it also took note of exhibit-Kha by way of which, the brother of the DW-
1(defendant No.1) gifted 2K 17L’s of land in favour of the local High School. The plaintiff side
failed to rebut the said evidence whereby the fact of partition was held to be established.
11.     In order to decide the fact of possession, the learned trial Court relied the evidence
of one Abed Ali, DW-2, who deposed that the total land measuring 5B 2K under patta
RSA 60 of 2008

                                              Page No.6
No.423 had all along been cultivated by him as an Adhiar under the defendants/appellants.
The learned trial court disbelieved the evidence of PW-2, Sohrab Ali, who deposed that after
the death of Dadhi Hazarika and Prithu Hazarika, the plaintiffs and defendants lived together
and the plaintiff No.2 used to cultivate the land held jointly by them. Accordingly, the learned
trial court decided the issue No.6 against the plaintiffs/respondents by holding the
possession in favour of the defendants/appellants.
12.      While discussing issue No.1(a), the learned trial court bringing reference of the
discussions made in issue No.6 held that there was partition between Prithu Hazarika and
Dadhi Hazarika and drawing further references, that the father of the plaintiffs/respondents
died 30 years back and considering the year of death of the father of the
plaintiffs/respondents in 1964, it was held that the defendants/appellants were possessing
and cultivating the suit land till date without any concealment. Further, taking into
consideration, the evidence of DW-2 that he was cultivating over the total land measuring 5B
2K of Dag No.423, the learned court below came to the conclusion that the
defendants/appellants have been possessing the suit land adversely. On the basis of the said
two findings, the learned trial court dismissed the suit of the plaintiffs/respondents.
13.      The learned First Appellate Court came to the findings that Prithu Hazarika and Dadhi
Hazarika, the predecessor in interest of the parties to the suit, owned A-Schedule land
measuring 5B 2K of land of patta No.359 and bringing into reference, the admission made in
the written statement by the defendants/appellants that there was a partition in the year
1967 and they are enjoying the separate shares independently, took note of the relief
claimed by the plaintiffs/respondents to the extent of Schedule-B land. It was also
considered that DW-1 deposed that there was a partition in the year 1967 and his father was
possessing the suit land since 1967 and on his death in the year 1983, the
defendants/appellants are possessing the said B-Schedule land. Further, considering the
RSA 60 of 2008

                                               Page No.7
evidence of PW-1 to the effect that there was partition between Prithu Hazarika and Dadhi
Hazarika by drawing reference of the sale transaction by way of exhibit-Kha held that there
took a partition between the fathers of the parties to the suit. However, the contention of
the defendants/appellants with regard to adverse possession was disbelieved by drawing
reference to Section 44 of the Transfer of Property Act and rightly, drawing the conclusion
that a possession of a co-sharer amounts to possession of the other co-sharer who are not
possessing the land and such possession cannot constitute adverse possession unless there
is total ouster of the co-sharer. Finally, the First Appellate Court concluded that the
plaintiffs/respondents are entitled to the reliefs including recovery of possession by holding
that the defendants/appellants have not acquired any right over the suit land by way of
adverse possession and decreed the suit in favour of plaintiffs/respondents.
14.      From the aforesaid findings of both the courts below, it can be concluded that there
was a partition in the year 1967 and thereafter on the basis of the said partition the
defendants/appellants maintained their possession over the suit land. But once the
defendants/appellants have taken the plea of adverse possession, it can safely be held that
the said Schedule-B land fell in the share of the father of the plaintiffs/respondents. The plea
of adverse possession which the defendants/appellants had taken had failed to substantiate
the    total   ouster of   the    plaintiffs/respondents   from   the     Schedule-B   land.  In
Nagabhushanammal Vs. Chandikeswaralingam reported in (2016) 4 SCC 434 it was held
that “Ouster” does not mean only driving out of the co-sharer from the property. It will,
however, not be completed unless it is coupled with all other ingredients required to
constitute adverse possession. Broadly speaking, three elements are necessary for
establishing the ouster of a co-owner, they are (1) declaration of hostile animus, (2) long
and uninterrupted possession of the person pleading ouster and (3) exercise of right of
exclusive ownership openly and to the knowledge of the other co-owner.
RSA 60 of 2008

                                             Page No.8
15.      On a thorough scrutiny of the evidence led by the defendants/appellants it is very
much apparent that they failed to prove the requisite ingredients to form total ouster of the
plaintiffs/respondents from the Schedule-B land. In such a situation, the learned First
Appellate Court has rightly decreed the suit of the plaintiff/respondents.
16.      By way of taking the plea of adverse possession by the defendants/appellants, they
have admitted the right, title and interest of the plaintiffs/respondents. That presumption
follows on the basis of the depositions of the parties to the suit with respect to the partition
which was affected between the predecessor-in-interest of the parties to the suit, whereby
both the parties admitted the partition. Under such circumstances, where there is no denial
with regard to the share as specified and shown in the plaint, it need not be recorded that
the suit land fell in the share of the plaintiffs/respondents. Accordingly, the substantial
question of law is decided in the affirmative.
17.      This Second appeal fails and the same is dismissed without cost. The judgment and
decree of the First Appellate Court is upheld.
18.      Send back the LCR.
                                                                                     JUDGE
Rakhi
RSA 60 of 2008


