                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
         (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                       Case No:        RSA 71/2017
                   On the death of Thuleswar Das his legal heirs -
                   Md. Jamaluddin Ahmed                      ……      Appellant
                                      -Versus-
                   State of Assam and others                 ..... Respondents
                                   :: BEFORE ::
            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
               For the Appellant              :      Ms. SG Baruah
                                                             Advocate
               For the Respondents            :      Ms. S Konwar
                                                             Standing Counsel
                                                             (Elementary Education)
               Date of Hearing                :      19.07.2017
               Date of delivery of
               Judgment and Order             :      19.07.2017
                   JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
        Heard Ms. SG Baruah, learned counsel for the appellant and Ms. S
Konwar, the learned Standing Counsel for Elementary Education.
2.      The present plaintiff/ appellant preferred Title Suit No. 30/2012 for
declaration and injunction against the defendants/ respondents. It is with respect
to a declaration sought for by the plaintiff/ appellant that the Teteliguri M.E.
School 65/68 No. Grant is the only recognised and the Government approved
                                                                          Page 1 of 8
RSA 71/2017

school. The facts pleaded in the plaint is that in the year 1985 Teteliguri M.E.
School was established at village Dongibil. The defendant/ respondent No. 6 was
the Headmaster and few other teachers were appointed in the school. After
establishment of the school, the government i.e. defendant/ respondent No. 1
granted temporary permission to run the school by putting certain criteria with
regard to appointment of the headmaster. The plaintiff/ appellant was appointed
in place of the defendant/ respondent No. 6 who was the senior most founder
teacher of the school. The said school was established in the compound of 449,
Solmari L.P. School and since then the school had been running till 2004. Due to
flood, the same was shifted to Teteliguri Idgah for 2 (two) years. Thereafter, the
school was again shifted to the land of Najibur Rahman in the month of
February, 2009. The school thereafter was finally established in the 65/68 No.
Grant village covered by Dag No. 200, Periodic Patta No. 3. The said school has
been receiving financial assistance from Assam Sarba Siksha through Assam
Gramin Vikas Bank. The defendant/ respondent No. 4 on 13.08.2010 submitted
one report showing that in addition to the school of the plaintiff/ appellant there
was another breakaway school. The plaintiff/ appellant was appointed as the
headmaster of the said school on 15.12.2009. The defendant/ respondent No. 6
in collusion with the defendants/ respondents No. 3 and 4 tried to divert the
financial assistance given to the plaintiff/ appellant school to the newly
established breakaway school. On the basis of a writ petition a direction was
given to enquire the matter by the defendant/ respondent No. 2 who reported
that both the schools were running without fulfilling the norms for providing
financial assistance and as such, no financial assistance could be given to the
                                                                         Page 2 of 8
RSA 71/2017

said schools. However, a financial assistance was released to the school in which
defendant/ respondent No. 6 was working as the headmaster. It is the fact
pleaded further in the plaint that the defendant/ respondent No. 6 was serving
the school of the plaintiff/ appellant till the year 2004 whereafter the defendant/
respondent No. 6 started a new school in the name of Teteliguri M.E. School
along with some other teachers and constituted a committee headed by
defendant/ respondent No. 6. On 27.03.2010, the defendant/ respondent No. 6
and other teachers agreed to continue their services in the school in which the
plaintiff/ appellant was working i.e. the school standing on the land covered
under Grant No. 65/68. However, the defendant/ respondent No. 6 and other
teachers failed to join and accordingly, running the breakaway school and
refused to return the register and documents taken by the defendant/
respondent No. 6. Accordingly, the dispute was agitated before the Gauhati High
Court vide Writ Petition (C) No. 522/2012 by the plaintiff/ appellant and the High
Court directed the parties to establish their right in a regularly instituted civil suit.
Accordingly, the suit has been filed for a declaration that the plaintiff/ appellant
school be declared as original and entitled to get financial benefits payable to the
school with a further prayer of permanent injunction.
3.       The defendants/ respondents No. 5 and 6 contested the suit by filing
written statement. It is stated in the written statement that the Teteliguri M.E.
School at Dongibil was established in the year 1986 and the appointment of the
plaintiff/ appellant approved provisionally by the authority. The said order of
appointment of plaintiff/ appellant was directed to be cancelled vide order dated
24.07.2008. Thereafter, the Managing Committee of the Teteliguri M.E. School
                                                                             Page 3 of 8
RSA 71/2017

appointed the defendant/ respondent No. 6 as the headmaster of the said
school. The same was provisionally approved by the defendant/ respondent No.
4. On 30.08.2008, the defendant/ respondent No. 4 cancelled the appointment of
the plaintiff/ appellant and appointed one Hemaprabha Gogoi, the senior most
Assistant Teacher as the Headmaster of the school and a public meeting was also
called for. The said meeting was held on 15.11.2008 and the School Managing
Committee (for short, ‘SMC’) appointed the defendant/ respondent No. 6 as the
Headmaster of the school on 04.01.2009. On 30.08.2008, the plaintiff/ appellant
stopped coming to the school and established another school by the same name
as Teteliguri M.E. School and as such, it is claimed that the school of the
defendant/ respondent No. 6 is not a breakaway school, inasmuch as, the said
school along with 12 others schools were allowed financial assistance by the
Government of Assam. There is no school in the Grant No. 65/68. The
defendant/ respondent No. 6 and other teachers discussed for unification of the
school but never consented to join in the school of the plaintiff/ appellant. The
DISE Code is in the name of the school of the defendant/ respondent NO. 6 and
financial assistance were also received by the said school since the year 2007-08.
It is submitted that the school of the defendant/ respondent No. 6 is the original
recognised and approved school and the defendant/ respondent No. 6 sought for
a counter claim to decree for declaration that Teteliguri M.E. School is entitled to
receive the financial assistance from the Government of Assam. The defendant/
respondent No. 3 filed the written statement on behalf of the rest of the
defendants/ respondents and pleaded that the school where the plaintiff/
appellant is working as headmaster is a newly established school i.e. 65/68 No.
                                                                         Page 4 of 8
RSA 71/2017

Grant at Dongibil. The SMC of the newly established Teteliguri M.E. School 65/68
No. Grant has no approval by the Government. The appointment of the plaintiff/
appellant as Headmaster of the earlier school was challenged by the defendant/
respondent No. 6 and the High Court cancelled the order dated 28.11.2005 and
allowed the SMC to take decision. Thereafter, the original school Teteliguri M.E.
School was split into two schools. One is standing on the land covered by patta
No. 15 and 26 under defendant/ respondent No. 6 and the other one shifted to
the land covered by Dag No. 52 of 65/68 No. Grant and headed by the plaintiff/
appellant. As per the record, the defendant/ respondent No. 6 and other teachers
are the founder teachers of the original Teteliguri M.E. School. The SMC of the
plaintiff/ appellant school has not been approved by the authority. It is further
submitted that the Teteliguri M.E. School under defendant/ respondent No. 6 is
the original school.
4.       On the basis of the pleadings, the following issues were framed by the
learned trial court:-
             1. Whether there is cause of action in the suit?
             2. Whether or not the suit is bad for necessary party?
             3. Whether or not, Teteliguri M.E. School situated at 65/68 No. grant was
                established in 1986 approved and recognised by the Government/
                defendant No. 1?
             4. Whether or not, Teteliguri M.E. School situated at Dangibil run under
                defendant No. –5 & 6 was established in 1986 approved and recognised
                by the Government/ defendant No. 1?
             5. Whether or not the plaintiff/ head master and SMC of the school 65/68
                No – Grant has locus standi right to file the suit?
             6. Whether or not the plaintiff is entitled to the decree and/ or relief as
                prayed for?
             7. Whether the Teteliguri M.E. School of 65/68 no. Grant is break away or
                Dongibil is break away of the original school?
             8. Whether or not the defendant No-5 & 6 are entitled to the decree and/ or
                reliefs as they prayed for in the counter claim?
             9. To what other relief/ reliefs the parties are entitled?
                                                                              Page 5 of 8
RSA 71/2017

5.       The parties to the suit adduced evidence and on the basis of the said
evidence and the documents exhibited, the learned trial court dismissed the suit
and decreed the counter claim of the defendant/ respondent No. 6.
6.       The plaintiff/ appellant filed Title Appeal No. 23/2015 on 28.09.2015
thereby challenging the judgment and decree passed by the learned Munsiff No.
2, Lakhimpur in Title Suit No. 30/2012 in the court of learned Civil Judge,
Lakhimpur, North Lakhimpur. The said first appellate court vide judgment and
decree dated 07.10.2016 dismissed the said title appeal No. 23/2015.
7.       Being aggrieved, the plaintiff/ appellant has preferred this second appeal
challenging the judgment and decree passed in title appeal No. 23/2015. The
said second appeal is taken up for hearing under Order XLI Rule 11 of the Code
of Civil Procedure (CPC).
8.       Considered the submissions of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the appellant. The first appellate court upheld the findings arrived at by the trial
court in all issues. While deciding issues No. 3 and 5, the courts below came to
the finding that the plaintiff/ appellant in his evidence as PW 1 admitted that his
appointment to Teteliguri M.E. School was cancelled by the District Elementary
Education Officer (DEEO). He was not reappointed thereafter. He admitted that
after cancellation of his appointment, he has not filed any appeal against it. From
the Exhibit-6, the appointment letter of plaintiff/ appellant, he admitted that he
joined the school on 27.03.1995 in which school the defendant/ respondent No.
6 along with other teachers were also working. He deposed that till 2008 both
the schools were joined. In the DISE Code, the name of the Teteliguri M.E.
                                                                          Page 6 of 8
RSA 71/2017

School is standing. The rest of the witnesses of the plaintiff side supported the
case/ defence raised by the respondents in the written statement.
9.       PW 3, one Bhimbahadur Ray admitted the defendant/ respondent No. 6
was the Headmaster of the Teteliguri M.E. School in the year 1985-86. He stated
that there are two schools as of now and the names of the schools are Teteliguri
M.E. School and Teteliguri 65/68 No. Grant M.E. School. The latter school was
established by the plaintiff/ appellant. He stated that in the year 1986 the name
of the school was Teteliguri M.E. School and at that relevant point of time “65/68
No. Grant” was not there in the name of the school.
10.     PW 4, Md. Saruddin Ahmed, deposed that Teteliguri M.E. School was
established in the year 1986 near 449, Solmari L.P. School. He further deposed
that in the year 2010, a public meeting was held to unite both the schools but
ended without solution. The proceeding register of SMC of Teteliguri M.E. School
was exhibited as Exhibit-A and nowhere in the said proceeding register, the
name of the school has been shown as Teteliguri 65/68 No. Grant M.E. School.
The said name was introduced from the year 2009. He supported the fact that in
the year 2009, the financial aid was granted to Teteliguri M.E. School.
11.     Finally, after discussing the various evidence on record, the said two
issues were decided against the plaintiff/ appellant. Thereafter taking up the
issue No. 4, the courts below took up the admitted facts from the evidence of the
witnesses of both the parties and held that as the plaintiff/ appellant failed to
show any papers relating to his reappointment as the Headmaster of the
Teteliguri M.E. School and without examining any official witness to that effect, it
was concluded that the defendant/ respondent No. 6 was the founder
                                                                         Page 7 of 8
RSA 71/2017

Headmaster of the Teteliguri M.E. School and he has been involved with the
institution from the beginning and all the witnesses stated that the said
defendant/ respondent No. 6 has been serving in the Teteliguri M.E. School. As
such, the Teteliguri M.E. School situated at Dongibil under defendants/
respondents No. 5 and 6 was established in the year 1986 and approved and
recognised by the Government of Assam i.e. defendant/ respondent No. 1.
Accordingly, both the courts below granted the relief in favour of the counter
claim.
12.      From the discussions made herein above, it transpires that the dispute in
the suit is totally based on documentary piece of evidence. Such documents are
already on record and if the contents of the said documents are taken together
with the oral piece of evidence, it clearly goes to show that both the courts below
have rightly decided the issues involved and there is no dispute in that regard.
To the submission of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant
that the plaintiff/ appellant be permitted to adduce further evidence, the same
cannot be granted, inasmuch as, this court finds that there are no such ground
within the parameters of Order XLI Rule 27 of the CPC to allow the plaintiff/
appellant to adduce further additional evidence relevant to the issues involved in
the suit. Accordingly, this appeal stands dismissed at the stage of admission.
13.      The second appeal is, accordingly, disposed of.
                                                                          JUDGE
BiswaS
                                                                          Page 8 of 8
RSA 71/2017


