                                   1
                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
     (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM &
                      ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                          PRINCIPAL SEAT
                         RSA No. 95/ 2017
Musstt. Khatemon Nessa & Ors
                                          ………. Appellants/Defendants
                                  -VERSUS -
Musstt. Maleka Khatoon & Ors.
                                          …..….… Respondents/ Plaintiffs
Advocate for the appellants:              Mr. A Sharif.
                                                  ……. Advocate.
Advocate for the Respondents              Mr. AJ Sarma,
                                              ………... Advocate.
                            -BEFOR E–
         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
               Date of hearing                  : 26.07.2017
               Date of judgment & order         : 26.07.2017
                    JUDGMENT & ORDER (Oral)
       Heard Mr. A. Sharif, learned counsel, appearing for the
appellants/ defendants and Mr. AJ Sarma, learned counsel, appearing
on behalf of the respondents/ plaintiffs.

                                    2
2]             This second appeal involves the dispute raised by the
plaintiffs/ respondents against the defendants/ appellants. The
plaintiffs/ respondents plead that the land measuring 3 Bighas 2
Kathas 3 Lechas covered by the Periodic Patta Nos. 74 of Dag Nos. 49/
48/ 59 of 1930-31 settlement and Periodic Patta No. 154 of Dag No. 96
of 1968-69 settlement of Lorimukh Kissam, Laokhowa Mouza in the
District Nagaon, Assam, described in schedule ‘ka’ to the plaint is the
subject matter of the suit.
3]             The predecessor-in-interest of the plaintiffs/ respondents
purchased 1 Bigha of land vide registered sale deed No. 4192 dated
16.5.1956 from one Alimuddin, the predecessor-in-interest of the
defendants/ appellants. The said predecessor-in-interest of the
plaintiffs/ respondents purchased the remaining portion of the land
measuring 3 Bighas 4 Kathas from its original owner and possessor,
vide registered sale deed No. 1154 dated 11.3.1967, sale deed No.
109 dated 6.1.1964 and sale deed No. 643, dated 21.1.1969. After his
purchase, he maintained his possession. On the death of Yakub Ali, the
said land devolved on the plaintiffs/ respondents. Out of the total 3
Bighas 4 kathas of land, 1 Kathas 17 lechas of land is not within the
purview of the suit. The defendants/ appellants possessed a house
over the suit land as a permissive occupier. The defendants/ appellants

                                     3
subsequently constructed Tin Chali house in the year 2001 and on
protest made by the plaintiffs/ respondents, they denied the right, title
and interest of the plaintiffs/ respondents with respect to the suit land
measuring 2 Kathas. Accordingly, the respondents/ plaintiffs filed the
suit praying for declaration of right, title and interest over the suit land
measuring 3 Bighas 4 katha for recovery of khash possession and
confirmation of the possession and recovery of the suit land measuring
2 katha described in schedule “Ga” and confirmation of the possession
in the rest part of the land.
4]            The defendants/ appellants filed written statement
denying the execution of the sale deed by the predecessor-in-interest
of the defendants/ appellants,         Alimiuddin and also denied the
execution of the sale deed by the other vendors of the predecessor-in-
interest of the plaintiffs/ respondents. On the basis of the pleadings
following issues were framed:-
       (1) Whether there is any cause of action for filing the suit?
       (2) Whether the suit is barred by Limitation and adverse
       possession?
       (3) Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties?
       (4) Whether the suit is barred by Section 154 of the Assam Land
       Revenue Regulation?

                                     4
       (5) Whether the suit is barred by the principle of waiver,
       estoppel and acquiescence?
       (6) Whether the defendants have been possessing the suit land
       as a licensee as alleged?
       (7) Whether the plaintiff has any right, title and interest over the
       suit land?
       (8) Whether the suit is barred by adverse possession?
       (9) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to any relief? If so, what?
5]             The learned trial court decreed the suit by holding that
the plaintiffs/ respondents proved their case including the title over the
suit land.    On the other hand, the defendants/ appellants failed to
prove their defence. In addition to that there was a specific admission
on the part of the DW 1 that they had no possession over the land
covered by Suit Patta i.e. Periodic Patta No. 154 and Dag No. 96.
6]             Being aggrieved, the defendants/ appellants preferred
T.A. No. 2/2010 challenging the judgment and decree dated 27.1.2010
passed by the leaned trial court in T.S. 82/2002. The learned first
appellate court, vide judgment and decree dated 30.06.2015 decreed
the appeal. The first appellate court discussed the findings of the trial
court and, in addition to that also, discussed the evidence on record of
DW 1, Alimuddin. The first appellate court came to the findings that
the defendants/ appellants executed four sale deeds, but the same

                                     5
relates to the original Patta No. 74 out of which suit Patta No. 154, Dag
No. 96 has been carved out consisting the suit land. The first appellate
court also took note of the admission on the part of the DW 1,
Alimuddin wherein he has specifically made his deposition in his cross-
examination that he has no possession and title over the suit patta i.e.
Patta No. 154. Discussing the aforesaid evidence on record, the
learned first appellate court up held the findings of the learned court.
7]             Challenging the said judgment and decree of the first
appellate court, Mr. Sharif, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the
defendants/ appellants submits that the findings arrived at by both the
courts below are wrong. It is submitted by the learned counsel that as
the original patta bearing No. 74 covered land measuring 26 Bighas
under various dag numbers and the suit patta which was subsequently
carved out covering the suit land measuring 3 Bighas 4 Kathas. Further
the land being included in the said patta bearing No. 154, the court
below ought to have considered the deeds executed in favour of the
defendants/ appellants. Having not done so, the findings of both the
courts below is not free from perversity. In support, Mr. Sharif submits
that the second appeal be admitted considering the perversity of the
findings of the court below.

                                      6
8]             Mr. Sarma, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the
respondents/ plaintiffs submits that there is no wrong in the findings of
both the courts below.
9]             Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels.
Perused the findings of both the learned courts below. The first
appellate court came to the findings that the defendant appellant failed
to challenge the sale deeds with respect to land covered by suit patta
No. 154. In addition to that the learned first appellate court also
considered the admission on the part of the DW 1, Alimuddin and
finally upheld the findings of the trial court. The courts below also
considered that the plaintiffs/ respondents discharged their burden
with regard to the title over the suit land. Then discussed as to what
extent the defendants/ appellants were successful in discharging their
onus. The courts below thereafter held that the defendants/
respondents failed to discharge their onus at least by showing their
title over the suit land. In such a situation, considering the title of the
plaintiffs/ respondents, the courts below granted the relief of recovery
of possession in favour of the plaintiffs/ respondents which is the law.
First appellate court had properly discussed the law and upheld the
findings of the trial court. There is no perversity to that effect.

                                    7
10]           Keeping in view the findings of both the courts below this
court finds that no substantial question of law is involved further to be
decided by this Court. Accordingly, this second appeal is dismissed.
11]           This appeal is accordingly dismissed. No costs.
                                                         JUDGE
Eam/


