          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
              Case No:        RSA 94/2006
On the death of Suleiman Ali his legal heirs Ahad Ali & Ors
                                             …… Appellants
                             -Versus-
               Musstt. Safia khatoon and Ors.
                                             ...... Respondents
                           BEFORE ::
  HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
      For the Appellants             : Mr. N. Dhar & Mr. T.U. Laskar
      For the Respondent             : Mr. P.K. Kalita & Mrs. T.Goswami
      Date of Hearing                :       30. 03. 2017
      Date of delivery of
      Judgment and Order             :       ___24.07.2017_________
                 JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
              Heard Mr. N. Dhar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
      the appellants. Also heard Mr. P.K. Kalita, learned counsel
      appearing on behalf of the respondents.
      2.      The appellants before this Court are the defendants in Title
      Suit No. 50/94 which was filed by the plaintiff/respondent in the
      Court of Civil Judge (Jr. Divn.) No. 2, at Nagaon.
                                                                Page 1 of 20

3.        The facts, banking on which the plaintiff/respondent filed
Title Suit No. 50/94, within a short compass is that suit land
measuring 15 bighas 3 Kathas 5 Lechas covered by Dag No.
258,286,187,326 and 327 of 1968-69 settlement situated in
Chankhula under Gurubat Mouza in the District of Nagaon,
originally belonged to Mohiran Nessa, the mother of the
plaintiff/respondent. Mohiran Nessa died on 27.11.1992 leaving
the plaintiff/respondent as her sole legal heir. The mother of the
plaintiff/respondent married one Babar Ali who had also a second
wife and from her side, Alaluddin and Jalaluddin are the sons who
are impleaded in the Title Suit as the principal defendants No. 1 &
2. After the death of the mother of the plaintiff, the suit land
measuring 15 bighas 3 Kathas 5 Lechas referred hereinabove was
looked after by her husband Babar Ali (the father of the plaintiff).
Mohiran Nessa died on 27.11.1992 and in the month of December,
1992, the plaintiff/respondent came to know that the principal
defendant Nos. 1 & 2 got their names mutated over 6 Bighas 2
Kathas 10 Lechas of land. Having the said information, the
plaintiff/respondent through her husband filed an application for
cancellation of the names of the principal defendants No. 1 & 2
and vide order dated 18.01.1993, the Circle Officer, Kampur
cancelled the said names of the principal defendants No. 1 & 2.
Again the said defendants No. 1 & 2 filed two separate Misc.
Cases for mutation of their names and on 31.07.1993, the
plaintiff/respondent came to know that out of 15 Bighas 3 Kathas
                                                         Page 2 of 20

5 Lechas of land (the suit land), the principal defendants No. 1 &
2 in collusion with the Revenue Authority mutated their names to
the extent of 6 Bighas of land in their names on the basis of a
fake registered sale deed bearing No. 2556/81 wherein Mohiran
Nessa had been shown to be the executant.
4.        It is the case of the plaintiff/respondent that her mother
never executed the said sale deed No. 2556/81. It is also pleaded
that the said principal defendants No. 1 & 2 tried to dispossess the
plaintiff/respondent following which a proceeding u/s 145/146 of
the Cr.P.C had to be initiated against the said principal defendants
No. 1 & 2. However in the said proceeding, the possession was
declared in favour of the said defendants No. 1 & 2 and on the
basis of that order the plaintiff/respondent was dispossessed by
force and they are occupying the suit land described in Schedule
‘Ka’ illegally. The sale deed is a fraudulent one and the defendants
including the principal defendants No. 1 & 2 are the trespassers in
respect of Schedule Ka land. Accordingly, the plaintiff/respondent
sought for the reliefs of declaration of her right, title and interest
and possession in respect of Ka Schedule land and the possession
on the ‘Ga’ Schedule land, and for declaration that the sale deed
covering land described in Schedule Ka is a fake, fraudulent one
and injunction restraining the defendants.
5.        The defendants No. 1 & 2 contested the suit filing their
joint written statement and on the other hand, the present
                                                           Page 3 of 20

appellants No. 1 & 2 (who are defendants No. 2 (a) and 6) filed
separate written statement. However none of the defendants
preferred     any   counter  claim  against   the   claim  of   the
plaintiff/respondent. The defence taken by the defendants
including the present appellants are that Mohiran Nessa is not the
owner of the said land. The appellants/defendants are also owners
of the suit land and they have been enjoying their respective
shares by constructing houses thereon. Mohiran Nessa during her
lifetime sold 1 Bigha 2 Katha 10 Lechas of land to the defendants
No. 1 & 2 and the same is being enjoyed by way of right of
purchase. The defendants No. 1 & 2 has in total 7 Bighas 2 katha
10 Lechas land and the remaining land is under the possession of
the maternal uncle of the plaintiff/respondent i.e the present
defendants/appellants No. 1 & 2.
6.       It is the case of the defendants/appellants that the suit
land originally belonged to one Ibrahim Ali, the grandfather of the
plaintiff/respondent, who sold land to Babar Ali, through
registered sale deed. But as the land was covered by annual patta,
the name of Babar Ali had not been mutated in the Revenue
Records. Subsequently, name of Mohiran Nessa was mutated in
the periodic patta. Babar Ali purchased 1 Bigha 2 Katha 10 Lechas
land in the name of Jalaluddin, the defendant No. 2 in the year
1978. Thereafter, the defendant No. 1 & 2 vide registered sale
deed purchased 6 Bighas of land from Mohiran Nessa and took
delivery of possession and since then they have been enjoying the
                                                        Page 4 of 20

suit land. The plaintiff/respondent’s suit is false and baseless for
which the same is liable to be dismissed.
7.       The     present   defendants/appellants   in  their  written
statement pleaded that land measuring 15 Bighas 3 Kathas 5
Lechas belonged to Md. Ibrahim, son of Nandu Sheikh. The land
was settled with Ibrahim Ali in the year 1935-36. Ibrahim along
with two brothers namely Usmat Ali and Rusmat Ali migrated to
Assam in the year 1936. Ibrahim deposited settlement premium to
Colonization Officer in 1935. On 08.10.1948, the Deputy
Commissioner issued khiraj periodic patta to Ibrahim Ali under
patta No. 26 and since then Ibrahim Ali and the present
defendants/appellants have been paying revenue. In 1956-58
periodic patta was again issued in the name of Ibrahim over the
suit   land.    Ibrahim   had   three  heirs  namely    the   present
defendants/appellants and Mohiran Nessa, the mother of the
plaintiff/respondent. After death of Ibrahim, suit land was
inherited by them and the present defendants/appellants got 6
Bighas 10 Lechas land each and Mohiran Nessa 3 Bighas 13
Lechas of land. Mohiran Nessa was married to Babar Ali.
8.       It is the case of the defendants/appellants that after death
of Mohiran Nessa the plaintiff/respondent manipulated revenue
record of the suit land by showing Mohiran Nessa as the daughter
of Nandu Sheikh and accordingly she mutated the suit land in her
name. The defendants/appellants had their residence over the suit
                                                          Page 5 of 20

land since 50 years and both of them are owners with respect to
the 6 Bigha 1 Katha 6 Lechas land each over the suit land and the
remaining 3 Bigha 13 Lechas land is the share of Mohiran Nessa
and as such the plaintiff/respondent is entitled to 3 Bigha 13
Lechas of land as per the Mohamedan Law. Accordingly, the
defendant/respondents prayed for the dismissal of the suit.
9.      On the basis of the pleadings the learned Trial Court
framed the following issues:_
           I.  Whether the plaintiff has cause of action for the
               suit?
          II.  Whether the plaintiff has right, title and interest
               over the suit land?
        III.   Whether the sale deed as mentioned in schedule
               ‘ka’ is fraudulent one and as such liable to be
               dismissed?
         IV.   Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree of khas
               possession in respect of schedule Gha land by
               evicting the defendant Nos. 1 & 2?
          V.   Whether the suit is barred by limitation?
         VI.   Whether the suit is valued properly?
        VII.   To what relief or reliefs parties are entitled under
               the law and equity?
Addl. Issues:-
                                                          Page 6 of 20

        VIII.    Whether the suit land is inherited by the defendant
                 No. 2 (a) and 6 from their predecessor in interest
                 of Ibrahim Sheikh?
10.       The parties to the suit adduced their respective evidence.
The trial Court after hearing the parties partly decreed the suit of
the plaintiff/respondent declaring that she is entitled to get only 1
Bigha 2 ½ Katha 13 Lechas of land and the present
defendants/appellants, each are entitled to get 6 Bighas 1 Katha 6
Lechas     of  land.    It   is  out   of   the  suit  land  that   the
plaintiff/respondent is entitled to 3 Bigha 0 Katha 13 Lechas of
land and as the defendants No. 1 & 2 are possessing 1 and ½
Bighas of land of the plaintiff/respondent’s share, as such she is
entitled to the extent of 1 Bigha 2 ½ Katha 13 Lechas of land as
held vide Judgment and decree dated 20.06.2003 in Title Suit
50/94. The Trial Court discussed the issue No. 2, 3 and 8 jointly
and    came    to    the   finding   relying  the  evidence   of   DW-
1(Defendant/Appellant No.1) that the suit land measuring 15
Bigha 3 Katha 5 Lechas belonged to Ibrahim Ali (father of DW-1).
11.      The Trial Court going through the exhibits A, B, C and D
which are the receipts against payment of premium issued by
Colonization Officer and the annual khiraj patta issued on
08.10.1948 in the name of Ibrahim, son of Nandu Sheikh, the
exhibits E and F which are the draft chitta copy for the period
1957-58 and 1968-69, held that the suit land stood in the name of
                                                            Page 7 of 20

Ibrahim Ali. On the other hand, the plaintiff/respondent relied
exhibit-1 which is the copy of the jamabondi covering land
measuring 15 Bighas 3 Kathas 5 Lechas under Dag No. 285, 286,
287,326, 327 of KP patta No. 34 for the settlement period 1968-
69. The said exhibit-1 consists of the note that as per the order
dated 21.05.1974 passed in NRS 289/72-655/2-61, the same was
made khiraj period in the name of Mohiran Nessa, showing the
name of her father as late Nandu Sheikh. The trial Court discarded
the said exhibit-1 on the ground that mere entry in the revenue
record does not confer title unless it was made in accordance with
law. The trial Court held that the plaintiff/respondent made out a
false case and held that Mohiran Nessa cannot be the sole owner
as the daughter of Nandu Sheikh.
12.     The learned Trial Court relied the documents referred
hereinabove and held that suit land belonged to Ibrahim Ali and
not of Nandu Sheikh as contended by the plaintiff/respondent. It
was also accepted by the Trial Court relying on the piece of
evidence of DW-3, who is the official from the land Revenue
Branch, that till 1957-58 settlement and 1968-69 settlement,
Ibrahim Ali remained the owner on the entire suit dag of the land
which was covered under annual patta. So far exhibit 1 is
concerned, the learned trial Court disbelieved the same owing to
the absence of any proof as to how the Deputy Commissioner
passed the order dated 21.05.1974 as the original record had not
been proved by the plaintiff/respondent to substantiate her
                                                        Page 8 of 20

contention. Relying the evidence of DW-3 that there was no entry
of the name of the Mohiran Nessa in the exhibit-E i.e the draft
chitta it held that the same stood in the name of Ibrahim. Further
considering the evidence of DW-3 the learned trial Court held that
in the year 1968-69, the said dag number referred in draft chitha
remained under annual patta and as there was no piece of
evidence as to how the name of Mohiran Nessa entered in the
jamabondi, finally the trial Court held that the name of Mohiran
Nessa was inserted in the revenue record by manipulating the
same. However, the trial Court held and declared that the exhibit-
6 on the basis of which the defendant No. 1 & 2 claimed to
purchase 6 Bighas of land from Mohiran Nessa as false and forged
document after obtaining expert opinion with respect to the
thumb impression of Mohiran Nessa, who purportedly executed
the same. On the other hand, the trial Court held exhibit-4, on the
basis of which the defendant No. 1 & 2 claimed to purchase 1
Bigha 2 Katha 10 Lechas of land from Mohiran Nessa out of the
suit land shown in exhibit 1 jamabondi to be valid. Finally, the trial
Court held the issue No. 2, 3 & 8 partially in favour of the
plaintiff/respondent.
13.      Being aggrieved, the plaintiff/respondent preferred T.A.
No. 40/03 before the learned court of Civil Judge (Sr. Div) Nagaon
against the judgment and decree passed in Title Suit No. 50/94.
The First Appellate Court after hearing the parties allowed the
                                                        Page 9 of 20

appeal decreeing the suit in favour of plaintiff/respondent
reversing the findings of the Trial Court.
14.      While reversing the findings, the learned First Appellate
Court took into consideration the premium paid vide exhibits A, B
and C by Ibrahim Ali against the annual patta No. 26 (exhibit-d)
for land measuring 15 Bighas 0 Katta 8 Lechas covered by various
dag numbers. The exhibit-1, Jamabondi is also considered wherein
the name of Mohirun Nessa is recorded in periodic patta No. 34.
The said exihibit-1 records that on the strength of letter No. NRS
289/72-6552-61      and    order    dated   22.04.74   of   Deputy
Commissioner the same was converted to periodic patta. This
order of conversion was taken into consideration holding that the
annual patta exhibit-d standing in the name of Ibrahim Ali was
converted to periodic patta No. 34. The said settlement was made
final in the year 1968-69.
15.      The learned First Apellate Court further held that against
such cancellation, the present defendants/appellants did not
prefer any appeal, which fact is supported by Fajar Ali (defendant
No. 6) as DW-1. The evidence of DW-1 was considered to the
effect that, he alongwith Suleman Ali (defendant No. 2 A) brother
of DW-1 are residing over Govt. land but not over the suit land. It
was held that Mohirun Nessa (mother of plaintiff/respondent),
Fajar Ali (defendant No. 6) and Suleman Ali (defendant No. 2 A)
are the legal heirs of Ibrahim Ali. The said two defendants did not
                                                       Page 10 of 20

challenge the order of the cancellation of annual patta and/or
settlement of land to Mohirun Nessa and as such they have lost
their right, title and cannot inherit the property.
16.       It was pointed out by the learned First Appellate Court
that the defendant No. 2 A and 6 had not filed any counter claim
claiming their share as per Mohammedan Law. Rather, Fajar Ali
(defendant/respondent No.2) was the identifier of Mohirun Nessa
while she purportedly executed Registered Sale Deed No. 2556 (
Exhibit-6) transferring land measuring 6 Bighas to defendants No.
1 and 2 out of the land covered by Jamabondi (exhibit-1) wherein,
it was mentioned about the settlement of the land to Mohirun
Nessa.
17.      The learned First Appellate Court also took note of the
various Regd Sale deeds Nos. ‘Ka’, ‘Kha’, ‘Ga’, ‘Gha’ etc by way of
which Ibrahim Ali sold land covered by Annual Patta No. 26.
However, the said First Appellate Court upheld the findings of the
Trial Court whereby the Registered Sale deed bearing No. 2556
dated 20.07.89 (exhibit-6) purportedly executed by Mohirun Nessa
in favour of the defendant No. 1 and 2 to be a false and
fraudulent document. The said finding has not been challenged by
the said defendants Nos. 1 and 2. It was also held by the said
First Appellate Court that Mohirun Nessa had no right, title and
interest over land measuring 1 Bigha 2 Kathas covered by Dag No.
327, 1 Bigha, 2 Kathas 10 Lechas covered by Dag No. 326, which
                                                       Page 11 of 20

was sold to the defendants No. 1 and 2 by Mohirun Nessa vide
exhibit-4. Surprisingly, the learned First Appellate Court held land
measuring 1 Bigha 2 Kathas covered by 327 standing in the
names of the present original appellants to be proper as their
names are mutated. This finding is contradictory to the findings of
the     First   Appellate     Court    itself,  that   the    present
defendants/appellants cannot claim any right, title over the land
as it was settled with Mohirun Nessa as per the order recorded in
exhibit-1. Finally, the First Appellate Court reversed the findings of
issue Nos. 2, 3 and 8 holding that plaintiff has got title over 12
Bighas 3 Kathas 15 Lechas of land out of 15 Bighas 3 Kathas 5
Lechas leaving the land covered by Dag No. 326 and 327 as
aforesaid.
18.      The defendant No. 2 A and 6 being dissatisfied with the
reversal of the findings by the First Appellate Court preferred the
Second Appeal, which was admitted on 21.07.2006 on the
following substantial question of law:-
         (I) Whether the learned appellate Court below was
justified in reversing the finding of the learned Trial Court merely
relying on jamabandi of 1968-69, Ext.1 in complete disregard to
the established principle of law that mere entry of name in the
jamabandi is no proof of title.
19.      Mr. N. Dhar, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the appellants, submits that the First Appellate Court failed to
                                                         Page 12 of 20

consider the law holding the field that title cannot be declared
merely on the basis of mutation entry in the Jamabondi. It is
submitted that Ext-1 is the Jamabondi, wherein the name of
Mohirun Nessa has been shown to be mutated with respect to the
total land measuring 15 Bighas 3 Kathas 8 Lechas. The learned
First appellate Court straightway taking note of the remarks with
regard to conversion, held that the land under old annual patta
No. 26 (exhibit-d) was converted and settled with Mohirun Nessa,
the mother of the plaintiff/respondent. It is submitted that the
First Appellate Court ought not have considered the order so
recorded in the Jamabondi unless and until, the actual order of
conversion and settlement was produced and proved before the
Court. In order to buttress his argument, Mr. Dhar, relied (a)
R am Das –Vs- Salim Ahm ed and Anr, reported in (1998) 9
SCC 719, (b) R.K . M adhuryyajit Singh and Anr. –Vs-
Takhellam bam Abung Singh and others reported in AIR
2001 Gauhati 181 .
20.     Mr. Dhar, citing Reg. 39 of the Assam Land and Revenue
Regulation, 1886 submits that the said provision clearly stipulates
that no person shall merely on the ground that a settlement has
been made with him be deemed to have acquired any right to or
over any estate as against any other person claiming rights to or
over that estate. This provision has been pressed as against the
findings in the First Appellate Court that even it is presumed to be
true settlement of suit land in favour of the Mohirun Nessa, then
                                                         Page 13 of 20

also, the present appellants have the right to dispute the said
settlement.     Further it is submitted that the exhibits of the
defendants/appellants gives the preponderance in favour of them
and they are entitled to inherit their respective shares as per
Mohammedan Law, which the learned trial Court rightly held. So
Mr. Dhar submits that the substantial question of law is to be
decided in favour of the appellants.
21.      Mr. P.K. Kalita, the learned Senior Counsel, assisted by Ms.
T. Goswami, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent/plaintiff, submits that the First Appellate Court had
held that there was no appeal filed, challenging the order of
Deputy Commissioner, on the basis of which the suit land was
settled with Mohirun Nessa. Already 20 (twenty) years had
passed, at least till the date of filing the suit, but even thereafter
also no appeal was preferred by the defendants/appellants.
Further, it is submitted that there was no challenge to the title of
the plaintiff/respondent by the defendants/appellants nor there is
any counterclaim preferred by the said appellants claiming their
shares and as such the learned Trial Court is wrong in declaring
the share of the appellants. It is further submitted that, in such a
situation    there  is   no    requirement   on    the  part   of  the
plaintiff/respondent to prove the patta standing in the name of
Mohirun Nessa. Pointing the deposition of DW-1, Mr. Kalita
submits the present appellants who are the brothers of Mohirun
Nessa had no possession over any part of the suit land inasmuch
                                                          Page 14 of 20

as the DW-1 deposed that he alongwith his brother are residing
on Govt. reserve land but not over the suit land. Thus, Mr. Kalita
supported the judgment passed by the First Appellate Court.
22.      Considered the submissions of both the learned counsels.
Perused the records, the evidence and the exhibits. It is true, as
submitted by Mr. Dhar, that the plaintiff/respondent must be
successful on the basis of her own case, but not on the weakness
of the defendants/appellants. In order to prove the title of
Mohirun Nessa over the suit land, the plaintiff/respondent had
exhibited Ext-1, the Jamabondi whereon, a note has been given
that the land was settled with Mohirun Nessa on the basis of the
specific case and letter issued and an order by the Deputy
Commissioner whereafter, the periodic patta was issued to
Mohirun Nessa. However, the said order and/or the letter referred
in exhibit-1 purportedly issued by the Deputy Commissioner, has
not been exhibited in order to prove the said fact. The appellate
court below held that the original annual patta No. 26, exhibit ‘d’
standing in the name of Ibrahim Ali was cancelled and converted
into the periodic patta No. 34 and land covered by it was settled in
the     name    of   Mohirun     Nessa,     the    mother   of   the
plaintiff/respondent. Both the Courts below held that Ibrahim Ali
died leaving behind, the present appellants (substituted by their
respective legal heirs in this appeal) and Mohirun Nessa, the
mother of the plaintiff/appellant as his legal heirs.
                                                        Page 15 of 20

23.      The suit of the plaintiff/respondent is for declaration of her
right, title in respect of land covered by Schedule ‘kha’ and her
possession over Schedule ‘ Ga’. Both, the schedule ‘Kha’ and ‘Ga’
are the land covered by the Jamabondi, exhibit-1.
24.      For such a declaration, there is a prime duty caste upon
the plaintiff/respondent to prove her title and/or how the title
vested on her and the right of ownership. In the present case in
hand, except the Jamabondi, exhibit-1, no other Title deed has
been proved. Further the said Jamabondi, Ext. 1 is not equivalent
to periodic patta normally issued under the provisions of the
Assam Land and Revenue Regulation after settlement of a
particular plot of land to a particular person. Though, there is
mention about the order on the body of exhibit-1, Jamabondi that
is not sufficient in order to show her absolute title over the suit
land.
25.      In R am Das –Vs- Salim Ahm ed reported in (supra), the
predecessor in interest of the respondent preferred a suit for
declaration of Title and injunction contending inter-alia that the
said predecessor-in-interest, Karimbux acquired title to the suit
property by way of purchase from one Sarifan, who acquired title
in turn from Bandijaan on the basis of a will. The appellants
denied the title of the plaintiff. The trial Court dismissed the suit
as the plaintiff failed to proof the title. The First Appellate Court
upheld the findings. In the Second Appeal, the High Court placing
                                                          Page 16 of 20

reliance on the copy of the will and as nobody objected to it,
accordingly held that said Sarifan got title to the property.
Thereafter on challenge being made, the Hon’ble Apex Court held
as follows:-
         “ It, however, appears to us that although the High Court
indicated in the impugned judgment that the defendant’s claim of
easement right and also the claim of title by way of adverse
possession could not be accepted, such weakness in the
defendant’s title to the suit property cannot establish the plaintiff’s
title. The High Court has failed to consider the specific finding
made by the lower appellate Court that the plaintiff had failed to
establish the plaintiff’s title. It may be noted that the plaintiff was
not entitled to get declaration of title if such title could not be
established by the plaintiff by leading convincing evidence. The
lower appellate Court had considered the evidence in detail and by
giving cogent reasons had come to the finding that the plaintiff
failed to establish the title to the property. Such finding was not
reversed by the High Court by indicating any reason for such
reversal but indicating the weakness of the defendant’s title the
plaintiff’s suit was decreed. Even if it is assumed that the property
in question was bequeathed by Bandi Jaan by executing the Will,
the title to the suit property cannot be declared in favour of the
plaintiff unless the title of the executor of the Will is fully
established. In the aforesaid facts, the impugned judgment of the
High Court cannot be sustained and the same is therefore set
                                                          Page 17 of 20

aside by allowing this appeal. The judgment and decree of the
lower appellate Court are restored. There will be, however, no
order as to costs. ”
26.      Similarly in AIR 2001 Gau 181, (Supra) this Court held
as follows:-
         “ On consideration of the entire materials/evidence on
record, it appears that the title and the case of the plaintiff could
not be established positively/affirmatively, Mutation of name of a
person in the revenue record does not ipso facto create or
extinguish the title of the person, nor does it lead to any
presumptive value. The revenue records basically entitled a person
to pay the land revenue. Mere entry in the revenue records does
not ipso facto lead to the conclusion that the mutation in favour of
the plaintiffs conveys title in their favour. ”
27.      From the ratio of the said decisions, it is clear that a
plaintiff in a suit claiming his/her title over suit property, must
prove his/her title and the manner how it devolved on the plaintiff.
The submission of Mr. P.K. Kalita, the learned Senior Counsel that
as the defendants/appellants did not challenge the title of the
plaintiffs/respondent, so there was no duty cast upon the
respondent to proof her title, cannot be accepted, if considered in
the light of Section 101 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 which
specifically cast the burden on the plaintiff/respondent to prove
her title.
                                                        Page 18 of 20

28.      Further, mutation entries in record of rights though cannot
be brushed aside, but that alone cannot be the foundation of title.
In the present case in hand, the plaintiff/respondent failed to
exhibit and prove the order of settlement of land on Mohirun
Nessa. Exhibit-1 simply shows the name of Mohirun Nessa, and
the same was purportedly mutated on the strength of the order of
the Deputy Commissioner. Jamabondi cannot be equated
with a period patta, which is normally issued to a
particular     person/persons        after    completion       of    a
settlement/resettlement operation as per the Assam Land
and Revenue Regulation thereby endowing the status of
landholder to that particular person/persons. The said
period patta is sufficient proof of title and the same is the
origin of the title with respect to a particular immovable
property. The said “periodic patta” is the proof of the
lease entered into by the Govt. with the person to whom
the settlement is offerred and accepted by the said
person.
29.      The learned First Appellate Court failed to consider that
aspect of the matter and merely putting reliance on the said copy
of Jamabondi, Ext-1, declared the right, title and interest of the
plaintiff/respondent over the suit property which is wrong. Thus
the substantial question of law is decided in favour of the
defendant/appellants. The Judgment and decree passed by the
                                                         Page 19 of 20

First Appellate Court is set aside upholding the judgment and
decree passed by the trial Court.
30.     No costs, Send back the LCR.
31.    Accordingly, this Second Appeal is disposed of.
                                                   JUDGE
B. DEY
                                                       Page 20 of 20


