           *IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                   Date of decision: 7th July, 2016
+                          W.P.(C) No.4648/2014
        AZAD SINGH SOLANKI                                        ..... Petitioner
                           Through: Mr. Kirti Uppal, Sr. Adv. with Mr.
                                        Sidharth Chopra and Mr. Mohd.
                                        Manan, Advs.
                                    Versus
        PUNJAB NATIONAL BANK                                  ..... Respondent
                           Through: Mr. Pallav Saxena, Adv.
CORAM:-
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
1.      The petition (i) impugns the communication dated 26 th May, 2014 of the
respondent Punjab National Bank (Bank) to the petitioner to the effect that
upon the failure of the petitioner to pay balance 75% of the bid amount within
the prescribed time, the amount deposited by the petitioner till then with the
respondent Bank shall stand forfeited; and, (ii) seeks mandamus to the
respondent Bank to refund the earnest amount of Rs.40,20,000/- to the
petitioner along with interest.
2.      The petition came up before this Court first on 28 th July, 2014 when the
counsel for the respondent Bank appearing on advance notice was asked to
obtain instructions whether the respondent Bank was agreeable to refund the
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                    Page 1 of 15

amount forfeited. The counsel for the respondent Bank on 19th November, 2014
informed that the respondent Bank was not so agreeable. Notice of the petition
was issued and pleadings have been completed. On 18th January, 2016 when the
petition came up for hearing, attention of the senior counsel for the petitioner
was invited to the order dated 18th March, 2015 of the Supreme Court in Civil
Appeal No.3053/2015 titled National Highways Authority of India Vs. MEIL-
EDB LLC (JV) quoted by me in CCPL Developers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. GAIL (India)
Ltd. MANU/DE/4361/2015 and on request of the counsels the matter was
adjourned to 11th February, 2016 when after hearing arguments judgment was
reserved.
3.      It is the case of the petitioner (i) that in pursuance to the notice got
published by the respondent Bank in the newspapers on 27th March, 2014 of e-
auction of property no.E-131 ad measuring 100 sq. yards in Khasra No.174 min
situated in the abadi deh of Village Mohammadpur, New Delhi, the petitioner
submitted its bid in the sum of Rs.1,20,00,000/- and which during e-auction
was enhanced to Rs.1,60,80,000/- and being the highest was accepted by the
respondent Bank on 2nd May, 2014; (ii) that in accordance with the terms and
conditions of e-auction the petitioner deposited Rs.12,00,000/- with the
respondent Bank on 28th April, 2014 and Rs.28,20,000/- on 30th April, 2014,
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                               Page 2 of 15

being 25% of the bid amount; (iii) the petitioner was required to deposit
remaining 75% of the bid amount within the stipulated period of 15 days; (iv)
that the petitioner though had made all arrangements for payment of the
balance 75% of the bid amount but learnt that the aforesaid property was
subject matter of multiple litigations and a disputed property and that the Debt
Recovery Tribunal (DRT)-I, Chandigarh in SA No.71/2012 had restrained the
respondent Bank from putting the subject property to e-auction; (v) the
petitioner addressed a communication dated 17th May, 2014 to the respondent
Bank seeking clarification and to which a confusing and evasive reply dated
17th May, 2014 was given by the respondent Bank but denying that it had been
restrained from auctioning the property and pleading that the property was
auctioned on “as is where is basis” in terms of the order dated 23 rd April, 2014
of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate; (vi) the petitioner addressed yet another
communication dated 20th May, 2014 to the respondent Bank and to which a
response dated 22nd May, 2014 was sent by the respondent Bank; (vii) yet
another letter dated 23rd May, 2014 also from the petitioner elicited the
impugned communication dated 26th May, 2014; (viii) that the auction
aforesaid by the respondent Bank is in violation of the order of the DRT-I,
Chandigarh in SA No.71/2012 copy whereof is purported to be Annexure P-17
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                               Page 3 of 15

to the petition (but neither is there any P-17 to the petition nor is it shown in the
index to the petition); (ix) that owing to the order dated 13th July, 2012 of this
Court in W.P.(C) No.3600/2014 also, the respondent Bank was not entitled to
auction the property; (x) that the mortgage itself of the subject property with the
respondent Bank was under challenge; (xi) that sale of the property on “as is
where is basis” does not entitle the respondent Bank to sell a property without
even having a marketable and clean title thereto; (xii) that the property, in the
sale notice was wrongly described as commercial; and, (xiii) that the auction
aforesaid is in violation of the provisions of Securitisation and Reconstruction
of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002
(SARFAESI Act).
4.      The respondent Bank in its counter affidavit has defended the petition
pleading (i) that the issues at which the parties are at variance constitute
disputed questions of fact which cannot be gone into writ proceedings; (ii) that
if the petitioner had any grievance, he ought to have invoked Section 17 of the
SARFAESI Act and the writ petition is not maintainable for the reason of
availability of alternative remedy; (iii) that the petitioner is espousing proxy
litigation on behalf of the guarantor/mortgagor Mr. Udai Bir Singh Tokas who
has since instituted SA No.71/2012 titled Udai Bir Singh Tokas Vs. Punjab
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                    Page 4 of 15

National Bank before DRT-I, Chandigarh and which is pending adjudication;
(iv) that the aforesaid property was mortgaged in favour of the respondent Bank
in the loan account of M/s. Virgo Trading House, of which Mr. Ankit Singla is
the sole proprietor, credit facilities to whom were classified as Non-Performing
Asset (NPA) and the provisions of SARFAESI Act were invoked for non-
payment of dues of Rs.1,71,80,184/-; (v) that the subject property comprises of
three floors of which ground floor is being used as a shop and the upper floors
are being used for residential purposes; the property is even otherwise situated
in a predominantly commercial area having numerous shops and offices in an
urbanised village; (vi) that the property in the Sale Notice dated 27 th March,
2014 of e-auction was correctly described as “commercial”; the forfeiture has
been effected in terms of clauses 11, 16 (ii), (iii) and (xxi) of the Sale Notice
and Rules 9(4) and 9(5) of the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002;
(vii) that the petitioner vide his letter dated 17th May, 2014 referred to the
proceedings initiated by Mr. Udai Bir Singh Tokas before Debt Recovery
Appellate Tribunal, Delhi (DRAT); (viii) that the respondent vide its reply
dated 17th May, 2014 clarified that the DRAT, Delhi did not grant any interim
relief to Mr. Udai Bir Singh Tokas and once again requested the petitioner to
deposit the balance bid amount; (ix) that there was no dispute with respect to
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                Page 5 of 15

auction sale dated 30th April, 2014 including as to the nature of the property;
(x) that the petitioner appeared to have deposited Rs.40,20,000/- only with an
ulterior motive to frustrate the statutory proceedings under SARFAESI Act, in
collusion and connivance with Mr. Udai Bir Singh Tokas; (xi) that the
petitioner inspected the property prior to auction sale dated 30th April, 2014 and
made inquiries and only on being satisfied about all the matters relating to the
auction sale participated therein; (xii) denying that the subject property is
disputed property or that the petitioner was ready and willing with the balance
sale consideration; (xiii) that W.P.(C) No.3600/2014 instituted by Mr. Udai Bir
Singh Tokas before this Court was disposed of vide order dated 29th May, 2014
directing that till the final decision of SA No.71/2012 or 31 st July, 2014,
whichever is earlier, the respondent Bank shall not issue fresh auction notice or
take any other precipitative action; thereafter vide orders dated 22 nd July, 2014
and 9th September, 2014 the time to decide SA No.71/2012 was extended up to
5th September, 2014 and 31st October, 2014 respectively; the said time was not
extended thereafter; SA No.71/2012 is still pending adjudication and there is no
interim order therein; and, (xiv) that accordingly fresh Sale Notice dated 24th
February, 2015 had been got issued by the respondent Bank.
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                Page 6 of 15

5.      The petitioner has filed a rejoinder but since no reference was made
thereto during the hearing, need to refer thereto is not felt.
6.      The senior counsel for the petitioner during the hearing relied on (i) para
68 of Guruvayur Devaswom Managing Committee Vs.C.K. Rajan AIR 2004
SC 561 holding that existence of an alternative remedy albeit is no bar to
exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India if discretion
is exercised wholly without jurisdiction or contradictory to the constitutional or
statutory provisions; (ii) paras 11 & 19 of Haryana Financial Corporation Vs.
Rajesh Gupta AIR 2010 SC 338 laying down Haryana Financial Corporation
could not rely on the clause of sale being of “as is where is basis” because it
could not take advantage of its own wrong; (iii) paras 5 & 6 of Jai Logistics Vs.
The Authorised Officer, Syndicate Bank MANU/TN/1161/2010 where a
Division Bench of the High Court of Madras held that the obligation of the
authorised officer of the Bank to in a Public Notice issued under Rule 8(6) of
the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002 include in the Public Notice
the details of encumbrances known to the secured creditors; (iv) Rekha Sahu
Vs. UCO Bank I (2014) BC 221 (DB) where the High Court of Allahabad also
held that a secured creditor does not enjoy the immunity in respect of his action
if it is not bona fide and that if the authorised officer of the bank, prior to
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                 Page 7 of 15

publishing auction notice, does not take care of encumbrances in the property
and does not mention it in the public notice, the bank is liable for payment of
interest on the sale consideration till the title is perfected; and, (v) R.
Shanmugachandran Vs. The Chief Manager, Indian Bank Asset Recovery
Management MANU/TN/1243/2012.
7.       I have in Speed Track Cargo Vs. State Bank of Patiala
MANU/DE/0359/2016, dealing with a similar petition, held a writ remedy to
be not available for the relief as claimed in the present petition also, giving
the following reasons:-
                “9. The Division Bench of this Court in similar
          situation in judgment dated 10th March, 2011 in W.P.(C)
          No.8418/2010 titled Madhucon Projects Ltd. Vs. National
          Highway Authority of India had directed refund of 5% of the
          bid security given for the tender floated and which 5% was
          forfeited. However, the Supreme Court in order dated 18th
          March, 2015 in SLP (C) No.15689/2011 titled National
          Highways Authority of India Vs. MEIL-EDB LLC (JV) has
          dealt with the matter as under:-
               “We are confronted with a situation when there is a contract
               between the parties, duly signed by the Respondent which restricts
               forfeiture of 5% of the value of the Bid Security ostensibly not by
               way of a penalty. Of course, as is to be expected, the Respondent
               disagrees and on the contrary submits that the deduction /
               forfeiture is in terrorem and is punitive in nature. A Writ Court
               may at least as a temporary or preliminary view decide whether
               the damages imposed by an Authority amenable to writ jurisdiction
               such as NHAI indubitably are punitive or not, but it should abjure
               from going into the minute calculation. That controversy should be
               left to the Civil Court to decide, i.e. whether the deduction /
               forfeiture, in the present instance of 5% of the value of the Bid
               Security is punitive or otherwise. We think that the course that
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                               Page 8 of 15

               commends itself to us is to relegate the parties to the Civil Courts
               to determine whether any damages had been suffered by the
               National Highways Authority of India and if so whether the
               deduction of 5% was a fair pre-estimate or was punitive in nature.
               Since the parties have been bona fide prosecuting writ proceedings
               in the event of the plaintiff seeks enlargement / extension of time
               for filing of a Suit, the Courts in seisin will keep all the
               circumstances in view before passing an order.”
         10. In the light of the said dicta of the Supreme Court, the
         remedy if any of the petitioner is not under Article 226 of the
         Constitution of India.
         11. Reliance by the counsel for the petitioner on E. Muthuraj
         supra is totally misconceived. The counsel for the petitioner
         during the hearing has drawn my attention to para 5 under
         para 11 of the said judgment and on the basis whereof has
         contended that the Court therein held that Rule 8(6)(f) of the
         Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002 under the
         SARFAESI Act mandates the secured creditors to set out in the
         terms of sale notice any other thing which the authorised
         officer considers it material for a purchaser to know in order
         to judge the nature and value of the property and that the said
         Rule would include the encumbrance(s) relating to the
         property. However the paragraph cited by the counsel for the
         petitioner is not the paragraph of E. Muthuraj but the
         paragraph of Jai Logistics Vs. The Authorised Officer,
         Syndicate Bank reported in 2010 (4) CTC 627 referred to in
         para 11 of the judgment in E. Muthuraj. Thereafter in para 12
         of E. Muthuraj itself it is noted that the judgment in Jai
         Logistics was considered by a Division Bench of the Madras
         High Court in R. Shanmugachandran Vs. The Chief
         Manager, Indian Bank, Asset Recovery Management
         Branch, Coimbatore MANU/TN/1243/2012 in which it was
         held that the purport of Rule 8(6) cannot be extended to such
         an extent that it obliterates the liability of the purchaser to
         undertake due diligence and to scrutinise the title to the
         property and that the obligation of the authorised officer is
         only to disclose the encumbrance that have come to the notice
         of the secured creditor and that it is for the auction purchaser
         to apply for encumbrance certificates in the time of 30 days
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                                Page 9 of 15

         made available to the intending buyers to see if there are any
         encumbrances. In the light of the judgment of the Division
         Bench in R. Shanmugachandran the writ petition in E.
         Muthuraj was dismissed. E. Muthuraj is thus against the
         petitioner rather than being in favour of the petitioner and
         reliance thereon appears to have been made making a Google
         like search and not after reading the judgment fully.
         12. I am otherwise also entirely in agreement with the view
         taken in E. Muthuraj.
         13. The Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules have been
         framed in exercise of the rule making power contained in
         Section 38(1) and 38(2)(b) read with Section 13(4), (10) and
         (12) of the SARFAESI Act. SARFAESI Act has been enacted to
         regulate the securitisation and reconstruction of financial
         assets and enforcement of security interest and for matters
         connected therewith or incidental thereto. The SARFAESI Act
         is not concerned with the relationship between the
         banks/financial institutions holding the financial assets and
         security interest and the purchasers from the Banks / financial
         institution thereof. Section 13 lays down the procedure for
         enforcement of security interest and in sub Section (4) thereof
         empowers the secured creditor to take possession, in sub
         Section (10) thereof empowers the secured creditor to, if the
         dues are not fully satisfied from the sale proceeds of the
         secured asset, initiate proceedings before the Debt Recovery
         Tribunal (DRT) and in sub-Section (12) thereof provides for
         the rights of the secured creditor to be exercised by one or
         more its (authorized) officers. Section 38 empowers the
         Central Government to make rules inter alia for the manner in
         which the rights of secured creditor may be exercised. There is
         nothing in the provisions of SARFAESI Act to indicate the
         intent to encompass the relationship between the secured
         creditor as seller of the secured asset and the purchaser
         thereof. The Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules have to be
         read and interpreted in the said light. Rule 8 thereof provides
         for sale of immovable secured assets and sub Rule (6) thereof
         is as under:-
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                Page 10 of 15

               “ The authorised officer shall serve to the borrower a notice of
               thirty days for sale of the immovable secured assets, under sub-
               rule (5)
               PROVIDED that if the sale of such secured asset is being effected
               by either inviting tenders from the public or by holding public
               auction, the secured creditor shall cause a public notice in two
               leading newspapers; one in vernacular language having sufficient
               circulation in the locality by setting out the terms of sale, which
               shall include,-
               (a) the description of the immovable property to be sold, including
               the details of the encumbrances known to the secured creditor;
               (b) the secured debt for recovery of which the property is to be
               sold;
               (c) reserve price, below which the property may not be sold;
               (d) time and place of public auction or the time after which sale by
               any other mode shall be completed;
               (e) depositing earnest money as may be stipulated by the secured
               creditor;
               (f) any other thing which the authorised officer considers it
               material for a purchaser to know in order to judge the nature and
               value of the property.”
         14. Sub Rule (6) aforesaid is also dealing with the rights
         inter se between the secured creditor and its borrower. The
         same limits the liability of the secured creditor to, in the public
         notice of sale by auction, give details only of the
         encumbrances known to the secured creditor and inter alia of
         any other thing which the authorised officer considers it
         material for a purchaser to know in order to judge the nature
         and value of the property. The same does not impose an
         absolute obligation on the secured creditor to disclose all the
         encumbrances or all the things which a purchaser should
         know but only such of the encumbrances which are known to
         the secured creditor and only such other things which the
         authorised considers it material.
         15. A perusal of the public notice in pursuance to which the
         petitioner submitted its bid along with EMD shows the terms
         and conditions thereof to be inter alia as under:-
               “(2) Bidders are advised to go through the website
               https://sarfaesi.abeprocure.com for detailed terms and conditions
               of auction sale before submitting their bids and taking part in e-
               auction sale proceedings.
               (8)      The successful bidder shall have to pay 25% of the
               purchase amount (including earnest money) already paid,
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                                Page 11 of 15

               immediately on closure of the e-auction sale proceedings on the
               same day of the sale in the same mode stipulated in clause 7 above.
               The balance 75% of the purchase price shall have to be paid within
               15 days of acceptance/confirmation of sale conveyed to them.
               (11)     The property is sold on “as is where is” and “as is what
               is” condition and the intending bidder should make discreet
               inquiries as regards on the property of any authority besides the
               banks charges and should satisfied themselves about the title,
               extent, quality and quality of the property/security before
               submitting their bid. No claim of whatsoever nature regarding the
               property/security put for sale charges encumbrances over the
               property/security on any other matter etc. will be entertained after
               submission of the online bid.
               (19)     The Court of Haryana only shall have the jurisdiction to
               adjudicate any type of dispute/case(s) relating to the above said
               sale/auction.
               (20)     All the terms used in the present sale notice are in the
               terms of the rules and meaning as enumerated under the provisions
               of SARFAESI Act, 2002. The sale is subject to conditions
               prescribed in the SARFAESI Act/Rules, 2002 and the condition
               mentioned above.”
         16. It is thus obvious that the sale was on “as is where is”
         and “as is what is” condition and no claims of whatsoever
         nature were to be entertained. By stating so, in my view the
         proposed purchasers had been sufficiently warned/cautioned
         to satisfy themselves as to the nature and title of the property.
         17. I may also state that a writ petition even otherwise is not
         maintainable. The claim in the writ petition is based on
         contract and has no public law character in it. I have recently
         in CCPL Developers Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Gail (India) Ltd.
         MANU/DE/4361/2015, relying inter alia upon Joshi
         Technologies International Inc. Vs. Union of India (2015) 7
         SCC 728 held such writ petitions to be not maintainable.
         18. I am also of the opinion that the present controversy shall
         entail disputed questions of fact and which can be at best
         adjudicated in a suit and cannot be addressed in a writ
         petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
         19. The petition is thus dismissed as not maintainable with
         liberty however to the petitioner to take appropriate
         remedies.”
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                                Page 12 of 15

8.      I do not see any reason to take a different view in the present case.
Mention may also be made of State of Kerala Vs. M.K. Jose
MANU/SC/0869/2015 where also Supreme Court has held writ petition to
be not maintainable in contractual disputes. In the light of subsequent
judgments, reliance on Guruvayur Devaswom Managing Committee supra
is not apposite. Rather in the present case there is an additional plea of the
respondent Bank of the collusion of the petitioner with the mortgagor and
which plea cannot, if I may say so, be said to be totally meritless. The timing
of the proceedings initiated by the mortgagor Mr. Udai Bir Singh Tokas does
indicate the petitioner and him being hand in glove. If that be so, certainly
the petition is liable to be ousted from the discretionary jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India on this ground alone.
9.      As far as the judgments cited by the senior counsel for the petitioner
are concerned, Haryana Financial Corporation supra is not with respect to
proceedings under the SARFAESI Act. SARFAESI Act was brought into
force to get over the difficulties faced by the banks in encashing their
securities. Section 35 thereof gives provisions thereof overriding effect
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. The counsel for
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                 Page 13 of 15

the respondent Bank in this regard has referred to T.P. Vishnu Kumar Vs.
Canara Bank, P.N. Road, Tirupur (2013) 10 SCC 652 where the Supreme
Court commented upon the misuse of Article 226 to thwart the proceedings
under the SARFAESI Act. As far as            R. Shanmugachandran and Jai
Logistics supra are concerned, they have already been dealt with by me in
Speed Track Cargo supra. Rekha Sahu supra turned on its own facts i.e. of
a finding of fact of the action of the authorised officer of the Bank being not
bona fide. I may respectfully state that no finding of fact – whether action is
bona fide or not, also can be given without examination and cross-
examination of witnesses. I am otherwise also, with respect, not inclined to
accept the view taken by the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court. I
otherwise also find that the Division Bench of this Court in judgment dated
9th May, 2016 in W.P.(C) No.2089/2015 titled M/s Midas Electronics Pvt.
Ltd. Vs. Small Industries Development Bank of India held that the
judgment of the Division Bench of Allahabad High Court in Rekha Sahu
does not discuss the terms of the tender documents and hence the ratio
thereof cannot be blindly followed. Else, the Division Bench of this Court
reasoned that the bank, in the auction notice, having given a clear indication
to the prospective bidders that encumbrances if any in the form of
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                 Page 14 of 15

government dues had to be paid, the bidders very well knew that if there
were encumbrances on the property the same had to be borne by them. It
was further held that when a property is put up for sale on „As Is Where Is‟
basis the bidder cannot be heard to contend that encumbrance was not
disclosed.
10.     The petition is therefore misconceived and is dismissed with liberty
however to the petitioner to avail of civil remedies. The petitioner however
having pursued this petition inspite of his attention having been drawn to the
dicta of the Supreme Court in MEIL-EDB LLC (JV) supra, it is clarified
that if the petitioner still does not invoke civil remedies, the same also may
become barred by time.
        No costs.
                                                     RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J
JULY 07, 2016
„pp‟..
W.P.(C) No.4648/2014                                                Page 15 of 15


