   *IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+            OMP No.514/2009
%                        Date of decision: 9th September, 2009
LARSEN & TOUBRO LIMITED                                 .…Petitioner
                         Through:   Mr. Sumit Bansal with Mr. Ajay
                                  Monga, Mr. Ateev Mathur & Mr.
                                  Manish Paliwal, Advocates
                                Versus
NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY
OF INDIA                                              .....Respondent
                         Through: None
CORAM :-
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
1.     Whether reporters of Local papers may
       be allowed to see the judgment?     Yes
2.     To be referred to the reporter or not?   Yes
3.     Whether the judgment should be reported
       in the Digest?    Yes
RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J.
1      The petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act,1996 with
respect to the arbitral award dated 13th May, 2009 is for admission.
After hearing counsel for the petitioner for one and a half hour, the
petition was dismissed with reasons to follow.
2      The Arbitral Tribunal comprised of three arbitrators in
accordance with the agreement of the parties.         This petition is
preferred with respect to the award dismissing the claims No.1, 2(i),
3, 5, 6 and 8 of the petitioner. As far as the award on claim No.1 is
concerned, the same is split; the majority of the arbitrators have
dismissed the claim while the minority award is in favour of the
OMP No.514/2009                                              Page 1 of 15

petitioner.     The award dismissing the other claims aforesaid is
unanimous.       The counsel for the petitioner has addressed to the
maximum length with respect to the challenge to the majority award
dismissing the claim No.1 and also stated that the petition is mainly
with respect to the dismissal of the said claim.
3       Claim No.1 of the petitioner was for “reimbursement of
enhanced royalty charges” in the sum of Rs 65,61,664/-. Shorn of
legalese, the claim was, i) that the contract was an item rate
contract; (ii) it provides in clause 70 of COPA (Conditions of
Particular Application Part II) for “changes in cost and legislation”;
(iii) that royalty charges for boulders and ordinary sand used in the
contract had been enhanced by an amendment to the Karnataka
Minor Mineral Concession Rules 1994; (iv) that the petitioner was
entitled to such enhancement of royalty borne by the petitioner,
under clause 70.8 of COPA.
4.      Clause 70.8 (supra) is as under
           “Sub-Clause 70.8 : subsequent legislation
           If, after the date 28 days prior to, the latest date for
           submission of bids for the Contract there are changes to
           any national or State Statue, Ordinance, Decree or other
           Law or any regulation or by-law of any local or other duly
           constituted authority, or the introduction of any such State
           Statute, Ordinance, Decree, Law, regulation or by-law in
           India or States of India which causes additional or reduced
           cost to the Contractor, other than under the preceding
           Sub-Clauses of this Clause, in the execution of the
           Contract, such additional or reduced cost shall, after due
           consultation with the Employer and the Contractor, be
           determined by the Engineer and shall be added to or
           deducted from the Contract Price and the Engineer shall
           notify the contractor accordingly, with a copy to the
           Employer. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such additional
           or reduced cost shall not be separately paid or credited if
           the same shall already have taken into account in the
           indexing of any inputs to the price Adjustment Formulae in
           accordance with the provisions of sub-Clauses 70.1 to
           70.7.”
OMP No.514/2009                                               Page 2 of 15

5.     The Arbitral Tribunal has held that though the aforesaid
amendment to the Karnataka Minor Mineral Concession Rules 1994
is a subsequent legislation within the meaning of clause 70.8
aforesaid but still the plaintiff is not entitled to the claim owing to
the last part of clause 70.8 i.e. because the same has already been
taken into account in the price adjustment in accordance with earlier
sub-clauses of clause 70, i.e., 70.1 to 70.7.
6.     Clause 70.1 provides that the amounts payable to petitioner/
contractors are valued at base rates as defined and shall be adjusted
in respect of rise or fall in the indexed costs of labour, equipment
and plant, materials and other inputs to the work, by addition or
subtraction of the amounts determined by the formula prescribed in
clause 70; clause 70.2 provides that to the extent the full
compensation for any rise or fall in costs is not covered in the
contract, the unit rates/price included in the contract shall be
deemed to include the amount to cover the contingency of such rise
or fall in costs; Clause 70.3A provides for variation in price of local
labour; clause 70.3B provides for variation in price of general
materials- it provides for variation in price of “all materials other
than specifically provided in sub-clause 70.5” – such variation has
been linked to the fluctuation in Whole Sale Price Index (WPI) of all
commodities; clause 70.3C deals with variation in price of petroleum,
oil and lubricants, with which we are not concerned; Clause 70.3D
deals with variation in price of Plant and Equipment and clause
70.3E with variation in price of foreign inputs, with both of which
we are not concerned; clause 70.5 deals with variation in price of
specified materials, with which we are again not concerned.
OMP No.514/2009                                              Page 3 of 15

7.     It was the accepted position before the Arbitral Tribunal that
determination of WPI is on the basis of prices of 58 commodities,
just like sensex in a stock exchange is determined on the prices each
day of a select number of shares and not on the basis of prices of all
the listed/traded shares/stocks.      It was further the established
position before the Arbitral Tribunal that neither boulder nor
ordinary sand on account of increase in royalty whereon, claim No.1
was made were included in the said 58 commodities, fluctuation in
price whereof determined the WPI.
8.     The contention of the petitioner before the Arbitral Tribunal
was that since boulders and ordinary sand were not in the basket of
58 commodities determining WPI, the enhanced royalty thereon was
not taken into account in the indexing of inputs to the Price
Adjustment Formula in clause 70.3 B relating to “General Materials”,
in which category boulders and ordinary sand otherwise fell and thus
they became entitled to such increased royalty under clause 70.8
(supra).
9.     The Arbitral Tribunal did not accept the aforesaid contention of
petitioner, hence this challenge.
10.    Not only do I find the interpretation of aforesaid clauses by the
Arbitral Tribunal to be a plausible one, but also the only correct
interpretation.
11.    Any other interpretation would be anomalous.        Clause 70.3B
aforesaid is with respect to “all materials” used in the contract and
not only those materials included in the basket of 58 commodities
determining WPI.        As per the formula provided therein, the
OMP No.514/2009                                              Page 4 of 15

petitioner/contractors will get variation in price of all materials
irrespective of whether the price of materials used in contract have
varied or not, as long as WPI has varied.       In a given case say of
increase in prices, it is possible that WPI has gone up owing to
increase in prices of 58 commodities included in basket determining
the same, but there is no increase in prices of material used in the
works under the contract, say boulders and ordinary sand.             The
petitioner will thus benefit from increase in WPI, though has not
suffered any increase in costs.     A reading of the formula given in
clause 70.3B does not have any doubt as to the same. Can then it be
said that if there is increase in price of boulders and ordinary sand,
but WPI has not varied, the petitioner would be still entitled to
increase, this time under clause 70.8 because increase is on account
of subsequent legislation. The answer has to be no.
12.    It is further the admitted position that had the increase in
royalty been with respect to any of the minerals included in the
basket of 58 commodities determining the WPI, the impact thereof
would be visible on the WPI. The question which arises is, whether
WPI is to be confined to the 58 items in the basket determining the
same only or generally for determination of variation in price of all
materials. Not only does the contract in the present case makes it
the index of variation in price of all materials but WPI by its very
nature is representative.    It tracks the movement of price of each
(articles on google say it includes 435 commodities in its basket and
not 58 as mentioned in the award) commodity individually and based
on this individual movement, WPI is determined through averaging
principle. It captures the price movement.
OMP No.514/2009                                             Page 5 of 15

13.    The parties in the present case have agreed to variation in
prices of all materials as per WPI, the petitioner cannot be heard
that variation in price of boulders and ordinary sand on account of
subsequent legislation is not covered by clause 70.3B (supra) merely
for the reason of boulders and ordinary sand being not included in
the basket determining WPI.       Clause 70.8, not only in the non
obstante part towards its end, but also by use of words “other than
under the proceeding sub-clauses of this clause” excludes increase in
cost of materials, even on account of subsequent legislation from the
purview of clause 70.8. Clause 70.2 expressly provides that even if
the petitioner is not fully compensated for increase in cost on
account of increase in royalty of boulders and ordinary sand, for the
reason of such increase being not reflected in WPI, such increase
shall be deemed to be included in the prices thereof stipulated in the
contract.
14.    There is yet another reason for me to hold so. Even if suppose
such increase in royalty were to be reflected in the WPI directly if
boulders and ordinary sand were included in the basket of
commodities determining WPI; the increase would not be of the
entire enhancement.     Could in such a situation, the petitioner be
heard to say that the balance increase should be given under clause
70.8.   The answer against has to be No.        Once the variation is
covered by formula provided for variation of price of labour,
material, petroleum, oil lubricants, plant, equipment, foreign inputs,
the variation with respect thereto, even if on account of subsequent
legislation cannot be covered by clause 70.8. Else, it will amount to
variation under two clauses and which is not permitted.
OMP No.514/2009                                            Page 6 of 15

15.    The counsel for the petitioner has at the outset contended that
the aforesaid award is contrary to the dicta of the Division Bench of
this  court   in  NHAI     Vs.   ITD   Cementation     India   Limited
MANU/DE/9104/2007.        In this case also there was an increase in
rates of royalty and which were held to be not covered by WPI. The
Arbitral Tribunal however made a declaratory award only holding
the contractor in that case to be entitled to the amounts for the
reason of such increase and leaving the same to be determined by
NHAI.    The Division Bench of this court was not called upon to
pronounce on the finding of the arbitrator of the petitioner being
entitled to the increase.   The challenge before the Division Bench
was only that the award was bad and incomplete for the reason of
not computing the amount due which the arbitrator had found due to
the contractor in that case. Thus this judgment cannot be said to be
the judgment on the contention raised by the petitioner before this
court.   The Arbitral Tribunal in the present case has interpreted
Clause 70.8 and upon such interpretation held the petitioner not
entitled to the claim. In fact the Division Bench has in Para 13 of the
judgment held that simply because the interpretation placed by the
arbitrator has not favoured one or the other party can be no reason
for the court to interfere under Section 34 of the Act with the award
made on any such interpretation; it being settled by a long line
decisions that the court does not sit in an appeal over the award.
16.    Thus all that can be said from the aforesaid judgment of the
Division Bench is that the Arbitral Tribunal in that case had
interpreted Clause 70.8 differently from the interpretation adopted
by   the  Arbitral   Tribunal in this    case.    However    since     the
interpretation in that case was not under challenge and further since
I have on detailed analysis aforesaid found the interpretation of the
OMP No.514/2009                                             Page 7 of 15

same clause by the Arbitral Tribunal in this case, to be correct, no
ground under Section 34 is made out.        In fact I may notice that
Arbitral Tribunal in that case did not go into the question analysed
above and proceeded on the premise that if items on which
“Seigniorage Fee” in that case were not included in the items
determining Index, it would ipso facto fall under clause 70.8
17.   It is not as if the Arbitral Tribunal in the present case was
oblivious of the judgment in ITD Cementation Limited (Supra).
The petitioner herein relied upon the judgment before the Arbitral
Tribunal also and the Arbitral Tribunal has in Para 21 of the award
dealt therewith.
18.   The counsel for the petitioner has also contended that the
report of the Engineer Incharge of the respondent is also in favour of
the petitioner in this regard and in fact payments under the said
head    were    earlier  being made    to  the  petitioner  and    were
subsequently wrongly stopped. The Arbitral Tribunal has dealt with
this aspect also and held that the decision of the Engineer Incharge
was    not   binding    and  was  challengeable   in   the  arbitration
proceedings. Thus no reliance can be placed by the petitioner on the
decision of the Engineer Incharge or for the reason of some
payments having been released on the said decision of the Engineer
Incharge.
19.   The counsel for the petitioner has next contended that the
Arbitral Tribunal has proceeded with the matter with the intent to
deny the said claim of the petitioner.    On a reading of the entire
award qua the said claim, I do not find any such intent. The Arbitral
Tribunal has on the contrary dealt with each and every plea raised
OMP No.514/2009                                            Page 8 of 15

by the petitioner and which same pleas has been raised before this
court also and given their findings with respect thereto.
20.   The counsel for the petitioner has also urged that if the
interpretation adopted by the Arbitral Tribunal is to be accepted, the
same will result in the clause becoming otiose. I do not agree with
the said contention also. All that the Arbitral Tribunal has held is
that the increase under Clause 70.8 is not for increase in cost of
materials, provision wherefor has been made in accordance with the
preceding sub-clauses of clause 70.
21.   The counsel for the petitioner has also read portions of the
minority award on the said claim to persuade this court to accept the
same.     The Division Bench of this court in The Fertilizer
Corporation of India Ltd Vs IDI Management Inc. AIR 1984
Delhi 333 and the Division Bench in Chogule Brothers Vs
Rashtriya Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd MANU/MH/0114/2006
have held that it is not permissible to look at the minority award
while dealing with a petition to set aside the majority award.
22.   The claim No.2 of the petitioner was for reimbursement on
account of increased taxes.      The award allows claim under five
components under this head and denies the claim for Rs.3,67,812/-
for “resale tax on bitumen”. The Arbitral Tribunal has held that the
said claim was made on the basis of payment of central sales tax
though the sale of bitumen was for use in Karnataka State only; it
was thus held that there being no interstate sale, there could be no
question for compensation with respect to the same.
OMP No.514/2009                                             Page 9 of 15

23.    The counsel for the petitioner also upon it being inquired as to
how with respect to local sale in a state, claim for central sales tax
could be made, did not press the challenge with respect to the said
claim.
24.    Claim No.3 of the petitioner before the Arbitral Tribunal was
for Rs.11,16,364/- for “price adjustment of bitumen on temporary
diversions and renewal coat”.     The claim was made under Clause
70.5.
25.    The Arbitral Tribunal found that the adjustment of contract
price under clause 70.5 (2) (a) was for bitumen for use in the
permanent works only and not for temporary works. The contention
of the petitioner was that the items were POQ items and hence the
petitioner was entitled to price variation thereon.        The Arbitral
Tribunal finding works with respect whereto price adjustment was
claimed to be of temporary nature, rejected the claim.
26.    The counsel for the petitioner has taken me to page 222 of the
paper book, containing copy of Bill No.9 and with reference to items
9.02 and 9.03 thereof to show that the items are included in the
BOQ. However from item No.10.03 in Bill No.10 on Page 223 of the
paper book the nature of the work as temporary is apparent.
27.    Again, it is a matter of appreciation of evidence as to what
works are permanent and what temporary.           The award contains
reasons for holding the works to be temporary. The finding of the
Arbitral Tribunal is a finding of fact. Section 34 does not permit a
challenge to such finding of fact.      This court cannot enter into
OMP No.514/2009                                             Page 10 of 15

investigation whether the works were permanent, as contended by
the petitioner.
28.    The Arbitral Tribunal comprised of experts in the field. It has
been held in Jagdish Chander Vs Hindustan Vegetable Oils
Corporation AIR 1990 Delhi 204 that the court should be slow in
interfering with the findings of such expert arbitrators.
29.    The next challenge is to the award with respect to claim No.5
(Rs 67,00,521) “for payment of foreign currency component of
interim payment certificates”.     The counsel for the petitioner has
contended that under the contract 10% of the value thereof was
payable to the petitioner in foreign exchange and for fluctuation in
rates thereof provision was made in Clause 15.2. The counsel admits
that the fluctuation as on the date of payment to the petitioner has
been taken into account. The claim is for fluctuation between the
date of said payment and the date of reconversion thereof into Indian
currency by the petitioner. The counsel for the petitioner contends
that the purport of Clause 15.2 is that the petitioner is to be
unaffected by fluctuation in rate of foreign exchange; thus the
petitioner needs to be saved even for fluctuation at the time of
reconversion by the petitioner.      On inquiry the counsel for the
petitioner admits that the time of reconversion was at the sole
discretion of the petitioner and the respondent had no control over
the date or time when the petitioner was to reconvert the foreign
exchange     to Indian   currency.   That    being  the   position,    the
interpretation of the arbitrator that the fluctuation if any of the time
when the petitioner reconverts the foreign exchange is not to be
considered and was not part of contractual obligation cannot be
OMP No.514/2009                                              Page 11 of 15

faulted with.   The petitioner by its own act could not make the
respondent liable.
30.    Claim No.6 of the petitioner was for Rs 2,06,47,791/- towards
“price adjustment of grade 60/70 bitumen”.     The price of bitumen
was to vary as provided in clause 70.5 of the agreement. The “basic
price” is defined in clause 70.5 as meaning the price indicated in
schedule 3 of Section IX of the bidding document, copy whereof is
filed at Page 238 of the paper book and wherein the basic price of
the bitumen 60/70 grade is given as Rs.12,000/- per MT. “Current
Price” is defined in clause 70.5 (ii) (a) as meaning the ex refinery
price inclusive of sales tax and excise duty from nearest refinery,
prevailing at the relevant time.
31.    The Arbitral Tribunal found that the project being an Asian
Development Bank project, exemption from excise duty had been
granted to the petitioner. Thus the admitted component of Rs 1296
per MT was removed from the base price of Rs 12,000/- per MT
given by the petitioner and the basic price of Rs 10,344.83 per MT
taken. Similarly, excise duty was not included in the current price
computation as well.
32.    The contention of the petitioner was/is that the basic price
should be taken as Rs 8100/- per MT, as the basic price of Rs
12,000/- given by him in schedule 3 (supra) was inclusive of, besides
excise duty aforesaid, sales tax of Rs 1183.90p per MT and
Transportation and Handling charges of Rs 1420.10p. per MT. Else
it was/is urged that transportation and handling charges should also
be added in the current price.
OMP No.514/2009                                           Page 12 of 15

33.    The Arbitral Tribunal held that Clause 70.5 clearly specifies
the modality of determining the current price as well as the meaning
of basic price. The Arbitral Tribunal also held the base price arrived
at by the Engineer Incharge to be in consonance with several other
clauses of the agreement. The Arbitral Tribunal further found that
there was no basis whatsoever for the transportation and handling
charges of Rs.1420.18p. per MT deemed to be included by the
petitioner in arriving at the total base price of Rs.12,000/- per MT in
the bid document.       The Arbitral Tribunal also noticed that the
petitioner   had   with  respect    to another    claim, accepted      the
transportation cost as Rs.800/- per MT as rightly determined by the
Engineer Incharge and for this reason found the figure of Rs.1420/-
per MT to be arbitrary and to be only to be able to justify the rate
calculation of Rs.12,000/- per MT. Thus the only tinkering with the
base price of Rs.12,000/- per MT given in the schedule to the
agreement was to the extent of excluding excise duty component
therefrom, since the same was not leviable. Similarly the Arbitral
Tribunal found that the contract did not permit inclusion of
transportation and handling charges to the current price.
34.    Neither do I find any ground under Section 34 of the Act to
have been made with respect to the aforesaid finding of the Arbitral
Tribunal nor has the counsel for the petitioner made any other
submissions with respect thereto.
35.    Claim No.8 of the petitioner for Rs 3,00,00,000/- was on
account of “Extra rates for value of works executed during the
extended period.     The original end date of the contract was 31 st
August, 2004 and was extended to 31st December, 2004 i.e. by four
months.    It was also the admitted position that price variation in
OMP No.514/2009                                              Page 13 of 15

respect of the work done during the said extended time had been
based on the agreed rates and paid by the respondent to the
petitioner.   The contention of the petitioner was that the price
variation so paid to him did not compensate him for the increase in
rate or the prices and preferred the claim in this regard on the basis
of 10% of the value of the work executed during the said extended
term.
36.    The Arbitral Tribunal found that the petitioner had not in
accordance with Clauses 52.1 and 52.2 given notice of any intention
to claim extra payment or a varied rate of price and held the
petitioner not entitled to any other increase than already paid. The
Arbitral Tribunal also found that the claim had not been made at any
time prior to 30th January, 2006 and that the petitioner had in fact
admitted that the price adjustment for the work done during the
extended period of four months had been paid and the parties had no
dispute on this. The Arbitral Tribunal also found that the claim was
not supported by any rate analysis or the prevalent rates during the
extended term.     The claim was thus held to be without any basis
whatsoever and rejected.
37.    The petitioner has in the OMP not challenged the finding of the
facts written by the Arbitral Tribunal of the petitioner having
accepted the increase paid and having confirmed that there were no
disputes with respect to the same.        The petitioner has also not
challenged the finding of the Arbitral Tribunal of petitioner having
not furnished any basis for the said claim. In my view on the basis of
the said factual findings of the Arbitral Tribunal alone no fault can be
found with the finding of the Arbitral Tribunal rejecting the said
claim.   Once the parties have agreed on a formula for payment of
OMP No.514/2009                                              Page 14 of 15

increase, the petitioner cannot make a claim in addition thereto and
specially when the petitioner has not even given any notice, as the
arbitrators have held was required to be given in terms of the
contract. The petitioner has in the OMP challenged that the clauses
of the contract referred to by the Arbitral Tribunal in this regard are
not applicable. However it cannot be forgotten that the award is not
challengeable merely because the interpretation of the contract by
the arbitrator is found to be wrong by the court. The findings of the
Arbitral Tribunal in this regard is neither shown to be in the face of
any contractual provision nor shown to be contrary to any
substantial law.     Thus no ground is made with respect to the
rejection of the said claim also.
38.   No perversity or anything to shock the judicial conscience is
found in portions of the arbitral award challenged in this petition.
Resultantly, the petition is dismissed. No order as to costs.
                                          RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
                                                (JUDGE)
September 09, 2009
J
OMP No.514/2009                                              Page 15 of 15


