   *IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                   CS(OS)1292/1992
%                                  Date of decision: 14.05.2009
JAWAHAR LAL KHANNA
THROUGH LEGAL REPRESENTATIVES                       ….…        Plaintiff
                         Through: Mr. S.C. Singhal, Advocate
                                 Versus
 JIA LAL KHANNA & ORS.                         .......     Defendants
                         Through: Mr. Vivek Sharma, Proxy counsel for
                         Mr. Ashish Makhija, Advocate for defendant No.1
CORAM :-
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
1.    Whether reporters of Local papers may
      be allowed to see the judgment?      Not Necessary
2.    To be referred to the reporter or not?       Not Necessary
3.    Whether the judgment should be reported
      in the Digest?     Not necessary
RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J.
1.    Partition of House No.B-III/31, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi and
commercial      building bearing   Municipal    No.XIII/2407-15      (New)
Teliwara, near Sadar Bazar, Delhi is sought.
2.    According to the plaint, the plaintiff and the defendants
No.1&2 are brothers; their father Sh. Panna Lal Khanna was the
owner of the aforesaid two properties; the father died on 29th July,
1975 leaving his widow and other children also besides the plaintiff
and the defendants No.1&2; that the father left a Will dated 1st May,
1973 bequeathing the aforesaid two properties to the plaintiff and
the defendants No.1&2 in equal shares after the demise of his wife
Smt. Bishan Devi; that Smt. Bishan Devi also died intestate on 29th
November, 1975; that the Will dated 1st May, 1973 of the father has
CS(OS)1292/1992                                               Page 1 of 16

been probated by the court of the District Judge, Delhi vide order
dated 14th April, 1980. The plaintiff claims to be in possession of a
part of the house in Lajpat Nagar; the defendant No.1 is in
possession of another part of the said house; the remaining house as
well as the entire property at Teliwara are stated to be tenanted. The
cause of action for the suit was stated to be receipt of letter by the
plaintiff from the Asstt. Settlement Commissioner, Govt. of India
impleaded as defendant No.3 being the lessor of the land underneath
the Lajpat Nagar house, inviting objections, if any, of the plaintiff to
the application of the defendant No.1 for mutation of the Lajpat
Nagar house from the name of the father to himself.
3.    The defendant No.1 contested the suit. The defence of the
defendant No.1 is that he had been issued letters of administration
with Will (Supra) annexed of the father; that the plaintiff as well as
the defendant No.2 had given affidavits in the said proceedings
stating that both the aforesaid properties had been constructed by
the defendant No.1 and all the expenses of construction had been
borne by the defendant No.1 and that the rent from the tenants in
both the properties were being realized by the defendant No.1 only,
even during the lifetime of the parents.     The defendant No.1 also
pleaded that the defendant No.2 had also executed a relinquishment
deed dated 24th April, 1984 registered on 26th April, 1984 in his
favour and confirming that the defendant No.1 is the owner of the
properties in question.     The defendant No.1 contends that the
properties were acquired by him only in the name of his father and
that he is the absolute owner thereof and the plaintiff or the
defendant No.2 have no share in the same.
CS(OS)1292/1992                                             Page 2 of 16

4.    The defendant No.2 was proceeded against ex-parte on 16th
January,     1996.      The     defendant    No.3    (Asstt. Settlement
Commissioner) which is a proforma party was also proceeded against
ex-parte.
5.    On 15th February, 2006, the following issues were framed:-
      1. Whether the suit property is a joint property of plaintiff and
          defendant Nos.1 & 2? OPP
      2. Whether the defendant No.1 is the exclusive owner of the
          suit property and superstructure erected over it? OPD
      3. Whether the defendant No.1 has borne out the entire
          expenditure and paid all the dues in respect of suit
          property? OPD
      4. Whether the plaintiff and the defendant No.2, stopped (SIC
          are estopped) from challenging the title of defendant No.1
          in respect of suit property in view of the execution of
          affidavit and deed of relinquishment in favour of defendant
          No.1? OPP
      5. Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of partition to
          the extent of 1/3rd share in the suit property? OPP
      6. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for rendition of accounts? If
          yes, for which period and for what amount? OPP
      7. Whether the suit is not maintainable as being barred by
          limitation and hit by the law of estopple? OPD
      8. Whether the suit is not maintainable in view of the letter of
          administration granted by the successor Court as being a
CS(OS)1292/1992                                              Page 3 of 16

          judgment in rem and is not open for challenge to (SIC by)
          the parties? OPP
      9. Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of the parties? OPP
      10.    Whether the suit has not been properly valued for the
          purposes of court fee and jurisdiction? OPP
      11.    Relief.
6.    On 8th May, 2006 an application of the plaintiff for restraining
the defendant from dealing with the two properties was for
consideration. The counsel for the defendant No.1 stated that he had
already made a statement to the effect that he will not sell the Lajpat
Nagar property.       The defendant No.1 present in person also
informed that the Teliwara property had been sold more than ten
years ago. On 23rd August, 2006, the application of the defendant
No.1 for direction to the defendant No.3 L&DO to execute lease deed
of the Lajpat Nagar property in his exclusive name was dismissed.
While doing so, this court observed that even though letters of
administration have been issued in favour of the defendant No.1 but
that did not make the defendant No.1 the exclusive owner of the
property.
7.    The plaintiff died before giving evidence. His son and widow
were substituted in his place.
8.    Though the legal heirs of the plaintiff had also filed the
affidavit by way of examination in chief of the defendant No.2 as a
witness of the plaintiff but he did not appear for his cross
examination; only Mr. Nishith Khanna son of the deceased plaintiff
was examined.       He was cross examined by the counsel for the
CS(OS)1292/1992                                            Page 4 of 16

defendant No.1.      The defendant No.1 filed his affidavit by way of
examination in chief but failed to appear for cross examination
inspite of repeated opportunities. Ultimately, vide order dated 21st
July, 2008 the evidence of the defendant No.1 was closed.
9.     The counsel for the plaintiff has been heard. The counsel for
the defendant No.1 has filed written agreements.
       My issue-wise findings are as under:-
Re. Issue No.1 (Whether the suit property is a joint property of
plaintiff and defendant Nos.1 & 2? OPP)
10.    The admitted position is that the suit properties are recorded
in the names of the father of the plaintiff and the defendants
No.1&2. It is further the admitted position that the father of the said
parties left a Will. Letters of administration with copy of the said Will
annexed were ordered to be issued vide order dated 14th April, 1980
of the District Judge, Delhi. The said order has been proved as
Exhibit PW-1/2 and a certified copy of the Will dated 1st May, 1973
has been proved as Exhibit PW-1/1.
11.    The Will dated 1st May, 1973 is of some significance and the
relevant portion thereof is reproduced herein below:-
          “Whereas I bequeath my properties (i) No.B-III/31,
          Lajpat Nagar (residence house) (ii) No.XIII/2407-15
          (New) Teliwara, Delhi in favour of my wife Smt. Bishan
          Devi after my death. I shall however, remain the owner
          of these properties during my lifetime.
          Whereas my wife Smt. Bishan Devi shall be the
          exclusive owner of the aforesaid properties during her
          lifetime. In case she does not make any Will during her
          lifetime, the aforesaid properties shall fall to my legal
          heirs namely (i) Jia Lal Khanna (ii) Din Dayal Khanna
          (iii) Jawahar Lal Khanna in equal shares.
          “Whereas the self properties are my self made
          properties out of my earnings and are not ancestral
          properties.”
CS(OS)1292/1992                                              Page 5 of 16

12.   Exhibit PW-1/2 i.e. the order dated 14th April, 1980 of the
District Judge, Delhi ordering issuance of letters of administration
with Will annexed. It shows that the petition for letters of
administration was filed jointly by the plaintiff as well as the
defendants No.1&2 and letters of administration were vide the said
order granted jointly to the plaintiff and the defendants No.1&2.
The plaintiff has also filed certified copy of the petition dated 13th
October, 1976/9th February, 1977 on which the aforesaid order dated
14th April, 1980 was made. Though no Exhibit mark has been put on
the said petition but being a certified copy and being a undisputed
document and with an intent to appreciate the matter fully I deemed
it appropriate to read the same into evidence. In the said petition,
the plaintiff as well as the defendants No.1&2 have stated that the
properties mentioned in Schedule „A‟ to the petition were the
properties of the father Sh. Panna Lal Khanna.         The properties
mentioned in Schedule „A‟ to the petition include the aforesaid two
properties with respect to which this suit has been filed. Thus as on
the date of the institution of the petition for grant of letters of
administration or even at the time of grant thereof the defendant
No.1 did not contend that in fact he was the sole owner of the said
two properties and his father had no right to make a Will with
respect thereto. On the contrary, the petition for grant of letters of
administration was filed jointly by the plaintiff and the defendants
No.1&2 claiming to have become entitled to the properties as equal
owners thereof on the demise of their parents.
13.   At this stage, the two affidavits forming the main stay of the
case of the defendant No.1 may be considered. The said affidavits
are also undisputed.      The son of the plaintiff appearing as the
CS(OS)1292/1992                                            Page 6 of 16

witness admitted the signature of the deceased plaintiff on the
original of the said affidavit dated 10th November, 1976 filed before
the District Judge in proceeding aforesaid. The affidavit executed by
the deceased plaintiff is Exhibit PW-1/D-1. In the said affidavit the
deceased plaintiff has stated that the Lajpat Nagar house was
constructed by the defendant No.1 in the year 1953-54 and all
expenses incurred in construction etc. were borne by the defendant
No.1 and the defendant No.1 was also realizing rent from the
tenants from time to time, even during the lifetime of the parents.
The said affidavit does not concern the other property at Teliwara.
14.   The case of the defendant No.1 is that owing to the said
affidavit the plaintiff is estopped from claiming any share in the
properties.   In the written arguments filed by the counsel for the
defendant No.1 it is contended that the said affidavit constitutes a
judicial estopple against the plaintiff. The contention of the
defendant No.1 is not found tenable. The affidavit nowhere admits
the defendant No.1 to be the owner of the property and does not
negate the rights of the father of the parties and in exercise of which
right the Will had been made. Shortly, prior to the date of the said
affidavit, all parties had stated in the petition for letters of
administration that the property was of the father. A statement that
the property was constructed by the defendant No.1 and that the
expenses of construction were borne by the defendant No.1 and that
the rent was being realized by the defendant No.1 does not
constitute the defendant No.1 as the owner of the property.           The
affidavit does not state that the father of the parties had permitted
the defendant No.1 to raise construction in exercise of rights as
owners. Merely because a son constructs at his own expense the
structure over the land in the name of the father, does not constitute
CS(OS)1292/1992                                             Page 7 of 16

the son as the owner of the property.       The principle of accretion
applies, in the absence of any contract. Similarly, mere realization of
rent from the tenants by the son, of the property in the name of the
father, does not make the son the owner of the property.
15.   Another relevant aspect is in that notwithstanding the said
affidavit, the petition for letters of administration was pursued and
the letters of administration ordered to be issued jointly in the name
of the plaintiff and the defendants No.1&2. Had the purport of filing
the said affidavit been to extinguish the rights, if any, of the plaintiff
and the defendant No.2 in the property, the prayer in the petition for
letters of administration would have been amended thereafter and
the letters of administration sought in the name of the defendant
No.1 only.
16.   The defendant No.1 has filed before the court the photocopy of
the letters of administration dated 28th May, 1990 ultimately issued
pursuant to the order dated 14th April, 1980 (Supra). The said letters
of administration is in the name of the defendant No.1 only.           The
said document has not been proved, the defendant No.1 having not
led any evidence. Ordinarily, the letters of administration ultimately
issued ought to have been in consonance with the order directing
the same to be issued. The photocopy of letters of administration
even if read in evidence, shows the same to have been issued to the
defendant No.1 only, though pursuant to order dated 14th April, 1980
(Supra). There is no explanation whatsoever as to why the letters of
administration was issued in favour of one of the persons only
instead of three persons in whose favour it was ordered to be issued.
Again, that would still not make the defendant No.1 the owner of the
property. Administration was granted to him to administer the estate
CS(OS)1292/1992                                               Page 8 of 16

in accordance with law. The law of succession in this case being the
Will  aforesaid    annexed   to  the  letters  of  administration      and
whereunder      the  properties  had   been   bequeathed    equally      to
defendant No.1, plaintiff and the defendant No.2. Thus the issuance
of the letters of administration in the name of the defendant No.1
does not take away the joint character of the properties.              The
defendant No.1 even as the sole administrator is to distribute the
properties according to the Will.
17.   The defendant No.1 has also filed a photocopy of a registered
relinquishment deed stated to have been executed by the defendant
No.2 of his share in the aforesaid two properties in favour of the
defendant No.1. The said relinquishment deed again has not been
proved. Even if it were to be read, the same is qua the share of the
defendant No.2 only and not the share of the plaintiff.
18.   I had during the hearing, inquired from the counsel for the
plaintiff as to the language of the Will aforesaid.     It was felt that
under Will Sh. Panna Lal Khanna bequeathed to his wife Smt. Bishan
Devi the properties absolutely; Shri Panna Lal Khanna had no right
to bequeath the properties after the demise of his wife to the
plaintiff and the defendants No.1&2. It was put to the counsel for
the plaintiff as to how the suit for partition was maintainable when
admittedly there were other heirs also of Smt. Bishan Devi. The
principle as enshrined in Mauleshwar Mani Vs. Jagdish Prasad
AIR 2002 SC 727 being that once the testator has given a absolute
right to a devisee, it is not open to the testator to further bequeath
the same property in favour of second set of persons. The testator
cannot create successive legatees in his Will.
CS(OS)1292/1992                                              Page 9 of 16

19.    The counsel for the plaintiff has contended that the estate
given to Smt. Bishan Devi under the Will is a lifetime estate only and
not absolute estate and thus Sh. Panna Lal Khanna was competent to
Will the properties after the lifetime of his wife. Reliance in this
regard has been placed on Sadhu Singh Vs. Gurdwara Sahib
Narike (2006) 8 SCC 75 and T.K. Subhash Vs. Kamla Bai AIR
2008 Andhra Pradesh 169.
20.    It is also the contention of the counsel for the plaintiff that the
property has always been treated as the property of the plaintiff and
defendants No.1&2 only and on this basis only the other legal heirs
of Sh. Panna Lal Khanna and Smt. Bishan Devi had given their no
objection to the grant of letters of administration. Observations in
this regard in the order dated 14th April, 1980 granting letters of
administration have also been made.
21.    Even though I had raised the query aforesaid but on further
consideration I do not deem it appropriate to enquire into it further.
The question involves interpretation of Will, i.e. whether thereunder
Smt. Bishan Devi was given a life estate or absolute estate and even
if life estate, the impact of Section 14 of Hindu Succession Act,
thereon. If life estate was given, then Sh. Panna Lal Khanna was
competent to, after the demise of Smt. Bishan Devi bequeath the
properties to plaintiff and defendants No.1&2 only. However, if the
properties were bequeathed absolutely to Smt. Bishan Devi, then
Shri Pana Lal Khanna was incompetent to thereafter bequeath the
properties to plaintiff and defendants No.1&2 only and in which case
on demise of Smt. Bishan Devi not only plaintiff and defendants
No.1&2 but her other natural heirs will also have a share in the
CS(OS)1292/1992                                               Page 10 of 16

property. The suit has already been pending since 1992. It appears
that the other heirs have not made any claim to the property till
now. It is basically the plaintiff and the defendant No.1 only who are
litigating with respect to the same. Neither of the courses, either
impleading the other heirs as parties to this suit or of dismissing the
suit for this reason are in the circumstances found feasible.            I,
therefore, proceed to adjudicate the suit on the premise of plaintiff
and defendants No.1&2 only getting the properties under the Will
aforesaid.
       More so when the decision in the present suit would not affect
the rights, if any, of any other heirs in any case.
22.    The issue No.1 is thus decided in favour of the plaintiff and
against the defendant No.1 and it is held that the suit properties are
the joint properties of the plaintiff and the defendants No.1&2.
Re. Issue No.2 (Whether the defendant No.1 is the exclusive
owner of the suit property and superstructure erected over it?
OPD).
23.    In view of the findings on issue No.1, this issue necessarily has
to be decided against the defendant No.1. Even otherwise the
defendant No.1 has not led any evidence whatsoever of being the
exclusive owner of the properties. Reference in this regard may also
be made to the provisions of the Benami Transfer Prohibition Act,
1988, after the promulgation whereof the present suit has been filed.
The plea of the defendant No.1 of being the owner, in the face of the
property being in the name of the father is in the teeth of the said
law.
Re. Issue No.3 (Whether the defendant No.1 has borne out the
entire expenditure and paid all the dues in respect of suit
property? OPD)
CS(OS)1292/1992                                              Page 11 of 16

24.   The defendant No.1 has not led any evidence of having borne
the expenditure or of having paid the dues of the property. However
as far as bearing expenditure in construction of the property is
admitted in affidavit Exhibit PW-1/D1 of the deceased plaintiff, the
same would still not constitute the defendant No.1 as the sole owner
of the property. The issue is thus decided against the defendant No.1
and in favour of the plaintiff.
Re. Issue No.4 (Whether the plaintiff and the defendant No.2,
stopped from challenging the title of defendant No.1 in
respect of suit property in view of the execution of affidavit
and deed of relinquishment in favour of defendant No.1? OPP)
25.   I have in issue No.1 already held that the execution of the
affidavit dated 10th November, 1976 does not constitute estopple
against the plaintiff from claiming share in the property.         Even
otherwise, the rights in immovable property cannot be extinguished
by estopple except under Section 41 of the Transfer of Property Act.
As far as the deed of relinquishment is concerned, there is no plea of
the plaintiff having executed any deed of relinquishment. The plea of
the defendant No.1 is of the defendant No.2 only relinquishing his
share in the property. Even though, the defendant No.2 has in the
relinquishment deed (which as aforesaid has also not been proved)
stated that the property belonged to the defendant No.1 only but the
same would not be binding on the plaintiff. Thus the claim of the
plaintiff to a share in the property would not be affected by the
affidavit or by the deed of relinquishment. The issue is decided in
favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant No.1.
Re. Issue No.5 (Whether the plaintiff is entitled to a decree of
partition to the extent of 1/3rd share in the suit property? OPP)
CS(OS)1292/1992                                            Page 12 of 16

26.    Axiomatically, the plaintiff is found entitled to a decree for
partition to the extent of his 1/3rd share in the properties. The issue
is decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant No.1.
Re. Issue No.6 (Whether the plaintiff is entitled for rendition
of accounts? If yes, for which period and for what amount?
OPP)
27.    The plaintiff having been found entitled to the relief of
partition and the defendant No.1 having claimed to have sold one of
the properties, the plaintiff is also found entitled to the relief of
accounts against the defendant No.1.        The defendant No.1 as co-
owner is found liable to account to the plaintiff as other co-owner
particularly when the defendant No.1 admittedly has been dealing
with the properties. The plaintiff has claimed accounts w.e.f. 3 years
prior to the institution of the suit and the said claim is found to be
valid. This issue is decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendant No.1.
Re. Issue No.7 (Whether the suit is not maintainable as being
barred by limitation and hit by the law of estopple? OPD)
28.    The cause of action for a suit for partition is the denial of claim
therefor. In the present case, the denial by the defendant No.1 of the
right of the plaintiff to a share in the properties was only by applying
to the L&DO for mutation of the property in his name only.              The
L&DO informed the plaintiff of such claim of the defendant No.1 vide
its letter dated 24th April, 1992.      The suit was filed immediately
thereafter and is thus found to be within time. The counsel for the
defendant No.1 in written arguments has contended that the plaintiff
has approached after 17 years; probably from date of demise of Smt.
Bishan Devi in 1975. However, as aforesaid letters of administration
were jointly applied for in 1976, ordered to be jointly issued in 1980.
CS(OS)1292/1992                                               Page 13 of 16

Even if the date of issuance of letters of administration in 1990 is to
be reckoned, the suit was filed within two years therefrom. Merely
because     the  defendant    No.1   alone   pursued    for   letters    of
administration would not bar the plaintiff‟s relief of partition. The
plea of estopple of the defendant has already been dealt herein
above. The issue is decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the
defendant No.1.
Re. Issue No.8 (Whether the suit is not maintainable in view of
the letter of administration granted by the successor Court as
being a judgment in rem and is not open for challenge to the
parties? OPP).
29.   The grant of administration to the defendant No.1 does not
constitute the defendant No.1 as the sole owner of the property of
which administration has been granted to him. In this case, the
letters of administration is with a copy of the Will annexed. Under
the said Will the property has been bequeathed equally to the
plaintiff and the defendants No.1&2.       Such was the case of        the
defendant No.1 also in the petition for grant of letters of
administration.   The order dated 14th April, 1980 also provides for
grant jointly to the plaintiff and the defendants No.1&2. Thus the
ultimate grant even if in the name of the defendant No.1 only is no
bar to the present suit.
Re. Issue No.9 (Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of the
parties? OPP)
30.   In the light of discussion under Issue No.1 above, the suit is
held to be not bad for non-joinder of parties. Even otherwise under
Order 1 Rule 9 CPC, no suit can be defeated for the reason of non-
joinder of parties. This issues is decided in favour of the plaintiff and
against the defendant No.1.
CS(OS)1292/1992                                              Page 14 of 16

Re. Issue No.10 (Whether the suit has not been properly
valued for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction? OPP)
31.    The plaintiff was admitted to be in possession and enjoyment
part of the property. In the circumstances, fixed court fee was
payable on the plaint. The suit is found to have been properly valued
for the purposes of court fee and jurisdiction. This issue is also
decided in favour of the plaintiff.
Re. Issue No.11 (Relief).
32.    Even though, in view of my findings herein above, the
preliminary decree declaring the plaintiff and the defendants
No.1&2 to be having 1/3rd undivided share each in the property
follows, but considering long length of time the litigation has already
remained pending in the first court and further considering that the
defendant No.2 has chosen not to contest the suit, even though the
defendant No.1 has failed to prove the relinquishment deed executed
by the defendant No.2 of his 1/3rd share in the properties in favour of
the defendant No.1, I am inclined to believe the same. Declaring the
defendant No.2 also to be having 1/3rd share would further delay the
final decree in the suit. Thus, (i) a preliminary decree for partition of
the properties aforesaid is passed declaring the plaintiff to be having
1/3rd and the defendant No.1 to be having 2/3rd share therein.
(ii) a decree for accounts is also passed in favour of plaintiff and
against defendant No.1 directing the defendant No.1 to render
accounts with respect to aforesaid two properties, with effect from
three years prior to institution of suit.
       Decree sheet be drawn up.
CS(OS)1292/1992                                              Page 15 of 16

33.   The defendant No.1 has on a frivolous and vexatious defence
held up disposal of this suit for nearly 17 years. I, therefore, burden
the defendant No.1 with exemplary costs of Rs.50,000/- payable to
the plaintiff. However, if the defendant No.1 is not found delaying
disposal of the proceedings post preliminary decree, the cost today
imposed shall be entitled to be waived.
                                           RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
                                                 (JUDGE)
May 14, 2009
PP
CS(OS)1292/1992                                             Page 16 of 16


