           *IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                  Date of decision: 17th December, 2015
+                                W.P.(C) No.6414/2013
        MANOHAR LAL SHARMA                                ….. Petitioner
                          Through: Petitioner-in-person.
                                   Versus
        UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                             ….. Respondents
                          Through:     Ms. Jasmeet Singh, CGSC with Mr.
                                       Pankaj Bansal, Assistant Director,
                                       Home Ministry.
                                       Mr. Pranav Sachdeva and Mr. Syed
                                       Musaib, Advs. for AAP.
                                       Mr. Anshuman Sinha and Mr. Vijay
                                       Kumar Pandey, Advs. for R-5.
CORAM :-
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J
1.      The petition, filed as a Public Interest Litigation (PIL), seeks a
mandamus to the respondent No.1 Union of India (UOI) (Ministry of Home
Affairs) to register a criminal case against the respondents No.2 to 5 viz. Sh.
Shanti Bhushan, Sh. Prashant Bhushan, Sh. Arvind Kejriwal and Sh. Manish
Sisodia under Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (FCRA) and to
conduct day-to-day trial proceedings within supervision of this Court. Ancillary
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                              Page 1 of 9

reliefs of seizure of accounts and funds secured by the respondents No.2 to 5 in
the name of Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) and other societies / entities is also
claimed.
2.      It is inter alia the case in the petition that though the petitioner had made
a complaint dated 20th August, 2011 in this regard to the respondent No.1 UOI
and upon UOI not taking any action thereon had also earlier filed W.P.(C)
No.3412/2012 before this Court but this petition was being filed upon fresh
cause of action within the admitted facts having accrued to the petitioner.
3.      The petition came up for admission on 11th October, 2013 when the
learned Additional Solicitor General (ASG) appearing on advance notice stated
that the complaint received from the petitioner had been investigated and a
report was submitted to the Court in W.P.(C) No.3412/2012. Accordingly, the
matter was adjourned to 23rd October, 2013 with a direction to the learned ASG
to produce the said report. On 23rd October, 2013, the counsel for the
respondent No.1 UOI stated that the status report filed on 15 th January, 2013 in
W.P.(C) No.3412/2012 pertained to evaluation done in the year 2012 with
respect to the accounts of the Civil Society @ Team Anna and that UOI would
look into the allegations in the petition and if need be call for relevant
information pertaining the monies received by AAP from donors abroad.
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                                     Page 2 of 9

4.      The petitioner filed CM No.521/2014 for a direction to the respondent
No.6 Ford Foundation to enquire and report about their association with the
respondents No.2 to 5. The petitioner also filed an additional affidavit dated
16th November, 2013 making certain other averments as to the collection of
donation from private sources by the consortium of respondents No.2 to 5.
5.      On 29th January, 2014, the learned ASG appearing for the respondent
No.1 UOI stated that certain queries had been made from the respondents
pertaining to allegations in the petition and response whereto was awaited and
the verification would be completed thereafter.
6.      Vide order dated 5th February, 2014, on oral application of the petitioner,
AAP was impleaded as respondent No.7 and a response called therefrom. A
counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the said respondent No.7 AAP
responding to the allegations made in the petition and to which a rejoinder has
been filed by the petitioner.
7.      By order dated 12th March, 2014 respondent No.1 UOI was directed to
file its counter affidavit and has filed an affidavit dated 6 th May, 2014 inter alia
stating i) that it had filed a status report with respect to the allegations made by
the petitioner in the earlier writ petition being W.P.(C) No.3412/2012 and after
pursuing which status report, vide order dated 24th January, 2014, the said writ
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                                    Page 3 of 9

petition was closed observing that the irregularities found were not serious
enough to warrant criminal investigation; ii) that a questionnaire had been sent
to the Chief Functionary of AAP pertaining to the allegations made in the
present petition and to which a response had been received; and, iii) further
information had been sought from AAP and the allegations of the petitioner
with regard to violation by respondents No.2 to 5 of FCRA were being enquired
into.
8.      The petitioner has filed CM No.2641/2015 seeking directions to the
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) / National Investigation Agency (NIA) to
investigate against the respondents as well as the officials of Home Ministry
who according to the petitioner had filed un-investigated status report in
W.P.(C) No.3412/2012.
9.      We have heard the petitioner appearing in person, the counsel for the
respondent UOI and the counsel for the respondent AAP. The counsel for the
respondent UOI during the hearing also handed over the record of the Ministry
of Home Affairs pertaining to the matter in a sealed cover and which has also
been perused by us.
10.     While the petitioner and the counsel for the respondent UOI reiterated
their contentions as recorded by us hereinabove, the counsel for the respondent
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                                Page 4 of 9

no.7 AAP vehemently contended that the respondent no.7 AAP is being
targeted for such investigation and when it is the case of the respondent no.7
AAP that all other major political parties should be investigated on the same
lines and that the respondent no.7 AAP has nothing to hide and functions in a
transparent manner. It was also contended that the respondent no.7 AAP has in
fact approached to the Supreme Court for investigation into funding of all
political parties. The petitioner, in addition contended that the investigation also
has to be regarding the violations of Foreign Exchange Regulations Act, 1973
and Foreign Exchange Management Act and that the Central Investigation
Agency (CIA) of the United States of America also has to be involved owing to
the involvement of the Ford Foundation. He has during the hearing also handed
over several news clippings including of International Journals, downloaded
from the internet. In fact after the judgment had been reserved also the
petitioner mentioned the matter and has handed over an affidavit of one Mr.
Neil Terrance Haslam, S/o Mr. Roland Terrance deposing that the respondents
in this petition, against whom investigation is sought, have a direct connection
with one Mr. Daud Ibrahim residing in Pakistan who has arranged funds for the
respondents through USA, Canada. Certain other allegations have also been
made which we do not deem it necessary to record here.
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                                  Page 5 of 9

11.     We have considered the rival contentions.
12.     Though undoubtedly the Courts, in exercise of their power of judicial
review, are entitled to direct investigation into an offence alleged to have taken
place, as reiterated by the Constitution Bench in State of West Bengal Vs.
Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights West Bengal (2010) 3 SCC
571 and such direction would not amount to infringement of the doctrine of
separation of powers but such power should not be exercised just for asking or
to satisfy the ego or vindicate the prestige of a party interested in such
investigation and only if find such a direction necessary in the facts and
circumstances of the case/situation.
13.     In our view, the Courts would be justified in issuing such a direction only
if were to find prima facie an offence to have been committed and the
Investigating Agency, for whatsoever reason, unwilling to act lest investigate or
if find the investigation though undertaken, to be not a fair one or when find the
gravity of the offence prima facie found by the Court to be such which requires
investigation by a specialized agency, to restore public faith in the process of
law.
14.     In the facts of the present case we do not find either of the said
requirements to have been met. Not only has the State/State Agency not refused
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                                  Page 6 of 9

investigation or a willingness to look into the allegations made in the petition
against the respondents but from a perusal of the records produced before us we
find the State to have, in the context of each and every averment made in the
present case, launched an inquiry/investigation in accordance with law. The
petitioner has also not been able to make out a case of the likelihood of the
investigation against the respondents being not fair and proper, owing to
political factors or owing to the investigative agencies being under the
administrative control of the respondents. In fact, this Court had closed the
earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner finding no prima facie merit in the
allegations of the petitioner to call for an order by the Court in exercise of its
power of judicial review, to the investigative agencies to investigate.
15.     Supreme Court, in Secretary, Minor Irrigation & Rural Engineering
Services, U.P. Vs. Sahngoo Ram Arya (2002) 5 SCC 521, set aside the
judgment of the High Court directing the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI)
to hold an inquiry into the allegations made against the Minister. It was
reiterated that direction for investigation can be given only if an offence is
prima facie found to have been committed or a person’s involvement is prima
facie established but a direction to investigate whether any person has
committed an offence or not, cannot be legally given; such a direction would be
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                                 Page 7 of 9

contrary to the concept and philosophy of "LIFE" and "LIBERTY" guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution. Finding that the High Court had issued the
direction without coming to a definite conclusion that there is a prima facie case
established to direct an inquiry and that the High Court had proceeded on the
basis of ‘ifs’ and ‘buts’, the said direction was set aside.
16.     As far back as in S.N. Sharma Vs. Bipen Kumar Tiwari (1970) 1 SCC
653, while dealing with powers of Magistrate under Code of Criminal
Procedure, it was held that unless an extraordinary case of gross abuse of power
is made out by those in charge of investigation, the Court should be quite loathe
to interfere with the investigation, a field of activity reserved for the Police and
the executive.
17.     Thus, only if a case of mala fide exercise of power by a police officer is
made out, would the Court interfere.
18.     Supreme Court again in Babubhai Vs. State of Gujarat (2010) 12 SCC
254 reiterated that only in exceptional circumstances and in order to prevent
miscarriage of criminal justice the Court would interfere in investigation. Only
when there is a reasonable apprehension about justice becoming a victim
because of shabby or partisan investigation that the Court would step in and
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                                   Page 8 of 9

exercise its extraordinary power. The said principle has been recently reiterated
in Mithilesh Kumar Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan (2015) 9 SCC 795.
19.     In the present case, we do not find any reason as to why the investigative
agencies to whom the petitioner has already complained would not look into or
are not looking into the allegations or would not discover the truth.
20.     We therefore do not find any case or the need for any direction to be
issued by the Court and dismiss this petition with the clarification that neither
should the dismissal of this petition be considered as this Court having
expressed any view on the merits of the allegations of the petitioner nor should
any observation herein be read as our having found any merit therein.
        No cost.
                                                    RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J
                                                              CHIEF JUSTICE
                     th
DECEMBER 17 , 2015
‘gsr’/pp..
W.P.(C) No.6414/2013                                                  Page 9 of 9


