            *IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                           Date of decision: 14th July, 2011
+                              W.P.(C) 7646/2008
        SEEMA BANSAL                                               ..... Petitioner
                               Through:       Mr. Sumir Bansal & Mr. Vaibhav
                                              Arora, Advocates.
                                       Versus
        D.D.A.                                                   ..... Respondent
                               Through:       Mr. M.K. Singh, Adv.
                                       AND
+                              W.P.(C) 8563/2008
        SUSHIL KUMAR GOEL                                           ..... Petitioner
                               Through:       Mr. Sumir Bansal & Mr. Vaibhav
                                              Arora, Advocates.
                                       Versus
        D.D.A.                                                   ..... Respondent
                               Through:       Mr. Neeraj Choudhary, Adv.
CORAM :-
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
1.      Whether reporters of Local papers may
        be allowed to see the judgment?                           No.
2.      To be referred to the reporter or not?                    No.
3.      Whether the judgment should be reported                   No.
        in the Digest?
W.P.(C) No.7646/2008 & W.P.(C) No.8563/2008                                Page 1 of 6

RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J.
1.      The challenge in these petitions is to the demand of the respondent
DDA for unearned increase. The petitioner in each of the cases is the
purchaser in an auction held in the year 2005 by the Delhi Financial
Corporation (DFC) (not a party in these proceedings) of the plots of land
admeasuring 44 and 50 sq.m. respectively in Pocket-F, PVC Bazar, Tikri
Kalan, Delhi. DFC came to auction the said plots for the reason of the
original allottees of the plots having failed to re-pay the dues of DFC.
The petitioners thereafter as per the terms of the said auction applied to
the respondent DDA for mutation/transfer and execution of lease deed of
the said plots in their favour. The respondent DDA in the year 2007,
communicated the unearned increase payable by each of the petitioners.
Impugning the computation of the said unearned increase, the present
writ petitions have been filed.
2.       Though pursuant to the allotment of the plots aforesaid by the
respondent DDA, perpetual lease deed were to be executed but were in
fact not executed. However the terms and conditions of such allotment
inter alia provide as under:-
W.P.(C) No.7646/2008 & W.P.(C) No.8563/2008                        Page 2 of 6

        “(vi) The allottee shall not be entitled to sell, transfer,
        assign or otherwise part with possession of the whole or part
        of the plot, before or after the erection of the building on the
        plot without the previous consent in writing of the lessor. In
        the event of consent being given, the lessor may impose any
        condition and also be entitled to claim and recover a portion
        being 50% of the unearned increase in the value of the land
        (i.e. difference between the premium paid and the market
        value of the plot) at the time of sale, transfer assignment or
        parting with the possession. Provided that the lessor shall
        have pre-emptive right to purchase the property after
        deducting 50% of the unearned increase as aforesaid. The
        pre-emptive right of purchase would be exercise by the lessor
        as and when the built up space is required in public
        interest.”
3.      It is contention of the counsel for the petitioners that the demand
for unearned increase is not as per the aforesaid clause but de hors the
same.
4.      The respondent DDA in reply to an RTI query of the petitioners
informed and the same is the stand of the DDA in the counter affidavits
also, that the allotment in Tikri Kalan was on pre-determined rates which
were subsidized rates and that unearned increase is based on average
auction rate of Narela. I have enquired from the counsels for DDA
whether Tikri Kalan forms the part of Narela. They inform that Tikri
Kalan falls in the West District while Narela falls in the North West
District of the city.
W.P.(C) No.7646/2008 & W.P.(C) No.8563/2008                          Page 3 of 6

5.      It is further the stand of DDA that as per the Unearned Increase
Booklet of 1996, the value of plot is worked out on the basis of the
highest rate of the following rates:-
        “i)     Financial year & Zonal Market rate applicable for
                calculation of 50% UEI as per average auction rate.”
        ii)     MOUD’s market rate for residential/commercial
                properties applicable for calculating 50%.
        iii)    Delhi          Admn.        Market        rate        for
                residential/commercial/industrial plots.”
6.      It is further informed that the market rate of the plots in the present
cases for computation of unearned increase has been arrived at on the
basis of average auction rate of commercial plots and since the average
auction rate of any commercial plot in Tikri Kalan was not available, the
average auction rate of commercial plots in Narela has been considered.
7.      The counsels for the DDA have failed to produce before this Court
the Unearned Increase Booklet referred in the reply to the RTI
query/counter affidavit.
8.      The terms and conditions of allotment supra do not provide that the
unearned increase would be determined in accordance with the Booklet
aforesaid or any other Rule of the DDA. On the contrary, unearned
increase was agreed to be taken on the basis of the difference between
W.P.(C) No.7646/2008 & W.P.(C) No.8563/2008                           Page 4 of 6

premium paid for the plot and the market value of the plot. There can be
no better indicator of the market value of the plot than the price which the
plot fetched in the auction held by the DFC. The respondent DDA in its
counter affidavit has not stated any reason whatsoever as to why rate
which the plots fetched in the auction is not the market rate or is a
suppressed rate. The auction as aforesaid was held by DFC and not by
any private person/body.
9.      In the circumstances, the demand for unearned increase impugned
in these petitions is found to be in violation of the terms and conditions of
allotment and is set aside.
10.     The counsels for the DDA have neither in their counter affidavits
nor otherwise informed the premium paid for each of the aforesaid plots.
The counsel for the petitioners states that since the petitioners are not
original allottee of the plots, they are also not aware of the same.
Accordingly the writ petitions are disposed of with the direction to the
DDA to within eight weeks of today raise a fresh demand on the
petitioners for unearned increase on the basis of the difference between
the premium received at the time of allotment and the price paid by each
of the petitioners in the auction held by the DDA. Since the admitted
W.P.(C) No.7646/2008 & W.P.(C) No.8563/2008                        Page 5 of 6

amount has also not been paid, it is clarified that the DDA shall be
entitled to claim interest on the unearned increase so found due from the
date of the original demand and till the date of payment of the unearned
increase by the petitioner.
        The writ petitions are disposed of. No order as to costs.
                                              RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
                                                         (JUDGE)
JULY 14, 2011
Bs..
W.P.(C) No.7646/2008 & W.P.(C) No.8563/2008                       Page 6 of 6


