*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                   CS(OS)248/2004
%                               Date of decision : 17.07.2008
VIRENDER KUMAR (MINOR)                           ….… Plaintiff
                                Through:   Mr Sugriva Dubey, Advocate
                                  Versus
SHRI MANISH KUMAR THAKUR                         ........ Defendant
                                Through : Nemo.
CORAM :-
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
    1. Whether reporters of Local papers may
        be allowed to see the judgment?
    2. To be referred to the reporter or not?
    3. Whether the judgment should be reported
        in the Digest?
RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J
1.      The plaintiff has instituted the present suit for partition of
following immovable properties :
     i.   House bearing No.19/16, Shakti Nagar, Delhi-7,
          consisting of three stories i.e., Ground, First and the
          Second Floors.
     ii) House property shop No. A/243, Subzi Mandi, Azadpur,
          Delhi, under the leasehold rights in the land slotted to
          me by the DDA, Delhi;
and of share in the partnership firms M/s Babulal Paras Ram and
M/s Babu Lal & Company to the extent of the 15 naya paisa in each
and for certain Fixed Deposit Receipts (FDRs) which were stated to
be in the name of Shri Babulal Thakur and his wife Smt Munni Devi
cs(os)248/2004                                               Page No 1 of 7

being the grand father and grand mother              respectively of the
plaintiff and for certain other FDRs in the name of said Shri Babulal
Thakur alongwith each of his three daughters.
2.      The case of the plaintiff in the plaint, inter alia, was that his
grand father Shri Babulal Thakur had left a Will dated 5th March,
1993 leaving the properties aforesaid           and the plaintiff had
requested the defendant for partition and the defendant had denied
the partition. The plaintiff thus sued for partition and also claimed
the relief of permanent injunction restraining the defendant from
alienating or creating third party rights with respect to the
properties of which partition was sought. The defendant is the son
of the brother of the father of the plaintiff.     It is admitted in the
plaint itself that Shri Babu Lal Thakur, grand father of the plaintiff,
had left his wife Smt Munni Devi, two sons, namely, father of the
plaintiff and the father of the defendant and three daughters as his
natural heirs and further that the grand mother Smt Munni Devi has
also died. However, neither the sons nor the daughters of Shri Babu
Lal Thakur were impleaded as party to the suit and the suit was filed
against the defendant only.
3.      The defendant filed written statement to the suit in which the
defendant has admitted that Shri Babulal Thakur left the Will dated
5th March, 1993.     However, the defendant pleaded that under the
said Will, only the shop No. A/243, Subzi Mandi, Azadpur, Delhi had
been inherited by the plaintiff and the defendant in equal share but
none of the other properties of which partition was sought had
devolved upon the plaintiff and the defendant and the plaintiff and
cs(os)248/2004                                                Page No 2 of 7

the defendant were not the owners of the other properties.             The
defendant thus averred that the suit with respect to other properties
was misconceived.
        On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were
framed on 9th August, 2005 :
       1. Whether the plaintiff is the co-owner of House No.19/16,
           Shakti Nagar, Delhi and entitled to its partition?
       2. Whether the shop No.A-243, Subzi Mandi, Azadpur, Delhi
           cannot be partitioned, as per terms of Lease? OPD
       3. Whether the shop No..A-243, Subzi Mandi, Azadpur,
           Delhi is being noted used by both the parties to this suit
           as per the mutual agreement? OPP
       4. Whether the suit is without any cause of action and is not
           maintainable under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC?
       5. Whether the Hon’ble Court lacks necessary pecuniary
           jurisdiction to try this suit? OPD
       6. Whether the Hon’ble Court has no jurisdiction on account
           of   arbitration   clause    in  the partnerships/Business
           Agreements?
       7. Whether the suit is barred u/S 41 of the Specific Relief
           Act?”
4.      The plaintiff has instituted the present suit as a minor through
his natural guardian and father. The date of birth of the plaintiff is
stated to be 15th August, 1990. The plaintiff till date continues to be
a minor.      That to prove the case of the plaintiff, the father and
natural guardian of the plaintiff tendered his affidavit by way of
examination-in-chief as exhibit PW1/A.           He was partly cross
examined by the counsel for the defendant. However, the defendant
cs(os)248/2004                                                Page No 3 of 7

or his counsel thereafter stopped appearing before the court and
were proceeded ex parte vide order dated 23rd October, 2007. The
defendant continues to be ex parte and has thereafter not appeared
before the court. The plaintiff thereafter tendered another affidavit
of Shri Ajay Kumar Sharma by way of his ex parte evidence and
thereafter closed his ex parte evidence.
5.      The factum of Shri Babu Lal Thakur having executed a Will
dated 5th March 1993 was not disputed in the written statement.
However, the said Will was not proved by the plaintiff by examining
any witness to the said will or otherwise. During final arguments, it
was put to the counsel for the plaintiff that the plaintiff had not
proved any case with respect to the property No.19/16,            Shakti
Nagar, Delhi-7 or with respect to the share in partnership firm or
with respect to the FDRs, inasmuch as no evidence whatsoever was
led establishing any right of the plaintiff and the defendant to the
said properties.   The counsel for the plaintiff fairly conceded that
the suit be treated as for partition for shop No.A-243, Subzi Mandi,
Azadpur, Delhi only.
6.      With respect to the shop No.A-243, Subzi Mandi, Azadpur,
Delhi, as aforesaid, there is an admission in the written statement
that the plaintiff and the defendant have an equal share in the said
shop. Even though the defendant has not led any evidence and is ex
parte, the defence of the defendant in the written statement to the
partition of the said shop is that (i) from the said shop two firms one
controlled by the father of the plaintiff and the other controlled by
the father of the defendant are functioning, both occupying
cs(os)248/2004                                              Page No 4 of 7

approximately equal area (ii)       that the said shop being lease hold
cannot be partitioned.
7.      The defence of the defendant to partition of Shop No.A-243,
Subzi Mandi, Azadpur Delhi, is not tenable.         The said issue is no
longer res integra and it has been held by this court in the
judgments (1) Chiranji Lal & Anr v Bhagwandas & Ors 1991(3)
Delhi Lawyer 530; (2) Inderjeet Singh v Tarlochan Singh 1991
R.L.R. 239; (3) Mohinder Singh v Kartar Lal 1997 III AD (Delhi)
626 and (4) Ram Lal Sachdev v Smt Sneh Sinha AIR 2000 Del 92
that     there is no bar to partition of the super structure of the
leasehold properties and the same does not amount to division or
partition of leasehold right in land which is prohibited under the
terms of the lease. The plaintiff and the defendant would be entitled
to have the lease hold rights in their joint names.
8.      It is not the case of the defendant that the said property has
been partitioned by metes and bounds between the parties. The case
of the defendant only is that the said property was being used as per
mutual agreement of the parties.        However, such agreement would
not bar the partition of the said property.
9.      The plaintiff is, thus, entitled to a decree for partition of shop
No.A-243, Subzi Mandi, Azadpur, Delhi only on admission of the
defendant.          The plaintiff is not entitled to any other relief.
Accordingly, preliminary decree for partition is passed with respect
to shop No. A-243, Subzi Mandi, Azadpur, Delhi declaring the
cs(os)248/2004                                                 Page No 5 of 7

plaintiff and the defendant each having a 50% undivided share in
the said property.
10.     Mr S.M. Chopra, Additional District Judge (Retd) is appointed
as the Local Commissioner to suggest ways and means, if any, of
partition by metes and bounds of the said property.           His fee is
tentatively fixed at Rs 25,000/- to be borne first by the plaintiff. On
receipt of report of the Local Commissioner within three months,
the suit be listed for passing of the final decree of partition. It is
clarified that all out of pocket expenses, if any, incurred by the Local
Commissioner in making the site visit, in preparation of plans or in
taking any other technical help shall also be borne by the plaintiff.
                                           RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J.
July 17, 2008.
M
cs(os)248/2004                                               Page No 6 of 7


