           *IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                    Date of decision: 17th December, 2015
+                               W.P.(C) No.3903/2011
        DEEPAK ANAND                                          ….. Petitioner
                           Through:    Petitioner-in-person.
                                    Versus
        UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                              ….. Respondents
                           Through: Mr. Abhay Prakash Sahay, CGSC
                                       with Mr. Deepak Gupta, Adv. for R-
                                       1/UOI.
                                       Ms. Sonia Mathur with Mr. Sushil
                                       Kumar Dubey, Advs. for CBI.
                                       IO Mohit Kumar.
CORAM:-
HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J
1.      The petitioner, an Advocate, has filed this petition as a Public Interest
Litigation (PIL) seeking a direction to the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Government of India to constitute an independent Special Investigating Team
(SIT) or the Special Task Force (STF) for fair, unbiased, impartial and proper
investigation of case FIR No.878/2000 of Police Station Kalkaji, New Delhi
and to “expose the fake stamps scams and book all the persons involved in the
crime”.
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                             Page 1 of 10

2.      The petition was entertained and the respondent no.2 Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) directed to file and has filed an affidavit and to which a
rejoinder was filed by the petitioner.
3.      The petitioner, in the petition has sought to justify the relief by pleading
i) that though the accused in the FIR had disclosed getting supply of fake
stamps from one Hemant Dubey of Mumbai but after the investigation of the
case was taken over by the CBI, the CBI surprisingly not only gave a clean chit
to the said Hemant Dubey but also cited him as a prosecution witness in the
charge sheet; ii) that from what has emerged in the investigation, it is evident
that apart from the “Telgi Scam”, there was another fake stamp scam which was
run parallel to Telgi Scam; iii) that though the fake stamp scam of Abdul Karim
Telgi had come to an end with the recovery of his printing press in June, 2002,
the parallel scam of Hemant Dubey and others is yet to be unearthed.
4.      The respondent no.2 CBI in its counter affidavit has pleaded that:
        i)     The petition is based on baseless presumptions.
        ii)    The contention in the petition that the fake stamps recovered were
               printed by Hemant Dubey is devoid of any merits.
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                                Page 2 of 10

        iii)   Earlier also several writ petitions were filed by accused persons in
               fake stamp cases registered with CBI raising similar issues as in
               the present PIL and all the writ petitions were dismissed.
        iv)    Since the accused persons failed to scuttle the progress of the trial
               of the said cases, they have now got the present writ petition filed.
        v)     The role of Hemant Dubey was probed but except the allegation of
               accused Narender Singh nothing substantial came on record which
               could have formed the basis for prosecuting Hemant Dubey in the
               said cases.
        vi)    The cases relating to Telgi Fake Stamps Scam were assigned to
               CBI by the Supreme Court.
        vii)    The petitioner has a vested interest in filing this PIL; he wants to
               delay the course of trial of the said cases;
        viii) The charge sheets filed by the CBI in fake stamps cases are
               supported with quality oral and documentary evidence and this fact
               has been approved by several judgments by different Courts in
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                                 Page 3 of 10

               such cases wherein number of accused persons have already been
               convicted.
        ix)    Therefore it is wrong to say that the investigation by CBI is
               questionable.
        x)     The claim as made in this petition “of two fake stamps scams” has
               been made by some of the accused persons involved in RC-2/2003,
               EOU-VI and RC-3/2004, EOU-V to cover up their own role in the
               crime and to divert the course of investigation.
        xi)    The claim regarding another fake scam syndicate led by Hemant
               Dubey was investigated by the CBI and the outcome of the
               investigation has been discussed in the charge sheets filed in the
               Court.
        xii)   Specific role of Hemant Dubey was examined during investigation
               but nothing substantial emerged on record except the statement of
               accused persons who themselves were part of the same offence.
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                              Page 4 of 10

        xiii) If the petitioner had reliable material evidence in support of his
               claim as is produced along with this PIL, then it is inexplicable as
               to why he kept silent for a long time and has filed this petition at a
               crucial stage.
        xiv) Though       the  accused    named    Hemant    Dubey      but      during
               investigation could not corroborate the same.
        xv)    The name of Hemant Dubey figures in the body of charge sheets
               because his involvement was suspected at initial stage; however
               further investigation in the case did not establish his role or
               involvement in the said cases.
        xvi) After emergence of Telgi Fake Stamp Scam, an SIT under the
               supervision of Joint Director, CBI was formed by CBI and around
               48 cases of fake stamps scam spread over different parts of the
               country were thoroughly investigated by the SIT during 2004-05
               and the investigation was regularly monitored by the Supreme
               Court.
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                                Page 5 of 10

        xvii) The CBI has carried out the investigation in accordance with law
               and with complete transparency.
        xviii) That the PIL has been filed at the behest of accused persons.
        xix) Filing of the present PIL is part of the strategy formed by the
               accused persons.
               Else, each and every contention in the petition is specifically met
               with in the said affidavit.
 5.     The petitioner has filed a rejoinder controverting the contents of the
counter-affidavit of the CBI.
6.      The petitioner has also placed on record the transcript of a television
interview of the former Director of the CBI to make out a case of interference
by politicians in the investigation by the CBI.
7.      The counsel for the petitioner during hearing relied upon Bharati
Tamang Vs. Union of India 2013 (13) SCALE 108 to contend that evidence
obtained as a result of illegal search or seizure is not liable to be shut out and
the test of admissibility of evidence lies in relevancy and unless there is an
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                               Page 6 of 10

express or necessarily implied prohibition in the Constitution or other law,
evidence obtained as a result of illegal search or seizure is not liable to be shut
out and further remind this court of its duties as culled out in para 37 of the said
judgment.
8.      It was also argued by the petitioner appearing in person that there is no
evidence till date of the origin of the supply of fake stamps and the CBI has
under dictates of the politicians closed the cases against the kingpin of the said
scam.
9.      Per contra, the counsel for the CBI during the hearing referred us to the
order dated 15th March, 2004 of the Supreme court in W.P.(C) No.522/2003
titled Ajay K. Agrawal Vs. Union of India transferring 48 stamp scam cases to
the CBI for investigation and further directing that no High Court shall entertain
any petition or pass any order in regard to the said cases. It was further
informed that the said three cases were not part of the said 48 cases and are of a
subsequent date and a fall out of the earlier cases. A copy of the order dated
17th January, 2008 of this Court in Crl.M.C. No.4413/2006 titled Puran Singh
Vs. Union of India was also handed over to show that similar allegations as
made by the petitioner herein were made in that case also and were not
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                               Page 7 of 10

accepted.     It was further contended that the Trial Court before which the
proceedings are pending is fully competent to summon Hemant Dubey if feel
the need therefor. Reliance was placed on Sushila Devi Vs. State of Rajasthan
(2014) 1 SCC 269 to contend that monitoring by the Court of the case can be
till the investigation stage only but when the investigating agency appointed by
the Court completes the investigation, files a charge sheet and takes steps in the
matter in accordance with the provisions of law before a competent Court of
law, it would not be proper for the High Court or the Supreme Court exercising
supervisory jurisdiction to keep on monitoring the trial which is continuing
before the competent Court.
10.     The petitioner appearing in person in rejoinder handed over a copy of the
FIR No.298/2006 of Police Station Marine Line, Mumbai to show that Hemant
Dubey was an accused therein. The counsel for the CBI responded that this has
no relevance to the subject controversy.
11.     The counsel for the CBI during the hearing also handed over a status
report disclosing the status of the trial.
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                              Page 8 of 10

12.     Supreme Court as far back as in State of West Bengal Vs. Committee for
Protection of Democratic Rights West Bengal (2010) 3 SCC 571 held that
though the Courts in exercise of their power of judicial review are entitled to
direct investigation and that such direction would not amount to infringement of
the doctrine of separation of powers but such power should not be exercised just
for asking or to satisfy the ego or vindicate the prestige of a party interested in
such investigation and only if the Court finds such a direction necessary in the
facts and circumstances of the case. Similarly in Secretary, Minor Irrigation &
Rural Engineering Services, U.P. Vs. Sahngoo Ram Arya (2002) 5 SCC 521 it
was held that no direction should be issued without the Court being prima facie
satisfied. Again in Babubhai Vs. State of Gujarat (2010) 12 SCC 254 it was
reiterated that only in exceptional circumstances and in order to prevent
miscarriage of criminal justice would the Court interfere in investigation. Only
when there is a reasonable apprehension about justice becoming a victim
because of shabby or partisan investigation that the Court would step in and
exercise its extraordinary power. The said principles were recently reiterated in
Mithilesh Kumar Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan (2015) 9 SCC 795.
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                              Page 9 of 10

13.     In the present case, not only has this Court on an earlier occasion not
found any merit in the allegations as now made in this PIL but we are otherwise
also satisfied that no case for interference at this stage is made out. We rather
find considerable merit in the pleas aforesaid taken by the respondent no.2 CBI
with respect to the locus of the petitioner and the motive of the petitioner in
filing this petition. However, the petitioner being an advocate of this Court, we
refrain from saying anything more and further refrain from imposing any costs.
        Dismissed.
                                                    RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J
                                                               CHIEF JUSTICE
DECEMBER 17th, 2015
„gsr‟
W.P.(C) No.3903/2011                                              Page 10 of 10


