             *IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                             Date of decision: 24th May, 2011.
+                                  W.P.(C) 2163/2011
%        DEVA NAND SHAH                                           ..... Petitioner
                             Through:      Mr. S.K. Singh, Adv.
                                   Versus
         M/S A.V.I. PLAST                                     ..... Respondent
                             Through:      None.
CORAM :-
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
1.       Whether reporters of Local papers may                         No.
         be allowed to see the judgment?
2.       To be referred to the reporter or not?                        No.
3.       Whether the judgment should be reported                       No.
         in the Digest?
RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW, J.
1.       The writ petition impugns the award dated 17 th December, 2007 of
the Industrial Adjudicator on the following reference:
         “Whether the services of Sh. Deva Nand Shah S/o Sh.
         Damodar Shah have been terminated illegally and/or
         unjustifiably by the management, and if so, to what sum of
         money as monetary relief along with consequential benefits in
W.P.(C)2163/2011                                                   Page 1 of 4

         terms of existing laws/Govt. Notifications and to what other
         relief is he entitled and what directions are necessary in this
         respect?”
         and though holding the termination of services of the petitioner
workman by the respondent employer to be illegal for the reason of being
in violation of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes (I.D.) Act, 1947 but
granting relief only of compensation of `40,000/- to the petitioner
workman.
2.       The grievance of the petitioner workman in the writ petition is that
upon the termination having been found to be illegal, the relief of
reinstatement with full back wages ought to have been granted.              The
counsel for the petitioner workman has argued that even if compensation
were to be awarded, it should have been proportionate to the long time of
six years for which the reference remained pending and the long time of
about seven years from the date of the termination till the date of the
award.
3.       It is not as if the Industrial Adjudicator has not considered all the
aforesaid aspects or has arbitrarily held the petitioner workman to be not
W.P.(C)2163/2011                                                Page 2 of 4

entitled to the relief of reinstatement or has arbitrarily assessed the
compensation at `40,000/-. The Industrial Adjudicator has based his relief
on various factors including that the petitioner workman had rendered only
about ten months of service with the respondent employer; the brief period
of service rendered in comparison to the time after which the award was
made published; the reinstatement being not appropriate for the said
reason.       Similarly, the amount of compensation was fixed taking into
account the services rendered of ten months and last drawn wages of
`2,500/- per month.
4.       I have enquired from the counsel for the petitioner workman at to
what according to the petitioner workman should have been the measure of
damages.         All that the counsel for the petitioner workman is able to
contend is that the compensation should have been more and is highly
insufficient. Even in the writ petition there are no pleadings in this regard.
5.       I am of the opinion that the discretion exercised by the Industrial
Adjudicator in this regard as to the relief, cannot be interfered with in
exercise of powers of judicial review unless found to be perverse or
W.P.(C)2163/2011                                                Page 3 of 4

unreasonable considering the facts or being arbitrary. None of the said
criteria is found in the present case.
6.       There is no merit in the writ petition; the same is dismissed. No
order as to costs.
                                            RAJIV SAHAI ENDLAW
                                                      (JUDGE)
MAY 24, 2011
Bs..
W.P.(C)2163/2011                                               Page 4 of 4


