*            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                      Reserved on: 06.06. 2013
%                                                Date of Decision: 07.06.2013
        BAIL APPLN. 926/2013 & Crl. M.A. 1116/2013 (Interim Bail)
        ABHISHEK JAIN                                           ..... Petitioner
                            Through:      Mrs. Jyoti Singh, Sr. Adv. with
                                          Mr. Manish Jain, Mr. Ankur
                                          Garg, Mr. Sougata Ganguly, Mr.
                                          Deepak Bansal and Ms. Saaila,
                                          Advs.
                            versus
        STATE                                           ..... Respondent
                            Through:      Mr. Mukesh Gupta, APP for the
                                          State.
CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE R.V. EASWAR
                                 JUDGMENT
R.V. EASWAR, J.:
        This application under Section 438 of the Cr.P.C. has been filed by one
Abhishek Jain in case FIR No.128 of 2013 registered in PS Saraswati Vihar,
North West District under Section 376/420/506/34 of the Indian Penal Code.
2.      The application has been filed in the following circumstances. The
complainant, Nirmal Kaur alias Neha Gabree, is aged 24 years and is working
as Assistant Accounts Manager in a firm in Delhi. She got married to the
applicant on 4.3.2013 in the Arya Samaj Mandir Trust. The marriage was
also registered by the Registrar of Hindu Marriages, Ghaziabad on 4.3.2013.
Bail Appln.926/2013                                                   Page 1 of 7

On 30.3.2013 the complainant filed a FIR against her husband Abhishek Jain,
the applicant herein, stating that he raped her on the false pretext of marriage
and also threatened to kill her. She referred to her earlier complaint dated
25.2.2013 where she had stated that Abhishek Jain was having an affair with
her for more than two years before the marriage and that during that period,
he had raped her several times in the false pretext and promise of marrying
her. She also alleged that even after marriage he continued to torture her and
physically abuse her. Action was therefore requested to be taken against the
applicant/accused.
3.      Apprehending arrest, the accused has filed the present application for
anticipatory bail, the bail application filed by him before the Additional
Sessions Judge having been dismissed by order dated 25.4.2013.
4.      I have considered the facts and the rival contentions. The complainant
filed a complaint earlier on 25.2.2013 with the SHO, Rani Bagh Police
Station, Delhi. In that complaint she had stated how on several occasions
before the marriage the applicant had raped her, after falsely promising to
marry her. However, on 4.3.2013 the applicant and the complainant actually
got married and there is evidence in the form of the certificate given by the
Arya Samaj Vivah Mandir Trust, Ghaziabad and the certificate of registration
given by the Registrar, Hindu Marriages, Ghaziabad. Both the certificates are
Bail Appln.926/2013                                                 Page 2 of 7

dated 4.3.2013.     The FIR also narrates the physical abuse which the
complainant had suffered in the hands of the applicant after the marriage and
that because the parents of the accused did not accept the marriage of their
son with the complainant, the accused stayed away from them in a rented
house in Rohini. The FIR further narrates that the accused even used to tell
the complainant that “he had married me only to make me withdraw my
complaint.” Apparently the accused had even lied about his job; he in fact did
not have any job and was dependant on the complainant to meet the
household expenses. He was also demanding money from her every now and
then. Several instances are narrated in the FIR about the threats and physical
abuse suffered by the complainant not only from the applicant but also by his
family members who had conspired together to cheat her and get her married
to him only to make her withdraw the complaint of rape against him.
5.      The above specific averments in the FIR are grave. It is not clear to
me why the applicant abused the complainant and inflicted physical injuries
upon her by beating her if he really loved her and got married to her. The
complaint dated 25.2.2013, a copy of which is on record, cogently narrates the
long relationship which the complainant and the applicant had before their
marriage during which time, as narrated by the complainant, the accused
raped the complainant several times after falsely promising to her that he will
marry her. Having sexual relations with a woman against her will or without
Bail Appln.926/2013                                               Page 3 of 7

her consent also amounts to rape under section 375 of the IPC. If the consent
was obtained on a false assurance or promise of marriage, the consent cannot
be considered to be full and free and it would be a case of rape. This is what
appears to have happened to the complainant before the marriage took place
on 4.3.2013. The complaint also contains reference to an occasion when the
complainant was taken to a lady doctor at Shalimar Bagh for check up and
treatment of pregnancy. There is also reference to the fact that the accused
had threatened her that he has taken photographs while they spent time in a
hotel at Gurgaon and that he would put those photographs on the internet and
ruin her character for life and that then she will be left with no option but to
commit suicide.     When the complainant filed a complaint on 25.2.2013
containing such serious allegations against the applicant, it was natural for
him to think that marrying the complainant would leave her with no option
but to withdraw the complaint. The marriage was therefore gone through
only as a means of making the complainant withdraw her complaint. This is
what actually happened and on the very next day of the marriage i.e. on
5.3.2013; a hand written letter was filed with the SHO by the complainant that
she is withdrawing her complaint dated 25.2.2013. In these circumstances it
would be naïve to think that the marriage was a solemn “samskara” entered
into between the parties as a union for life.
6.      The learned counsel for the applicant contended that the FIR was
Bail Appln.926/2013                                                 Page 4 of 7

instigated because the parents of the accused had disowned him and
disinherited him from their property.       I am not prepared to accept the
contention. The FIR and the earlier complaint contain reference to the family
members of the accused, including his parents, threatening and abusing the
complainant. If they had disowned him, they could not have come to his aid
and support to such an extent; that throws considerable doubt on the
credibility of the alleged “disowning” of the accused by them.
7.      The learned counsel for the applicant referred to two judgments of this
Court. The first is the judgment dated 22.5.2013 of Kailash Gambhir, J in
Bail Appln.311/2013 (Rohit Chauhan Vs. State NCT of Delhi). That was
also a case of an FIR registered under sections 376/506/328 of the IPC.
There, on the facts of the case, the learned Judge was not prepared to accept
that the accused committed rape of the prosecutrix. There were peculiar
circumstances in that case, as a reading of the judgment would show. There
the prosecutrix was, in the words of the learned Judge,
        “quite an ultra-modern lady with an open outlook towards life,
        enjoying alcohol in the company of men which is evident from
        the photographs placed on record, which have not been denied
        by the prosecutrix present in court. She does not appear to be
        such a vulnerable lady that she would not raise her voice on
        being immensely exploited over such a long period of time. As
        per the prosecutrix, she had a physical relationship with the
        petitioner for the last more than 2 ½ years and it is not just a
        single act of sharing physical intimacy but the same continued
Bail Appln.926/2013                                                Page 5 of 7

        for almost a long period of three years. There lies a possibility
        that the petitioner might have then refused to marry the
        prosecutrix and this refusal on the part of the petitioner gave a
        serious jolt to the prosecutrix who then with the help of police,
        solemnized the marriage with him, in the wee hours of the night
        when petitioner was in his casual apparels (track suit). It is
        only on 30.01.2013, that the complainant raised her voice for
        the first time and made allegations of rape against the
        petitioner. It is an admitted case that the said marriage
        ultimately did not consummate as the complainant was never
        brought to the matrimonial home and the petitioner has already
        filed a civil suit to seek decree of declaration for declaring the
        said marriage as null and void.”
The above and the general observations made by the learned Judge in
paragraph 14 of the judgment have to be understood in the light of the facts of
that case and do not constitute the ratio decidendi. The other judgment is
Jagdish Nautiyal Vs. State 2013 1AD (Delhi) 475. In that case the learned
Judge (V. K. Shali, J) held that unless and until there is an imminent and great
imperative to have custodial interrogation of the accused, the anticipatory bail
should be granted.       It was further observed that even assuming that the
allegations in that case against the bail applicant were correct, at best a case of
consent of the complainant for contracting marriage having been obtained by
fraud or misrepresentation would be made out, and that does not require any
custodial interrogation. Each case is decided in the background of the facts of
that particular case and there can be no general proposition that in all cases
where the complainant says that her consent was obtained by fraud or
Bail Appln.926/2013                                                   Page 6 of 7

misrepresentation, custodial interrogation of the accused would not be
necessary. Again the observations in the cited decision need to be appreciated
and understood on the basis of the facts and circumstances of that case.
8.      The facts of the present case are tell-tale. It would prima facie appear
that the marriage was gone through only to persuade the complainant to
withdraw her complaint dated 25.2.2013. Immediately after the marriage the
applicant started physically abusing the complainant, apparently, in the hope
that she would leave him, but when she filed a complaint, the accused was
forced to apply for bail. The joint statement made before the sessions court
was only to the effect that they were married, and nothing more. The efforts
towards mediation failed and the sessions court referred the matter to the
assigned court which dismissed the bail application. Even before me, the
complainant who appeared stated that she was not willing to go for mediation.
9.      For the above reasons I do not find any merit in the anticipatory bail
application.     The same is rejected.    All pending applications also stand
disposed of.
                                                       R.V. EASWAR
                                                   (VACATION JUDGE)
JUNE 07, 2013
vld
Bail Appln.926/2013                                                 Page 7 of 7


