                       FAO NO. 302 of 2003
04  06.9.2013        Heard learned counsel for the parties.
                     This appeal by the appellant-Insurance Company
              is directed against the judgment/award dated 31.1.2003
              passed      by   the     Commissioner      for    Workmen’s
              Compensation, Bhubaneswar, in W.C. Case No.60 of
              1994,    awarding     an   amount      of   Rs.78,261/-   as
              compensation to be deposited within 30 days from the
              date of the order.
                     Learned    counsel   for   the    appellant-Insurance
              Company submits that as the driver of the offending
              vehicle (Truck) no.OR-U/3723 did not possess a valid
              and an effective driving licence, no liability can be
              saddled on the present appellant-Insurance Company as
              the insurer of the offending vehicle. In this regard, it is
              submitted that as the original driving licence i.e.
              D.L.no.134/78-Bolangir was found to be fake and
              fabricated, the subsequent renewal of the said driving
              licence vide renewal D.L. no.796/93-94 CKL is invalid
              and ineffective. In this regard, it is submitted that as the
              original driving licence i.e.    D.L.no.134/78 has been
              issued in favour of one Dr.Arjun Satpathy and not in the
              name     of  the   alleged  truck    driver   Bhamhananda
              Mohapatra, the subsequent renewal cannot validate the
              said driving licence.
                     On a perusal of the impugned award, it is seen
              that the Commissioner has taken into consideration the
 MP
              contention of the Insurance Company regarding validity
              of the driving licence and has come to hold that as the

                    2
renewal D.L. no.796/93-94 CKL is a genuine licence, it
cannot be said that the driver was not possessing a valid
driving licence.
        Considering the submissions made and keeping in
view the findings of the Commissioner as given in the
impugned award and the reasons assigned in support of the
same, no impropriety or illegality can be said to have been
committed by the Commissioner so as to warrant any
interference.
        The Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation,
Bhubaneswar, is directed to disburse the deposited
compensation amount of Rs.78,261/- along with the
accrued interest thereon to the claimant on proper
identification.
          It is open for the appellant-Insurance Company
to seek recovery of the compensation amount from the
owner of the vehicle, if recoverable, in accordance with
law.
        FAO is accordingly disposed of.
                                            (S.C.PARIJA, J.)


