                                    M.A.C.A. No.599 of 2012
10. 08.08.2013               Heard learned counsel for the parties.
                             This appeal by the Insurance Company is directed
               against the judgment/Award dated 20.12.2011, passed by the 1st
               Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Keonjhar, in M.A.C. Case No.114
               of 2008, awarding an amount of Rs.16,44,300/- as compensation
               along with interest @ 6% per annum from the date of filing of the
               claim application, i.e.17.7.2008, till payment.
                             The contention raised by the learned counsel for the
               Insurance Company is that as the inquest report (Ext.A) clearly
               shows that the deceased died due to his own fault while driving
               his motorcycle, the said fact has not been considered by the
               learned Tribunal while passing the impugned award. Accordingly,
               it is submitted that as it is a case of contributory negligence, the
               Insurance Company can be held liable only for 50% of the
               awarded compensation amount. It is further submitted that the
               assessment of the compensation amount has not been properly
               made.
                             Learned counsel appearing for the claimants submits
               that in the connected claim application, arising out of the self-
               same accident, i.e. MAC No.115 of 2008, the Insurance Company
               has already satisfied the award, which fact is not disputed by
               learned counsel for the appellant-Insurance Company.
                             In view of the submissions made and keeping in view
               the fact that Insurance Company has already satisfied the award
               in the connected case, i.e. MAC Case No.115 of 2008, the plea of
               the Insurance Company now raised with regard to contributory
               negligence of the deceased cannot be considered.

                 Considering the grounds taken in the appeal and the
    submissions made by learned counsel for the parties and keeping
    in view the findings of the learned Tribunal as given in the
    impugned award with regard to the quantum of compensation
    amount awarded and the basis on which the same has been
    arrived at, I feel, the interest of justice would be best served if
    the awarded compensation amount of Rs.16,44,300/- is modified
    and reduced to Rs.14,50,000/- (Rupees Fourteen lakhs fifty
    thousand), which is payable to the claimants along with interest
    @6% per annum. The impugned award is modified to the said
    extent.
                 The appellant-Insurance Company is directed to
    deposit the modified compensation amount of Rs.14,50,000/-
    (Rupees Fourteen lakhs fifty thousand) along with interest @6%
    per annum, from the date of filing of claim application with the
    learned Tribunal within six weeks hence. On deposit of the said
    amount,    the   same    shall  be   disbursed  to    the claimants
    proportionately as per the direction of the learned Tribunal given
    in the impugned award.
                 The statutory amount deposited in the Registry of
    this Court along with accrued interest thereon shall be refunded
    to the appellant-Insurance Company on production of receipt
    showing deposit of the modified compensation amount and
    interest before the learned Tribunal.
                 M.A.C.A. is accordingly disposed of.
                                                   …………………….
                                              S.C.Parija, J.
uks

uks

