                         MACA No.174 of 2012
8 13.8.2013         Heard learned counsel for the parties.
                    This appeal by the appellant-Insurance Company, is
            directed against the judgment/award dated 04.11.2011,
            passed     by  the   1st  Motor    Accident    Claims   Tribunal,
            Dhenkanal, in MAC Case No.202 of 2007, awarding an
            amount of Rs.31,000/-(rupees Thirty-One Thousand) as
            compensation along with interest @ 6% per annum, from
            01.10.2007, till the date of payment.
                    The sole contention raised by the learned counsel for
            the appellant-Insurance Company is that as there are
            sufficient documentary evidence on record like F.I.R.(Ext.1)
            and Final Form (Ext.2) to show that the injured claimant was
            travelling as a gratuitous passenger in the offending tractor-
            trolley, learned Tribunal erred in ignoring the same and
            passing the impugned award.       It is further submitted that as
            the report of the investigator goes to show that the injured
            claimant was travelling as a gratuitous passenger along with
            others in the offending tractor-trolley, learned Tribunal has
            failed to take note of the same while passing the impugned
            award and fixing the liability on the appellant, as the insurer
            of the offending vehicle, to pay the compensation amount. In
            this regard, it is submitted that as the injured claimant was
            travelling as a gratuitous passenger in the offending tractor-
            trolley, which is in gross violation of the policy condition, no
            liability could have been saddled on the present appellant, as
            the insurer of the offending vehicle.
  mp

                       2
       On a perusal of the impugned award, it is seen that the
learned Tribunal has taken into consideration the evidence of
the claimant (P.W.1) as well as the evidence of the eye witness
(P.W.2) and in absence of any cogent evidence to the contrary,
learned Tribunal has come to hold that the driver of the
offending vehicle was rash and negligent in causing the
accident and the plea of the Insurance Company that the
injured claimant was travelling as a gratuitous passenger in
the offending vehicle cannot be accepted. Relevant finding of
the learned Tribunal is extracted below:-
                 “.... In view of the aforesaid finding, this
         Tribunal comes to a conclusion that the insurance
         company/O.P.No.2         is  liable  to   pay    the
         compensation to the petitioner. Although it was
         argued on behalf of O.P.No.2 that since the
         petitioner was a gratuitous passenger in the
         offending vehicle, he is not entitled to get any
         compensation. But, in view of the evidence of the
         eye witness to the accident, i.e. P.W.2 and in
         absence of any evidence on behalf of the O.P.No.2
         in support of its plea except the bald evidence of
         its investigator OPW.No.1, who is not an eye
         witness to the accident, and in absence of any
         other cogent, reliable and supportive evidence,
         adduced on its behalf, it cannot be said that the
         petitioner was a gratuitous passenger of the
         offending tractor at the time of accident. Thus,
         taking into consideration the above evidence, this
         Tribunal comes to a conclusion that the O.P.No.1
         is liable to pay the aforesaid compensation to the
         petitioner, which would be indemnified by the
         O.P.No.2 on account of valid and effective
         insurance policy of the offending vehicle and D.L.
         of its driver at the relevant time. Accordingly, the
         petitioner is entitled to get Rs.31,000/- as
         compensation from the O.P.No.2 along with
         interest @6% per annum from the date of filing of

                      3
          the claim application i.e. 01.10.2007…”
        Considering the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the parties and keeping in view the findings of the
learned Tribunal given in the impugned award and the
reasons assigned in support of the same, no impropriety or
illegality can be said to have been committed by the learned
Tribunal so as to warrant any interference in this appeal.
        The appeal being devoid of merit, the same is
accordingly dismissed.
          The appellant-Insurance Company is directed to
deposit the awarded compensation amount along with the
interest with the learned Tribunal within six weeks hence.
         The statutory amount deposited in the Registry of this
Court along with the accrued interest thereon shall be
refunded to the appellant-Insurance Company, on production
of receipt showing deposit of the awarded compensation
amount and interest with the Tribunal.
         MACA is accordingly dismissed.
                                             (S.C.PARIJA, J.)

4
5

