                                    BLAPL No. 30601 of 2013
05. 10.03.2014        Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned
               counsel for the State.
                      It appears that the petitioner in this case being in
               custody in G.R. Case No. 116 of 2013 arising out of Barpali P.S.
               Case 116 of 2013 pending in the court of learned JMFC,
               Barpali has come to this Court for his release on bail. The
               offence alleged against the petitioner is punishable under
               Sections 302/34 of the I.P.C.
                      From the materials available on record it appears that
               out of a trivial incident, i.e., with regard to the daughter of the
               deceased keeping terms with daughter of the petitioner, a
               quarrel occurred between both the families. During the course
               of quarrel the deceased was assaulted by the petitioner and his
               other family members by fist and kick blows and in the midst of
               the quarrel the son of the petitioner came being armed with a
               lathi and dealt blows to the vital part of the body of the
               deceased. The deceased sustained injuries and admitted in the
               hospital where he succumbed to the injuries sustained. There
               is no material to show that the petitioner to have dealt the
               blows which contributed to the death of the deceased. Charge-
               sheet in this case has since been filed. No material to show that
               the petitioner is a person of criminal antecedent. Nothing is
               there to show that the petitioner is likely to abscond or temper
               with the prosecution evidence, if allowed to go on bail.
                      Regard being had to the nature of accusation, character
               of evidence appearing against the petitioner, circumstances in
               which the offence said to have been committed, the role
               ascribed by the petitioner, there being no material on record to

                             2
    show that the petitioner is person of criminal antecedent and
    above all the fact that hardly any material being there to
    suggest the fact that he is likely to flee from justice or tamper
    with the prosecution evidence, if enlarged on bail, I am of the
    view that the petitioner deserves to be released on bail.
           Hence, let the petitioner be released on bail in the
    aforesaid case on furnishing bail bond of Rs.20,000/-(Rupees
    twenty thousand) with two solvent sureties each for the like
    amount to the satisfaction of the court in seisin over the
    matter.
          The bail application stands disposed of being allowed.
          Issue urgent certified copy as per rules.
                                            .........................
                                              S.Pujahari, J.
akd

3

