                         CRLMC No.1794 of 2005
22 10.01.2014          Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned
              counsel for the State. None appears for opposite party no.1
              inspite of service of notice by paper publication.
                      This application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been
              filed challenging the order of cognizance dated 07.07.2005,
              passed by the learned S.D.J.M., Nayagarh, in 1.C.C. No.58 of
              2005, taking cognizance of the offences under Sections
              504/304-A I.P.C. and issuing process against the petitioner.
                      The case of the petitioner is that on 25.02.2013, at
              about 11.00 P.M., when the petitioner was posted at the
              District Headquarters Hospital, Nayagarh, as ADMO, a
              patient,   namely,    Minati    Pati, W/o.   Gumani     Pati  of
              village/P.O.-Similisahi, P.S./Dist. Nayagarh, was admitted in
              the hospital for delivering a child. As the patient was not in a
              fit condition to give birth to her child normally, inspite of
              efforts of a team of doctors, the petitioner being the M.D. in
              Gynaecology, advised the patient and her attendant, who
              happened     to   be   her   brother,  for her   operation.  An
              undertaking, as required before operation, was also obtained
              from and on behalf of the patient. On the very next day
              morning, i.e. 26.02.2003 at 7.00 A.M., the patient was
              operated by the petitioner in which a team of doctors of the
              District Headquarters Hospital, Nayagarh, assisted. After
              successful operation, the patient gave birth to a child. The
              condition of the mother (patient) and the child were found
              normal by then. After some hours, the condition of the
              mother (patient) was found deteriorating. Not only the

                       2
petitioner, but also a team of doctors of the said hospital
treated the patient sincerely and to the best of their ability
but due to their misfortune, the patient died on 27.02.2003
at 2.00 A.M. in the night. At no point of time, the patient was
neglected in treatment either by the petitioner or by any other
staff, including the other doctors of the hospital.
         The brother of the patient (deceased) with false and
baseless allegations lodged an F.I.R. in Nayagarh police
station on 27.02.2003 at 3.00 P.M., alleging therein that due
to the act committed by the petitioner, his sister died after
operation. In the F.I.R., the informant also made allegation
against     the  petitioner   that  the   petitioner  demanded
Rs.10,000/- from the informant before his sister’s operation
and since the amount was not paid to the petitioner, his
sister was neglected in treatment at post-operation stage, for
which she died. The aforesaid F.I.R. was registered vide
Nayagarh P.S. Case No.48 of 2003, under Section 304-A
I.P.C. against the petitioner, corresponding to G.R. Case
No.105 of 2003, pending in the court of learned S.D.J.M.,
Nayagarh, as per Annexure-1 to the application.
         Consequent upon the registration of the F.I.R, the
police    investigated   into   the  matter     and  found   no
incriminating materials against the petitioner to bring home
the charge under Sections 304-A I.P.C. Accordingly, the
Investigating Officer submitted the Final Report indicating
therein that it was a case of “mistake of fact”. The relevant
findings in the Final Report are extracted below:
                   “The occurrence took place at D.H.H.,
          Nayagarh. Investigation disclosed that Minati

                       3
          Pati, Wife of Guman Pati of village Simlisahi
          was brought to D.H.H., Nayagarh on
          25.02.2003 night about 11 P.M. for her
          treatment and delivery. Dr. Trilochan Baral,
          A.D.M.O., and other Doctors attended the
          patient and Srimati Minati Pati gave birth a
          child on 26.02.2003 at 7.00 A.M. and after
          delivery she became serious and inspite of
          repeated attempts by a team of doctors she
          could not be survived and finally in the night of
          26/27.02.2003 at about 2.00 P.M. she died
          while undergoing treatment.
                   During investigation prescriptions of
          doctors have been seized.
                   Since the doctors had not neglected in
          treatment they have not any criminally
          intention in treating the patient. It appears
          that it is a case of mistake of fact and I,
          accordingly submitted compliance to S.P.,
          Nayagarh (T), I.I.C., Nayagarh P.S. for
          submission of F.I.R. M.F. and S.P. Nayagarh
          passed order to submit F.I.R. M.F. in this case.
                   So I submitted F.I.R. M.F. U/s. 304()
          I.P.C. in this case”
          On receipt of the Final Report, learned S.D.J.M.,
Nayagarh, vide order dated 12.10.2004, issued notice to the
complainant-opposite party no.1 to file protest petition, if
any. On 15.10.2004, notice was issued to the complainant-
opposite party no.1 fixing 30.11.2004 for filing of protest
petition.   The    complainant   appeared    and   took  several
adjournments        and    ultimately  on     21.04.2005,    the
complainant filed complaint petition, which was registered as
ICC No.58 of 2005, reiterating the allegations made by him in
the FIR.
        Learned Magistrate recorded the initial statement of

                      4
the complainant-opposite party no.1 on 23.4.2005, wherein
he stated as under:-
               “On 26.02.2003 the accused operated
       my sister but due to his negligence my sister
       died.”
         Learned Magistrate also recorded the statement of
witness, namely, Indumati Mohapata, wife of Harihara
Mohapatra of Machhipada, Nayagarh on 27.04.2005 under
Section 202 Cr.P.C. which was as follows:-
               “2 years and 2 months back the accused
       neglected the patient Minati Pati and hence she
       died.”
         Learned Magistrate also recorded the statement of
another witness, namely, Paramananda Mohapatra, son of
Raj Kishore Mohapatra of village Machhipada, Nayagarh, on
09.06.2005, wherein he stated as follows:-
               “2 years 3 months back, the accused
       neglected the medical treatment of the deceased
       and so she died. So, she is responsible for it. The
       deceased has been operated.”
         Considering the complaint petition, initial statement
and the statement of the witnesses, learned Magistrate vide
order dated 07.07.2005 proceeded to take cognizance of the
offences under Sections 504/304-A IPC and issued process
against the petitioner, as per Annexure-6 to the application,
which is under challenge in this application.
         Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that as the
initial statement of the complainant and the statement of the

                       5
witnesses recorded under Section 202 Cr.P.C. does not make
out any offence against the petitioner, learned Magistrate was
not justified in taking cognizance in a mechanical manner
and directing issue of process. In this regard, it is submitted
that even accepting the allegations made in the complaint
petition and the initial statement of the complainant and the
evidence of the witnesses to be true, as no offence is made
out against the present petitioner under Section 304-A/504
IPC, the impugned order of cognizance cannot be sustained.
It is further submitted that as the petitioner is a Government
servant, working as A.D.M.O. in the District Headquarters
Hospital, Nayagarh, and the offence is alleged to have been
committed by him while performing his official duty, no
cognizance could have been taken without prior sanction of
the State Government, as required under Section 197 Cr.P.C.
          Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits
that as the deceased patient was treated by the petitioner and
other team of doctors and all adequate care and caution had
been taken and inspite of best efforts, as the patient could
not be saved, no criminal liability could have been brought
against the petitioner, as per Sections 80 and 88 IPC.
          Sections 80 and 88 read as under:-
                 “80. Accident in doing a lawful act. -
         Nothing is an offence which is done by accident
         or   misfortune,  and   without   any    criminal
         intention or knowledge in the doing of a lawful
         act in a lawful manner by lawful means and with
         proper care and caution.

                       6
                 88. Act not intended to cause death,
         done by consent in good faith for person’s
         benefit.- Nothing which is not intended to cause
         death, is an offence by reason of any harm
         which it may cause, or be intended by the doer
         to cause, or be known by the doer to cause, or
         be known by the doer to be likely to cause, to
         any person for whose benefit it is done in good
         faith, and who has given a consent, whether
         express or implied, to suffer that harm, or to
         take the risk of that harm.”
          In this regard, learned counsel for the petitioner has
relied upon a decision of the apex Court in Dr. Suresh Gupta
V. Govt. of N.C.T. of Delhi and Anr., AIR 2004 Supreme
Court 4091, wherein the Hon’ble Court has come to hold that
for fixing criminal liability on a doctor or surgeon, the
standard of negligence required to be proved should be so
high,    as   can   be   described  as  “gross   negligence”  or
“recklessness”. It is not merely lack of necessary care,
attention and skill. When a patient agrees to go for medical
treatment or surgical operation, every careless act of the
medical man cannot be termed as ‘criminal’. It can be termed
‘criminal’ only when the medical man exhibits a gross lack of
competence or inaction and wanton indifference to his
patient’s safety and which is found to have arisen from gross
ignorance or gross negligence. Where a patient’s death results
merely from error of judgment or an accident, no criminal
liability should be attached to it. Mere inadvertence or some

                         7
degree of want of adequate care and caution might create civil
liability but would not suffice to hold him criminally liable.
         Learned Court further held as under:-
                “This approach of the courts in the matter
       of fixing criminal liability on the doctors, in course
       of medical treatment given by them to their
       patients, is necessary so that the hazards of
       medical men in medical profession being exposed
       to civil liability, may not unreasonably extend to
       criminal liability and expose them to risk of
       landing themselves in prison for alleged criminal
       negligence.
                For every mishap or death during medical
       treatment, the medical man cannot be proceeded
       against for punishment. Criminal prosecutions of
       doctors without adequate medical opinion
       pointing to their guilt would be doing great
       disservice to the community at large because if
       the courts were to impose criminal liability on the
       hospitals and doctors for everything that goes
       wrong, the doctors would be more worried about
       their own safety than giving all best treatment to
       their patients. This would lead to shaking the
       mutual confidence between the doctor and
       patient. Every mishap or misfortune in the
       hospital or clinic of a doctor is not a gross act of
       negligence to try him for an offence of culpable
       negligence.
                Xxx         xxx        xxx    xxx
                Between civil and criminal liability of a
       doctor causing death of his patient the court has
       a difficult task of weighing the decree of
       carelessness and negligence alleged on the part of
       the doctor. For conviction of a doctor for alleged
       criminal offence, the standard should be proof of
       recklessness and deliberate wrong doing i.e. a
       higher degree of morally blameworthy conduct.
                To convict, therefore, a doctor, the
       prosecution has to come out with a case of high

                     8
     degree of negligence on the part of the doctor.
     Mere lack of proper care, precaution and attention
     or inadvertence might create civil liability but not
     a criminal one. The courts have, therefore, always
     insisted in the case of alleged criminal offence
     against doctor causing death of his patient during
     treatment, that the act complained against the
     doctor must show negligence or rashness of such
     a hither degree as to indicate a mental state
     which can be described as totally apathetic
     towards the patient. Such gross negligence alone
     is punishable.”
             The legal position is well settled that when a
prosecution at the initial stage is asked to be quashed, the
tests to be applied by the Court is as to whether the
uncontroverted allegations as made prima facie establish the
offence. Section 482 does not confer any new powers on the
High Court. It only saves the inherent power which the
Court possessed before the enactment of the Code. It
envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an
order under the Code (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of
court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of justice. It is
neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule
which would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No
legislative enactment dealing with procedure can provide for
all cases that may possibly arise. Courts therefore, have
inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which
are necessary for proper discharge of functions and duties
imposed upon them by law. That is the doctrine which finds
expression in the section which merely recognizes and

                     9
preserves inherent powers of the High Courts. All courts,
whether civil or criminal possess, in the absence of any
express provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such
powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong
in course of administration of justice on the principle
“quando lex aliauid alicui concedit, concedere videtur et id
sine guo res ipsae esse non potest” (when the law gives a
person anything it gives him that without which it cannot
exist). While exercising powers under the section, the court
does not function as a court of appeal or revision. Inherent
jurisdiction under the section though wide has to be
exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution and only
when such exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid
down in the section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito
justitiae  to  do   real  and  substantial  justice   for  the
administration of which alone courts exist. Authority of the
court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is
made to abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the
court has power to prevent abuse. It would be an abuse of
the process of court, to allow any action which would result
in injustice and prevent promotion of justice and in exercise
of such powers, court would be justified to quash any
proceeding if it finds that initiation/continuance of it
amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of
these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice.
When no offence is disclosed by the report or the complaint,
the court may examine the question of fact. When a report
or complaint is sought to be quashed, it is permissible to

                     10
look into the materials to assess what the report has alleged
and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations
are accepted in toto.
              The scope of exercise of power under Article 226
of the Constitution and Section 482 of the Code and the
categories of cases where the High Court may exercise its
power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent
abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
ends of justice were set out in some detail by the Supreme
Court in State of Harayana and others v. Ch. Bhajan Lal
and others, AIR 1992 SC 604. The Hon’ble Court made it
clear that it may not be possible to lay down any precise,
clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list to
myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be
exercised :
          “(1)      Where the allegations made in the
          First Information Report or the complaint, even
          if they are taken at their face value and
          accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
          constitute any offence or make out a case
          against the accused.
          (2) Where the allegations in the First
          Information Report and other materials, if any,
          accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a
          cognizable offence, justifying an investigation
          by police officers under S. 156(1) of the Code
          except under an order of a Magistrate within
          the purview of S. 155(2) of the Code.
          (3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made
          in the FIR or complaint and the evidence

                    11
         collected in support of the same do not disclose
         the commission of any offence and make out a
         case against the accused.
         (4) Where, the allegations in the F.I.R. do not
         constitute a cognizable offence but constitute
         only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation
         is permitted by a police officer without an order
         of a Magistrate as contemplated under S.
         155(2) of the Code.
         (5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or
         complaint are so absurd and inherently
         improbable on the basis of which no prudent
         person can ever reach a just conclusion that
         there is sufficient ground for proceeding
         against the accused.
         (6) Where there is an express legal bar
         engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code
         or the concerned Act (under which a criminal
         proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
         continuance of the proceedings and/or where
         there is a specific provision in the Code or the
         concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for
         the grievance of the aggrieved party.
         (7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly
         attended with mala fide and/or where the
         proceeding is maliciously instituted with an
         ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the
         accused and with a view to spite him due to
         private and personal grudge.”
         In the case of Punjab National Bank v. Surendra
Prasad Sinha, AIR 1992 SC 1815, the Supreme Court has
observed that judicial process should not be an instrument
of oppression or needless harassment. There lies the
responsibility and duty on the Magistrate to find out
whether    the   concerned    accused     should   be   legally

                     12
responsible for the offence charged for. Only on satisfying
that the law casts liability or creates offence against the
accused persons impleaded then only process would be
issued. At that stage the Court would be circumspect and
judicious in exercising discretion and should take all the
relevant facts and circumstances into consideration before
issuing process lest it would be an instrument in the hands
of the private complaint as vendetta to harass the persons
needlessly.    Vindication     of   majesty     of   justice  and
maintenance of law and order in the society are the prime
objects of criminal justice but it would not be the means to
wreak personal vengeance.
            In the present case, the complainant had lodged
an FIR, which was registered as Nayagarh P.S. Case No.48 of
2003, under Section 304-A IPC, alleging therein that his
sister Minati Pati died after delivering the child, due to gross
negligence     of   the    petitioner.    After    completion   of
investigation, the Investigating Officer submitted Final
Report as a mistake of fact, as no incriminating material was
found to establish any recklessness and deliberate wrong
doing in treating the patient.
            In the protest petition, the complainant has
merely reiterated the allegations of criminal negligence
against   the    petitioner.  The    initial  statement    of the
complainant recorded under Section 200 Cr.P.C. and the
evidence of the witnesses recorded under Section 202
Cr.P.C. are mere bald allegations without any basis and do

                      13
not make out a prima face case of gross negligence or
recklessness against the petitioner. Therefore, allowing
continuance of the criminal proceeding against the present
petitioner would be an abuse of the process of Court.
              Coming to the question regarding requirement
of sanction for prosecution under Section 197(1) Cr.P.C., it
is now well settled that the protection given under Section
197 of the Code is to protect responsible public servants
against    the   institution  of  possibly  vexatious    criminal
proceedings for offences alleged to have been committed by
them while they are acting or purporting to act as public
servants. The policy of the legislature is to afford adequate
protection to public servants to ensure that they are not
prosecuted for anything done by them in the discharge of
their official duties without reasonable cause, and if
sanction is granted, to confer on the Government, if they
choose to exercise it, complete control of the prosecution.
This protection has certain limits and is available only when
the alleged act done by the public servant is reasonably
connected with the discharge of his official duty and is not
merely a cloak for doing the objectionable act. If in doing his
official duty, he acted in excess of his duty, but there is a
reasonable connection between the act and the performance
of the official duty, the excess will not be a sufficient ground
to deprive the public servant from the protection. The
question is not as to the nature of the offence such as
whether     the    alleged   offence   contained    an   element
necessarily dependent upon the offender being a public

                      14
servant, but whether it was committed by a public servant
acting or purporting to act as such in the discharge of his
official capacity. Before Section 197 can be invoked, it must
be shown that the official concerned was accused of an
offence alleged to have been committed by him while acting
or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duties. It
is not the duty which requires examination so much as the
act, because the official act can be performed both in the
discharge of the official duty as well as in dereliction of it.
The act must fall within the scope and range of the official
duties of the public servant concerned. It is the quality of
the act which is important and the protection of this section
is available if the act falls within the scope and range of his
official duty.
            In Rakesh Kumar Mishra v. State of Bihar &
Others, AIR 2006 SC 820, Supreme Court while reiterating
the object behind enacting Section 197 of the Code and also
the prerequisites for application thereof, held as follows:
                     “The protection given under
                Section 197 is to protect responsible
                public servants against the institution
                of    possibly    vexatious   criminal
                proceedings for offences alleged to
                have been committed by them while
                they are acting or purporting to act as
                public servants. The policy of the
                legislature is to afford adequate
                protection to public servants to
                ensure that they are not prosecuted
                for anything done by them in the
                discharge of their official duties

      15
without reasonable cause, and if
sanction is granted, to confer on the
Government, if it chooses to exercise
it,    complete     control    of    the
prosecution. This protection has
certain limits and is available only
when the alleged act done by the
public     servant     is    reasonably
connected with the discharge of his
official duty and is not merely a cloak
for doing the objectionable act. If in
doing his official duty, he acted in
excess of his duty, but there is a
reasonable connection between the
act and the performance of the official
duty, the excess will not be a
sufficient ground to deprive the public
servant from the protection. The
question is not as to the nature of the
offence such as whether the alleged
offence     contained     an     element
necessarily dependent upon the
offender being a public servant, but
whether it was committed by a public
servant acting or purporting to act as
such in the discharge of his official
capacity. Before Section 197 can be
invoked, it must be shown that the
official concerned was accused of an
offence    alleged    to    have    been
committed by him while acting or
purporting to act in the discharge of
his official duties. It is not the duty
which requires examination so much
as the act, because the official act can
be performed both in the discharge of
the official duty as well as in
dereliction of it. The act must fall
within the scope and range of the
official duties of the public servant
concerned. It is the quality of the act
which is important and the protection

                    16
              of this section is available if the act
              falls within the scope and range of his
              official duty. There cannot be any
              universal rule to determine whether
              there is a reasonable connection
              between the act done and the official
              duty, nor is it possible to lay down
              any such rule. One safe and sure test
              in this regard would be to consider if
              the omission or neglect on the part of
              the public servant to commit the act
              complained of could have made him
              answerable for a charge of dereliction
              of his official duty : if the answer to
              this question is in the affirmative, it
              may be said that such act was
              committed by the public servant while
              acting in the discharge of his official
              duty and there was every connection
              with the act complained of and the
              official duty of the public servant This
              aspect makes it clear that the concept
              of Section 197 does not get
              immediately attracted on institution
              of the complaint case.”
           In the present case, as the petitioner was a
Government     servant,    working   as   ADMO     at  District
Headquarters Hospital, Nayagarh and the offence is alleged
to have been committed by him while performing his official
duty as a doctor in the said hospital, the protection
envisaged under Section 197(1) Cr.P.C. is attracted and he
cannot be prosecuted without previous sanction of the State
Government.
           For the reasons as aforestated, the impugned
order of cognizance dated 07.07.2005, passed by the learned

                   17
S.D.J.M., Nayagarh, is quashed and the protest petition
registered as ICC No.58 of 2005 is hereby dismissed.
           CRLMC is accordingly allowed.
                                        (S.C.PARIJA, J.)


