                                     W.P.(C) No.27830 2013
02.  19.12.2013               Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and
                learned    Standing    Counsel    appearing    for  the    Transport
                Department.
                              It is submitted by the learned counsel for the
                petitioner that the petitioner is the registered owner of the
                vehicle bearing Registration No.OR-05-P/8877 and the opposite
                party is not granting permit and fitness certificate in respect of
                the said vehicle as the petitioner is in default of paying tax and
                penalty for some period. Learned counsel for the petitioner
                further submits that the petitioner is willing to deposit the tax,
                but the penalty amount being excessive, the same may be
                reduced.
                              Considering the submissions made, it is directed
                that if the petitioner pays the tax demanded by 03.1.2014 and
                undertakes before the opposite party to pay 60% of the penalty
                amount     in  three  equal   consecutive    instalments,   i.e., by
                18.01.2014, 03.02.2014 and 19.02.2014, then on payment of
                tax and the first instalment of the penalty, the petitioner’s
                application shall be considered and permit and fitness certificate
                shall be granted in favour of the petitioner, provided that the
                petitioner has not incurred any other dues in the meantime and
                the vehicle is otherwise fit to ply on the road. It is further
                observed that such permit and fitness certificate may be
                cancelled by the opposite party in the event of default in
                payment of the aforesaid instalments of penalty amount by the
                dates stipulated above or default in payment of any other dues
                accrued against the petitioner. In that event, the petitioner shall
                be able to pay the whole of the amount of penalty imposed. If
                the 60% of the penalty amount is paid by the dates stipulated,
                the balance penalty amount shall stand waived.
                              The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
                              Issue urgent certified copy as per rules.
   mp                                                            ………………………
                                                                 S.C. Parija, J.


