                                   M.A.C.A. No.85 of 2010
06. 24.09.2013               Heard learned counsel for the parties.
                             This appeal by the Insurance Company is directed
               against the judgment/award dated 20.11.2009, passed by the
               First Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Mayurbhanj, Baripada, in
               M.A.C.T. Misc. Case No.13 of 2004, awarding an amount of
               Rs.1,65,000/- as compensation along with interest @6% per
               annum with effect from 01.01.2008, till payment and directing
               the present appellant and respondent no.4, the insurer of the
               other vehicle involved in the accident to pay the same at the ratio
               60% and 40% respectively.
                             The sole contention of the learned counsel for the
               appellant-Insurance Company is that as the evidence on record
               including the police papers, such as, charge-sheet and the MVI
               report clearly goes to show that the driver of the offending Tata
               Sumo was rash and negligent in causing the accident, learned
               Tribunal was not justified in apportioning the liability between the
               insurer of the offending Tata Sumo and the Truck in the ratio of
               60:40. It is submitted that in view of the overwhelming of the
               evidence on record, the entire liability should be saddled on the
               respondent no.4, as the insurer of the Tata Sumo.
                             Learned   counsel   for   the  Insurance     Company-
               respondent no.4 submits that 60% of the awarded amount falling
               to the share of respondent no.4 has already been paid to the
               claimants, along with interest. It is further submitted that as the
               F.I.R and the evidence of eyewitness to the accident clearly shows
               the rash and negligence of the drivers of both the vehicles, for
               causing the accident, the impugned award cannot be faulted.
                             On a perusal of the impugned award, it is seen that
               the learned Tribunal has taken into consideration the evidence on
uks

                                       2
               record, both oral and documentary, including the police papers
               and the statement of the eye witness, namely, Ashis Tope, who
               was examined in the connected claim applications, i.e. M.A.C.T.
               Misc. Case Nos.11 and 12 of 2004, arising out of the self-same
               accident, in coming to hold that it was a case of contributory
               negligence and the driver of the Tata Sumo and Truck were rash
               and negligent in causing the accident and has accordingly
               apportioned the liability between the insurers of the two vehicles
               in the ratio of 60:40. This finding of the learned Tribunal is based
               on the materials available on record and is therefore fully
               justified.
                             In view of the above, there is no infirmity or illegality
               in the impugned award, so as to warrant any interference.
                             Appellant is directed to deposit the awarded amount
               along with interest with the learned Tribunal within six weeks
               hence.
                             The statutory amount deposited in the Registry of
               this Court along with accrued interest thereon shall be refunded
               to the appellant-Insurance Company on production of receipt
               showing deposit of the awarded compensation amount and
               interest before the learned Tribunal.
                             M.A.C.A. is accordingly dismissed.
                                                              …………………….
                                                         S.C.Parija, J.
                                   Misc. Case No.242 of 2010
07. 24.09.2013               In view of the dismissal of the appeal, no order is
               required to be passed.
               Misc. Case is accordingly disposed of.
                                                              ………………………
                                                               S.C. Parija, J.


