                                       W.P.(C) No.6839 of 2012
05.    24.07.2013               Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri S.K.
                  Nayak, learned Senior counsel appearing for the opposite party
                  no.3.
                                This writ petition has been filed challenging the
                  action of the opposite parties in not releasing the arrear
                  differential salary, as per the revised pay scale, 1998, as has
                  been granted to the other employees of Cuttack Municipal
                  Corporation, Cuttack, who are similarly situated.
                                Learned counsel appearing for the opposite party
                  no.3 submits that as no records are available with regard to the
                  appointment of the petitioner and many other similarly situated
                  persons and therefore no steps could be taken with regard to
                  payment of revised scale of pay. It is stated that if the petitioner
                  files a representation before the Commissioner, Cuttack Municipal
                  Corporation, Cuttack, furnishing the details of the arrear revised
                  salary he is entitled to, his case shall be considered by the
                  authority keeping in view the fact that similar benefits have been
                  extended to other employees of the Corporation.
                                Considering the submissions made and without
                  expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, this writ petition
                  is disposed of giving liberty to the petitioner to file representation
                  before the Commissioner, Cuttack Municipal Corporation-opposite
                  party no.3, with regard to arrear revised salary furnishing the
                  details thereof. If such representation is filed within two weeks
                  hence, the same shall be considered by the said authority,
                  keeping in view the fact that similar benefits have been extended
                  to other employees and pass appropriate orders in accordance
    uks

                   with law, as expeditiously as possible, preferably within a period
                   of three months from the date of receipt of such representation.
                                 W.P.(C) is accordingly disposed of.
                                 Issue urgent certified copy as per rules.
                                                                  ………..………………
                                                                    S.C. Parija, J.
                                       Misc. Case No.15395 of 2012
06.     24.07.2013               In view of the disposal of the writ petition, no order
                   is required to be passed.
                   Misc. Case is accordingly disposed of.
                                                                  ………..………………
                                                                    S.C. Parija, J.
    uks


