                                   W.P.(C) No.17717 of 2013
04. 22.08.2013               Heard learned counsel for the parties.
                             This writ petition has been filed challenging the order
               dated 24.05.2013, passed by the Deputy Director (Revenue),
               Employees’ State    Insurance Corporation, Odisha, Bhubaneswar,
               directing the petitioner to pay the contribution amount of
               Rs.2,93,865/- for the period from 04/2008 to 09/2012, as the
               proprietor of M/s. Konark Stone Crusher.
                             Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that he is
               not the Principal Employer or the Proprietor of M/s. Konark Stone
               Crusher and he is merely an employee of that unit. It is stated
               that merely because the petitioner received the communications
               sent to the address of M/s. Konark Stone Crusher, the same
               cannot be the basis to determine that the petitioner is the
               Principal Employer. It is further submitted that the impugned
               order has been passed ex parte without affording any opportunity
               of hearing to the petitioner, inasmuch as, the letter dated
               07.02.2013 had not been received by him.
                             Learned counsel appearing for the E.S.I. Corporation
               with reference to the counter affidavit submits that as all the
               communications sent in the name of the Proprietor of M/s. Konark
               Stone Crusher has been duly received by the petitioner and he
               has also signed the Inspection Report as the Proprietor, it is not
               open for him to take the plea now that he is not the Proprietor of
               M/s. Konark Stone Crusher, in order to avoid the statutory
               liability.
                             Without going into the merits of the contentions
               raised by the parties and keeping in view the fact that the
               impugned order dated 24.05.2013 has been passed ex parte and
uks

    in order to provide another opportunity to the petitioner, the
    same is set aside and the matter is remitted back to the Deputy
    Director (Revenue), Employees’ State Insurance Corporation,
    Odisha, Bhubaneswar, opposite party, to consider the same
    afresh after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
                  The petitioner shall appear before the said authority
    on 05.09.2013 along with all documents to establish that he is not
    the Proprietor of M/s. Konark Stone Crusher, which shall be
    considered by the authority on its own merit and in accordance
    with law.
                  The entire proceeding shall be completed within a
    period of four weeks from the date of appearance of the petitioner
    before the concerned authority.
                  Writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
                  Issue urgent certified copy as per rules.
                                                    ………..………………
                                                      S.C. Parija, J.
uks


