                       W.P.(C) No.20223 of 2013
2 30.8.2013             Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned
            Standing counsel for the Transport Department.
                        It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
            the petitioner is the registered owner of the vehicle bearing Registration
            No.OR-09-E/2652 and the opposite party is not granting permit and
            fitness certificate in respect of the said vehicle as the petitioner is in
            default of paying tax and penalty for some period. Learned counsel for
            the petitioner further submits that the petitioner is willing to deposit the
            tax, but the penalty amount being excessive, the same may be reduced.
                          Considering the submissions made, it is directed that if the
            petitioner pays the tax demanded by 13.09.2013 and undertakes before
            the opposite party to pay 60% of the penalty amount in three equal
            consecutive     installments,   i.e., by   28.9.2013,     15.10.2013    and
            30.10.2013, then on payment of tax and the first installment of the
            penalty, the petitioner’s application shall be considered and permit and
            fitness certificate shall be granted in favour of the petitioner, provided
            that the petitioner has not incurred any other dues in the meantime
            and the vehicle is otherwise fit to ply on the road. It is further observed
            that such permit and fitness certificate may be cancelled by the
            opposite party in the event of default in payment of the aforesaid
            installments of penalty amount by the dates stipulated above or default
            in payment of any other dues accrued against the petitioner. In that
            event, the petitioner shall be able to pay the whole of the amount of
            penalty imposed. If the 60% of the penalty amount is paid by the dates
            stipulated, the balance penalty amount shall stand waived.
  MP
                        The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
                        Issue urgent certified copy as per rules.
                                                                  …………………
                                                                   S.C. Parija, J.

2

