                                     W.P.(C) No.10711 of 2013
04. 30.08.2013                Heard    Ms.   D.  Mohapatra,   learned   counsel    for   the
               petitioner-Insurance    Company,    Sri  Mahesh    Das,   learned     counsel
               appearing for the opposite party nos.1 and 2 and Mrs. Manasi
               Mohapatra, learned counsel for the owner-opposite party no.3.
                              This writ petition has been filed by the Insurance
               Company challenging the order dated 18.03.2013, passed by the
               Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation, Ganjam, in W.C. Case No.3
               of 2012, rejecting the compromise petition filed by the petitioner and
               claimants-opposite parties 1 and 2.
                              Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that as the
               matter has been amicably resolved and/or compromised between the
               Insurance Company and the claimants for an amount of Rs.3,60,000/- in
               full and final satisfaction of their claim, the Commissioner was not
               justified in ignoring the same and rejecting the application for
               compromise.
                              Learned counsel for the claimants-opposite party Nos.1
               and 2 submits that the claimants have compromised the matter with the
               Insurance Company and have agreed to accept Rs.3,60,000/- in full and
               final settlement of their claim.
                              Considering the submissions made and keeping in view
               the fact that the matter has been amicably compromised between the
               parties, the impugned order is set aside and the matter is remitted back
               to the Commissioner to consider and dispose of the compromise petition
               afresh, after hearing the parties and examining the claimants, if found
               necessary. In the event the Commissioner comes to a finding that the
               compromise between the parties is genuine and bonafide, he shall
               record the same and dispose of the claim application in terms of such
               compromise.
                              W.P.(C) is accordingly disposed of.
                              Issue urgent certified copy as per rules.
                                                                  ………..………………
                                                                     S.C. Parija, J.
uks


