                 ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
 WRIT APPEAL (CIVIL) Nos.161,166, 168, 176, 178 of 2011
ALONG WITH MISC. CASE NOS. 553, 393, 304, 407, 411 of 2011
In the matters of appeals under Section 10 of the Letters Patent
of Patna High Court read with Article 4 of the Orissa High Court
Rules, 1948.
In W.A.No.161 of 2011(Arising out of W.P.C No. 16878 of 2008)
(along with Misc. Case No. 553 of 2011)
          State of Orissa, represented through the
          Commissioner-cum-Secretary      to   Govt.,
          Public Enterprises Department,
                                              …… APPELLANT
                              Versus
      Nityananda Sethy and another            …..  RESPONDENTS
In W.A.No.166 of 2011 (Arising out of W.P.C No. 16877 of 2008)
(along with Misc. Case No. 393 of 2011)
          State of Orissa, represented through the
          Commissioner-cum-Secretary      to   Govt.,
          Public Enterprises Department,
                                              …… APPELLANT
                              Versus
          Natabar Nath and another            …..  RESPONDENTS
In W.A.No.168 of 2011(Arising out of W.P.C No. 16879 of 2008)
(along with Misc. Case No. 304 of 2011)
          State of Orissa, represented through the
          Commissioner-cum-Secretary      to   Govt.,
          Public Enterprises Department,
                                              …… APPELLANT
                              Versus
          Manilal Khuntia and another         …..   RESPONDENTS

                                              2
           In W.A.No.176 of 2011(Arising out of W.P.C No. 16873 of 2008)
           (along with Misc. Case No. 407 of 2011)
                    State of Orissa, represented through the
                    Commissioner-cum-Secretary        to  Govt.,
                    Public Enterprises Department,
                                                         …… APPELLANT
                                         Versus
                    Muralidhar Mohanty and another       …..  RESPONDENTS
           In W.A.No.178 of 2011(Arising out of W.P.C No. 16845 of 2008)
           (along with Misc. Case No. 411 of 2011)
                    State of Orissa, represented through the
                    Commissioner-cum-Secretary        to  Govt.,
                    Public Enterprises Department,
                                                         …… APPELLANT
                                         Versus
                    Saroja Ku.Das and another            …..  RESPONDENTS
                 For appellant    :   Mr.R.K.Mohapatra, Government Advocate
                 For respondents :    Mr.Gopal Krishna Mohanty
           PRESENT:
           THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SHRI V.GOPALA GOWDA
                                          AND
                   THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE S.K.MSIHRA
                      Date of hearing & judgment : 03.09.2012
V.Gopala Godwa, C.J.     These   appeals  are   filed by the  State  along with
           Miscellaneous Applications for condonation of delay in each of the

                                    3
appeals explaining the delay in filing the appeals urging various facts
and legal contentions.
2.      Mr.R.K.Mohapatra, learned Government Advocate submitted that
by the order of the learned Single Judge of this Court in the writ
petitions arising out of which the present appeals arise, directing the
State Government to pay the arrears of salary to the respondent no.1
in all these appeals, who are the employees of Shree Sarala Weavers
Co-operative Spinning Mills Ltd., (hereinafter to be referred to as
‘Mills’)  in terms of the order passed in W.P.(C) No. 11333 of 2003,
would be borne from the State exchequer and thereby the order of the
learned Single Judge is contrary to the decision of the Supreme Court
in the case of Officers and Supervisors of L.D.P.L. v. Chairman &
M.D., I.D.P.L. and others, reported in (2003) 6 SCC 490, State of
Assam v. Barak Upatyaka D.U.Karmachari Sanstha, (2009) 5 SCC
694, A.K.Bindal and another v. Union of India and others, (2003)
5 SCC 163 and State of U.P. and another v. Uptron Employees’
Union, CMD and others, (2006) 5 SCC 319. He further contended
that in the scheme introduced         for voluntary retirement of the
employees of the Mills, the State Government had offered limited
financial assistance of payment of ex-gratia @ 21 days salary for every
completed year of service + gratuity and leave encashment to each one
of the employee who is intending to take voluntary retirement. The said
scheme was again amended in 2002 and 2005. However, the Mills was
closed for various reasons. The Mills invited applications from its

                                     4
employees     under   the  voluntary   retirement  scheme.   The   State
Government passed a resolution on 23.12.2005 clarifying that their
liability would be limited to assistance they have offered and that the
employees will give an undertaking that they would not claim any dues
from the State Government in any other forum other than what has
been offered. Upon furnishing such undertaking by the employees, the
employees would be paid their dues under the voluntary retirement
scheme. Since no dues were paid to the employees, they filed writ
petitions before this Court claiming benefits of arrears of salary from
the State Government, which according to them were not paid by their
employer. The said writ petitions were allowed on the basis of the order
dated 29.04.2004 passed in W.P.(C) No. 11333 of 2003 without giving
an opportunity to the State to file counter affidavit. Against the said
order, the State of Odisha went in appeal before the Supreme Court in
S.L.P.(C) No. 7057 of 2005 (State of Orissa v. Labani Jena and others)
with an application for condonation of delay. However, the said appeal
was dismissed by the Supreme Court on the ground of limitation as well
as on merit vide order dated 28.3.2005. Thereafter, the State of Orissa
also filed Review petition bearing Review petition No. 362 of 2006, the
same was dismissed by the Supreme Court observing that no
explanation has been given for the inordinate delay of 310 days and
even otherwise, there is no merit in the petition. That apart, the State
of Orissa also went in civil appeal challenging the said order dated
29.4.2004 passed in W.P.(C) No. 11141 of 2003 bearing Special Leave
petition No. 7635 of 2006 (State of Orissa v. Panchanan Sahu others)

                                     5
and the same also came to be dismissed on 21.4.2006 on the ground of
delay and merit.
3.      Learned   Government     Advocate   placing  reliance  upon     the
decisions of the Supreme Court in State of U.P. and others v. Rekha
Rani, AIR 2011 S.C. 1893 (Paragraphs 6 & 10), Royal Orchid Hotels
Limited and another v. G.Jayarama Reddy and others, (2011) 10
SCC 608 (para-35) in support of the proposition of law submits that
dismissal of Special Leave Petition at the stage of condonation of delay
and consequential dismissal of the Special Leave Petition on merit also
does not amount to merger of the order of the learned Single Judge
with that of the order of the Supreme Court. Therefore, he submits that
these appeals are required to be allowed as there is no statutory
liability cast upon the State Government to pay the arrears of salary to
these employees, who are respondent no.1 in all these appeals.
4.      Mr.G.K.Mohanty,    learned   counsel   appearing   for   the   first
respondent in all these appeals referring to 14 nos. of writ petitions, in
which arrears of salary have been disbursed to its employees, who took
voluntary retirement by the employer of the Mills as per the judgment
passed by this Court in W.P.(C) No. 11333 of 2003, which was
confirmed by the Supreme Court by dismissing the Special Leave
Petition referred to supra, submits that the State Government cannot
take a different stand in respect of the first respondent in all these
appeals, who are all similarly situated as that of the employees in the
earlier writ petitions and against the orders passed in the writ petitions,

                                     6
S.L.Ps. were filed. Accordingly, he prayed for dismissal of the
Miscellaneous petitions for condonation of delay and consequently
dismiss these appeals.
5.     It is an undisputed fact that the Mills was established to produce
cotton yarns and synthetic yarns. It is also a fact that though the Mills
was registered under the Co-operative Societies Act, the same were
enlisted under the Public Enterprises Department of the Government of
Odisha as 95% of their equity share was held by the State
Government. In the year 1995 the State Government constituted a
Cabinet Sub-Committee for restructuring of the State Public Sector
Undertakings in the State and the said Sub-Committee of the Cabinet
of the State Government also recommended for restructuring of Public
Sector Undertakings by downsizing the surplus staff through Voluntary
Retirement Scheme. The recommendation made by the Sub-Committee
of Cabinet on 6.6.1998 was accepted by the State Government and a
model Voluntary Retirement Scheme was formulated. As per the said
model Voluntary Retirement Scheme, an employee shall be allowed ex-
gratia, gratuity, leave salary and other statutory dues as admissible on
the date of retirement. Thereafter, in order to facilitate the Voluntary
Retirement Scheme, the State Government in the Department of Public
Enterprises circulated a better clarified scheme in which it was
stipulated that in addition to ex gratia, gratuity and leave encashment,
a retired employee is entitled to receive arrears of salary, provident
fund, ESI, unpaid bonus and any other due which has accrued over the

                                    7
years of service. Pursuant to the said scheme floated by the
Government, some of the employees like the first respondent in each
one of the appeals also took voluntary retirement, but on the date of
relieve, the first respondent was paid ex gratia, gratuity and leave
salary only and in the relieve order it was stipulated that disbursement
of other statutory dues shall be paid to the employees after sanction is
made by the State Government. Due to non-payment of the arrears of
salary, some of the employees like the first respondent in each one of
the appeals approached this Court wherein this Court allowed the writ
petitions holding that the State cannot be absolved from the liability of
payment of dues to the employees as per the voluntary retirement
scheme, which was confirmed by the Supreme Court as referred to
above.
6.     Having regard to the aforesaid rival legal contentions, the
following questions arise for consideration. They are :
       (i)   Whether the applications for condonation of delay of
             nearly about two years in filing these appeals for the
             reasons mentioned therein are to be allowed?
       (ii)  Whether the appellant- State has statutory liability to
             pay the arrears of salary of the employees, who were
             working under a public sector undertaking Mills? and
       (iii) Whether the impugned order of the learned Single Judge
             merges with the order passed in the Special Leave
             Petition Nos.7057 of 2005 and 7635 of 2006, which were
             dismissed on the ground of delay and merit ?
       (iv)  To what order ?

                                     8
7.     The impugned order, which is challenged in these appeals, has
been passed on 25.3.2009. The said order was passed in respect of the
first respondent in all these appeals, who were the employees of the
Mills and took voluntary retirement pursuant to the scheme introduced
by the State Government on the basis of the recommendation made by
the Cabinet Sub-Committee. It is also undisputed fact that persons
similarly placed with that of the first respondent had approached this
Court and got the relief on the basis of order passed in W.P.(C) No.
11333 of 2003 disposed of on 29.4.2004, against which Special Leave
Petition was filed along with petition for condonation of delay, which
also came to be dismissed vide order dated 28.3.2005, thereby
confirming the order passed by this Court in W.P.(C) No. 11333 of
2003. In view of the said undisputed fact, it is not necessary for this
Court to exercise its discretionary power to condone the delay of nearly
two years in filing these appeals though condonation of delay is a
discretionary power vests with the Court. But in the present case such
discretionary power need not be exercised, since it is undisputed fact
that similar matters have been dismissed by the Supreme Court on the
ground of delay and on merit and the orders passed by this Court have
been implemented by the appellant.
8.     In view of the foregoing reasons, we do not find any good reason
whatsoever to pass a different order than the order passed by the
Supreme Court in the Special Leave Petitions referred to above.

                                      9
Therefore, the Misc. Cases filed by the appellant for condonation of
delay in all these appeals are rejected.
9.    Though we have dismissed the miscellaneous applications for
condonation of delay in filing the appeals, the consequential order could
only be an order of dismissal of the appeals, but learned Government
Advocate referring to the decision of the Supreme Court in (2009) 5
SCC 694        (State of Assam v. Barak Upatyaka D.U. Karmachari
Sanstha) submits that the order passed in the Special Leave Petition,
which was dismissed on the ground of delay and on merit, is not a
speaking one and the same will not be merged with the order passed
by this Court. The said contention is definitely legal and valid and there
is no quarrel with the legal proposition, but the said decision does not
help the case of the appellant-State in view of the reason that the
Supreme Court in the said case has extensively referred to various
paragraphs from the decision of Kapila Hingorani v. State of Bihar,
(2003) 6 SCC 1. The apex Court in the case of            Kapila Hingorani
(supra) in paragraph 20 has framed the following question in favour of
the employees, which reads as follows:
              “Whether having regard to the admitted position that the
              Government companies or corporations referred to
              hereinbefore are State within the meaning of Article 12
              of the Constitution of India, the State of Bihar having
              deep and pervasive control over the affairs thereof can
              be held to be liable to render all assistance to the said
              companies so as to fulfill its own and/or the
              corporations’ obligations to comply with the citizens’
              right under Articles 21 and 23 of the Constitution of
              India.”

                                        10
Similarly, the apex Court in the said judgment Kapila Hingorani (supra)
has also made the following observations in different paragraphs:
             “26. We, therefore, do not appreciate the stand taken by the
             State of Bihar now that it does not have any constitutional
             obligation towards a section of citizens viz. the employees of
             public sector undertakings who have not been paid salaries
             for years.
             27. We also do not appreciate the submissions made on
             behalf of the State of Bihar that the directions issued were
             only one-time direction. In clause 4 of the directions, it was
             clearly stated that the State for the present shall deposit a
             sum of Rs.50 crores before the High Court for disbursement
             of salaries to the employees of the Corporation. Furthermore,
             the matter had been directed to be placed again after six
             months.
             30. The government companies/ public sector undertakings
             being ‘State would be constitutionally liable to respect life and
             liberty of all persons in terms of Article 21 of the Constitution
             of India. They, therefore, must do so in cases of their own
             employees. The Government of the State of Bihar for all
             intent and purport is the sole shareholder. Although in law, its
             liability towards the debtors of the company may be confined
             to the shares held by it but having regard to the deep and
             pervasive control it exercises over the government
             companies; in the matter of enforcement of human rights
             and/or rights of the citizen to life and liberty, the State has
             also an additional duty to see that the rights of employees of
             such corporations are not infringed.
             31. The right to exercise deep and pervasive control would in
             its turn make the Government of Bihar liable to see that the
             life and liberty clause in respect of the employees is fully
             safeguarded. The Government of the State of Bihar, thus, had
             a constitutional obligation to protect the life and liberty of the
             employees       of    the    government-owned         companies/
             corporations who are the citizens of India. It had an additional
             liability having regard to its right of extensive supervision
             over the affairs of the company.
             33. The State having regard to its right of supervision and/or
             deep and pervasive control, cannot be permitted to say that it
             did not know the actual state of affairs of the State
             Government undertakings and/or it was kept in the dark that
             the salaries of their employees had not been paid for years
             leading to starvation death and/or commission of suicide by a
             large number of employees. Concept of accountability arises
             out of the power conferred on an authority.
             34. The State may not be liable in relation to the day-to-day
             functioning of the companies, but its liability would arise on

                                         11
             its failure to perform the constitutional duties and functions
             by the public sector undertakings, as in relation thereto lie
             the State’s constitutional obligations. The State acts in a
             fiduciary capacity. The failure on the part of the State in a
             case of this nature must also be viewed from the angle that
             the statutory authorities have failed and/or neglected to
             enforce the social welfare legislations enacted in this behalf
             e.g. the Payment of Wages Act, the Minimum Wages Act, etc.
             Such welfare activities as adumbrated in Part IV of the
             Constitution of India indisputably would cast a duty upon the
             State being a welfare State and its statutory authorities to do
             all things which they are statutorily obliged to perform.
             37. We make it clear that we have not issued the
             aforementioned directions to the States of Bihar and
             Jharkhand on the premise that they are bound to pay the
             salaries of the employees of the public sector undertakings
             but on the ground that the employees have a human right as
             also a fundamental right under Article 21 which the States are
             bound to protect. The directions, which have been issued by
             this Court on 9.5.2003 as also which are being issued herein,
             are in furtherance of the human and fundamental rights of
             the employees concerned and not by way of an enforcement
             of their legal right to arrears of salaries. The amount of salary
             payable to the employees or workmen concerned would
             undoubtedly be adjudicated upon in the proper proceedings.
             However, these directions are issued which are necessary for
             their survival.”
10.     For the purpose of appreciating the justification of the claim
made by the first respondent, the legal contention urged by the learned
Government Advocate that the State Government has no statutory
liability to pay the arrears of salary of the employees, who were
working under a public sector undertaking Mills, pursuant to the orders
passed by this Court is wholly untenable in law in view of the
observations made by the Supreme Court in Kapila Hingorani case
(supra) and the order passed by the apex Court in the Special Leave
Petitions in relation to some similar employees like the first respondent
in these appeals referred to supra are complied with by paying their
arrears of salary.

                                          12
      11.   After having carefully gone through the paragraphs extracted
      above and the earlier orders passed by the Supreme Court in the
      similar cases in the Special Leave Petitions, we do not find any good
      reason to grant the relief to the appellant in all these appeals by setting
      aside the impugned order passed in the aforesaid writ petitions.
      Accordingly, we find no merit in the appeals and the same are
      dismissed. No costs.
                                                 ………………………..……………
                                                 V.Gopala Gowda,C.,J.
S.K.Mishra, J.      I agree.
                                                   ………………………………………
                                                         S.K.Mishra, J.
      Orissa High Court, Cuttack
      September 03, 2012/ PKSahoo


