                       ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
           WRIT PETITION (C) Nos. 15519/2010, 5737/2010,          7975/2011,
           18577/2011, 5186/2012, 5187/2012, 1087/2008,           2959/2008,
           3562/2008, 3563/2008, 3775/2009, 3903/2009,            3132/2010,
           1963/2012, 5764/2007, 6982/2012, 7/2008,               3010/2012,
           13978/2008, 3515/2008, 579/2010 and 5101/2012.
  In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India
                                        ----------
TATA STEEL LTD                              (WP(C) 15519/2010)
ESSAR STEEL ORISSA                          (WP(C) 5737/2010)
M/s. ACC LTD.                               (WP(C) 7975/2011)
M/s. JAYSHREE CHEMICALS LTD.                (WP(C) 18577/2011)
M/s. GMR KAMALANGA                          (WP(C) 5186 & 5187/2012)
INDIAN METALS AND FERRO LTD                 (WP(C) 1087/2008)
HINDALCO INDUSTRIES                         (WP(C) 2959/2008)
RUNGTA MINES LTD                            (WP(C) 3562/2008)
MANGILLALL RUNGTA                           (WP(C) 3563/2008)
NAGAR EXPORT PVT, LTD                       (WP(C) 3775 & 3903/2009)
MIKAGE STONE DEVELOP                        (WP(C) 3132/2010)
M/S. BHARATI TELEMEDI                       (WP(C) 1963/2012)
MAHASWARI COAL                              (WP(C) 5764/2007)
M/S. ACC LTD.                               (WP(C) 6982/2012
IFGL REFRACTORIES                           (WP(C) 7/2008)
M/S ADANI ENERPRISE                         (WP(C) 3010/2012)
EMAMI PAPER MILLS                           (WP(C) 13978/2008)
M/S VEDEANT ALUMINIUM                       (WP(C) 3515/2008)
DISHNET WIRELESS LTD                        (WP(C) 579/2010)
M/S VYOM TRADE LINK                         (WP(C) 5101/2012)
.                                              …                   Petitioners
                                             Versus
State of Odisha and others                     ….               Opposite parties

                                                   2
            For Petitioners                      -       Mr. S. Ganesh (Senior Advocate)
                                                          M/s Jagabandhu Sahoo,
                                                          N.K. Rout, and P. Mohapatra
                                                        (WP(C) 15519 & 3132 of 2010)
                                                          (WP(C) 1087,2959,3562 &3563 of 2008)
                                                           (WP(C) 3775, 3903 of 2009)
                                                           (WP(C) 1963 of 2012)
                                                                                  ----
                                                          M/s Satyajit Mohanty, R.R. Swain,
                                                          S. Pattanaik and N.K. Dash
                                                         (WPC 5186, 5187 & 6982 of 2012)
                                                                                 ----
                                                       M/s Bibeka Mohanty, S.K. Mishra,
                                                        S.K. Jena, N.R. Mohanty,
                                                        C.R. Dash, M.Roul & M. Wright
                                                       (WP(C) 18577/2011, 3515/2008
                                                               &, 579/2010
                                                                                 ----
                                                       M/s Pranaya K. Harichandan
                                                       CH.M.R. Mishra, B. Behera
                                                      (WPC 3010 & 5101 of 2012)
                                                                                 ----
                                                       M/s Subash Chandra Lal, Sumit
                                                        Lal & Sujit Lal
                                                       (WP(C) 7 & 13978 of 2008,
                                                       & 5764 of 2007
                                                                                 ----
                                                       M/s Sidhartha Ray and S. Dey
                                                       (WP(C) 7975 of 2011)
                                                                                 ----
                                                       M/s S. Kanunga, CH.S. Mishra,
                                                        R.N. Pattnaik, N.R. Mohanty,
                                                       M/s Bibek Mohanty, S.K. Mishra,
                                                       B.K. Sahool & M.Wright
                                                       (WP(C) 5737 of 2010)
          For Opposite parties               -        Mr. A. Mohanty (Advocate General)
                                                     and Mr. R.P. Kar
                                                    -----------
                THE HONOURABLE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. V.GOPALA GOWDA
                                                        AND
                           THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K.MISHRA
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Date of Hearing: 27.07.2012                        Date of judgment – 09.10.2012
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                    3
S.K.Mishra, J.           The following questions arise for determination in this bunch of writ
          petitions:-
                  (i)   Whether the entry tax under Orissa Entry Tax Act, 1999, can
                         be levied and/or imposed on the value of the goods imported
                         by the petitioners from outside the country ?,
                         (ii)    Whether such entry tax under the aforesaid Act can
                         be levied and/or imposed on import of plant and machinery
                         for establishing a plant in the State of Odisha ?
                  (iii) Whether the entry tax can be levied on certain raw materials
                         and goods imported from outside the country and purchased
                         from outside the State when such materials have not been
                         listed in the schedule appended to the Orissa Entry Tax
                         Act ? and
                  (iv)  Whether the Orissa Entry Tax Act, 1999, hereinafter referred
                         to as ‘the Act’ for brevity, is violative of Entry 83 of List I of
                         Seventh Schedule and Article 246 of the Constitution of
                         India.
          2.             The petitioners, in all these writ petitions except a few, whose cases
          shall be described separately below, are operating different industries for which
          they are importing coal from outside the country for being used as raw materials for
          production of various products. The petitioners, in order to carry out their
          manufacturing activity both inside the State and the factories located outside the
          State, import raw materials from outside India, for which they obtained necessary
          license from the appropriate authority. They have been registered under the OVAT
          Act, CST Act and the Orissa Entry Tax Act, 1999 and have been allotted TIN
          number by the Sales Tax Officer. They bring various goods including scheduled
          goods for their plants from within the State and also from outside the territory of
          India by way of import. The materials so purchased from various countries are duly
          supported by bills and other documents, which have been incorporated in the
          accounts of the petitioner-Companies.

                                         4
3.              The petitioners claim that Section 3 of the Act is the charging Section
which only conveys a definite charge of tax on happening of taxable event and not
bereft of the said provisions. Section-2 (j) defines ‘purchase value’, which can be
termed as measure of tax provided for procedure for ascertaining purchase value
for quantification of tax. A conjoint reading of both the provisions indicate that the
goods imported from outside the country are not contemplated for taxation under
Section 3 of the Act. Section 3 of the Act may not be controlled by the above
provision. It is contended that various clauses of Section 2 are inalienable limbs of
Section 3, which are not measure of tax but define expression to make impost with
element of certainty and definiteness. The petitioners claim that under Article 286
of the Constitution of India there has been a restriction for imposition of tax on the
sale or purchase of goods, where such sale or purchase takes place in course of
import of goods, into or export of the goods out of the territory of India [Article
286(i)(b)]. It is contended that Entry 52 of List-II of the Seventh Schedule, which
provides for tax on entry of goods into the local area for consumption, use or sale,
does not include any import made from outside the country and accordingly, the
assessment of the taxing authority on the imports so made is contended to be
illegal.
4.              In course of hearing, the learned Senior Advocate Mr. S. Ganesh,
appearing for one of the petitioners placed reliance on the reported cases of Tata
Iron & Steel Company Ltd. Vs. State of Jharkhand and others, (2007) 6 VST
587 (Jharkh), FR. William Fernandez Vs. State of Kerala and others, (1999) 115
STC 591(Ker), Thressiamma L. Chirayil Vs. State of Kerala, (2007) 7 VST 293
(Ker) as well as the judgment rendered by the Full Bench of the Orissa Sales Tax
Tribunal in the case of Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. Koraput Vs. State of Orissa

                                        5
and contended that in all the above cases the various High Courts as well as the
Sales Tax Tribunal of the State of Odisha has come to the conclusion that entry tax
cannot be levied upon imports made from outside the country. Therefore, the
petitioners pray that the entry tax levied on the imports should be exempted and
the State should be directed to refund the tax collected from them on account of
entry tax.
5.            Some of the cases have different set of facts, and therefore, they are
discussed separately with proper heading as follows:-
              In W.P.(c) No.13978 of 2008 (M/s Emami Paper Mills Ltd. vs. State of
Orissa and others), the petitioner claims that it is an incorporated company and has
a paper manufacturing plant at Balgopalpur in the district of Balasore. They are
producing newsprint, various writing and printing paper by using 100% recycled
waste papers. The company has stopped rice straw from April, 2006 and,
therefore, now using 100% waste paper as raw materials for manufacturing paper.
They decided to expand their plant. Thus, for additional capacity they have placed
orders for a major plant and machinery. In pursuance of such expansion program,
they entered into agreement and placed order for a paper plant and other
machinery on a company namely “Global Equipment and Machinery Sales Inc.,
Montgomeryville, Pennsylvania, USA”. Pursuant to such agreement and orders, the
petitioner has imported into India a paper manufacturing plant in knock down
condition with spares from USA (after dis-assembling the same as the entire plant
cannot be rooted out from USA and established in India).             Besides that the
petitioner also imports other machinery from the other countries and the said
imported machinery and spares parts entered into the country through different
ports and are released by the petitioner on payment of the import duty.

                                       6
               The petitioner claims that the plant and machinery are brought in a
knock down condition in ships and are unloaded in Calcutta Port and or other ports
and are released after payment of import duty levied under the Customs Act. After
the said plant and machinery were unloaded from the ships and cleared of the
customs duty, the said plant and machinery were transported to the factory
premises at Balgopalpur causing entry into the local area of Balasore under way
bills prescribed under Orissa Sales Tax Rules and Orissa VAT Rules. The
petitioner claims that even though the company is not liable to pay entry tax in
respect of paper making plants and machinery imported from USA           and other
countries, by letter dated 25.03.2006 the opposite party no.3 called upon the
petitioner to submit a statement showing the name of goods imported by the
petitioner from the USA. This fact is subject matter of W.P.No.12622 of 2006 and
the same is pending consideration before this Court. The petitioner protested that it
is not liable to pay entry tax on the plant and machinery brought from USA in
course of import and, further, since the plant is not a schedule good, the same
cannot be subjected to entry tax under Orissa Entry Tax Act, 1999. The opposite
parties denied to give way bills and ‘C’ forms and perpetrated other type of
harassment if the petitioner will not pay entry tax on the plant and machinery so
imported from USA. The petitioner had no other alternative than to make ad hoc
payment through challans towards Orissa Entry Tax under protest.
               The demand of entry tax on imported plant and machinery was not
authorized by the Act and such demand was arbitrary and the petitioner is before
this Court in W.P.(C) No.12622 of 2006, which was admitted by order dated
08.10.2006 and further direction was given that the petitioner should not be asked

                                        7
to pay any amount on entry tax in view of the payment of the customs duty by the
petitioner.
               Petitioner claims that the paper plant is a mega plant and it had to
purchase different types of machinery, its spare parts from different manufacturers
in other States of the Country. These machinery and spare parts are of definite
specifications and are neither manufactured in Orissa nor available otherwise.
Therefore of necessity, the petitioner has to purchase the same from different parts
of the Country (other than Odisha) and these are not manufactured in Odisha. The
petitioner claims that the spare parts have a definite commercial identity of its own
and bear a different name and as such are not scheduled goods under the
Schedule of Act. The petitioner further submits that even though it is not liable to
pay entry tax on the goods purchased from different States in as much as those
are neither scheduled goods nor can those goods be subjected to levy of entry tax,
the opposite party no.3 has assessed the petitioner to tax in respect of these goods
both imported from outside the Country and purchased from outside the States
(CST Goods) and imported into the local area of Balasore. The opposite party no.3
has completed assessment of the years, 2005-06 and 2006-2007 under the Act
and in the said order of assessment the opposite party no.3 has assessed the
petitioner to pay entry tax on these goods (CST Goods). However, no demand has
been raised in respect of goods imported from outside the country in view of the
interim order of stay passed by this Court. The petitioner, therefore, prays in this
writ petition to give necessary directions not to collect entry tax on goods,
machinery and plants imported from USA and also not to assess entry tax on spare
parts and machinery, both imported from outside the country and purchased from
outside the State as they are not included in the Schedule of the Act.

                                         8
6.              In W.P.(c) No.7 of 2008 ( M/s IFGL Refractories Vs. State of Orissa
and others), the Company is established as an import expand project. Commercial
production was started in March, 1993. Since then, the petitioner has been
continuously expanding capacity thereof by installing and erecting plants and
machinery both indigenous and imported. The petitioner’s policy is to identify the
customers’ need, design and develop products and successfully manufacture and
supply at competitive price to achieve customer satisfaction. Nearly 60% of the
products manufactured are presently exported outside the country.
                For manufacture of refractory products, the petitioner from time to
time requires imported raw materials, stores and spares, trading items and capital
goods which are released by the custom authorities after the petitioner effects
payment of duty levied thereon as per the provision of the Customs Act. Generally
said imported items are received either at Kolkata Port or at Kolkata Airport
wherefrom they are transported to the petitioner manufacturing facilities under way
bills in the Orissa Sales Tax Rules/VAT Rules by opposite party no.3
                For carrying manufacturing activity and production of item referred
above, i.e. Ladle Shrouds, Sub entry Nozzels, Monoblock Stopper, Tundish
Nozzle, Slide Gate Plates etc, some of the raw materials and ancillary goods are
not available nor are they manufactured in India. Consequently, the petitioner has
to import the same from different countries of the world on payment of the custom
duty. These materials are Fused Silica, Lime stabilize Fused Zirconia, Fused
Magnesia, Sintered Magnesia, Silicon Metal, Natural PVC, Refractory Glaze,
Furfular Alchohal and Micro Silica. The petitioner-company claims that it is not
liable to pay entry tax in respect of the said imported items. The opposite party no.3
has been collecting the same and the petitioner has been effecting payment

                                        9
thereof under protest. The petitioner claims that the company is not liable to pay
entry tax as the same is not falling within the definition of scheduled goods as
identified in the Act, but the opposite party no.3 has threatened to stop issuing way
bills and ‘C’ forms for which the company has been paying entry tax on purchase.
                Besides, the raw material imported from other countries, the
petitioner also uses raw materials available in other States of the country, which
are not manufactured in Odisha. These raw materials are Mag Alumina Spinel,
Zircon sand/Flour, Bauxite (Rotary Kiln/Calcined), Tabular Alumina, Brown Fused
Alumina, While Fused Alumina, Reactive Alumina, Dead Burn Magnesia, Silicon
Carbide, Borax, Allu Metal, Carbon Black. The petitioner has no other alternative
but to effect payment of entry tax on these items and the company should be
exempted from the payment of entry tax and tax already paid should be refunded
to it.
7.              In W.P.(C) No.5764 of 2007 (M/s Maheswari Coal Services (P) Ltd.
Vs. State of Orissa and others), the petitioner-company is a dealer in coal. It not
only purchases coal from Mahanadi Coal Ltd, but also imports Steam (Non-coke)
coal from different sellers under high seas agreements beyond the customs barrier
of the country. Thus, it is submitted that the major quantity of Steam (Non-coke)
coal is received by the petitioner at Paradip Port in the State of Orissa in course of
import into the country. The petitioner claims that after customs clearance, it stores
the said coal on the plot of land rented to it by Paradip Port Trust and the coal is
sold to buyers by delivering the same at Paradip. The Steam (Non-Coke) coal so
received in the ships in course of import, do not enter into the local area of Paradip
from any other local area in the State or from any other States of the country. The
petitioner was reluctant to pay entry tax demanded by opposite party no.3 on the

                                        10
imported coal at Paradip Port but opposite party no.3 stopped supplying way bills
to the petitioner and threatened to take further harassive attitude. The petitioner
has to pay a token sum of Rs.5,000/- on 27.01.2005 so that supply of way bills by
the opposite party no.3 would remain unhindered. In the same manner, the
petitioner has also paid huge sum amounting to almost Rs.20,00,000/- towards
entry tax. The petitioner claims that it is not liable to pay such entry tax and
necessary directions be passed for refunding the tax already collected from it.
8.             In all the cases, a common defence has been taken by the State of
Odisha. It is submitted by the State that the Orissa Entry Tax Act, 1999 is a
destination based tax, which is enacted within the field of legislation envisaged in
Entry 52 of List II of Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and tax is exigible on
entry of goods into the local areas for consumption, use or sale therein. The place
of origin of goods has no impact on the levy.
                Against the contention of the petitioners that entry tax is not leviable
on goods imported from outside the country, inasmuch as, it is hit by Article 286 of
the Constitution, on behalf of the State Government learned Advocate General
submits that the challenge is untenable on the face of the said Article, which
contemplates rider “tax on sale or purchase of goods” which “takes place in course
of import into the territory of India” but, not in respect of “taxes on entry of goods
into a local area” as per Entry 52 of List II of the Seventh Schedule.
               The State submits that incidence of import ends once the goods
cross the customs barrier. After crossing of customs barrier, the goods enter into
the local area for consumption, use or sale.
               On behalf of the State Government learned Advocate General further
submits that the observation made with reference to terminal tax is not applicable

                                       11
to entry tax. So, it is erroneous to submit that as because imported goods do not
mingle with mass of domestic goods, the levy of entry tax on imported goods would
be out of purview of domain of the State.
                The learned Advocate General submits that Section 2(j) of the Act,
which defines purchase value, does not expressly provide for including the import
duty. However, it provides for all other charges incidental to the purchase of such
goods. Therefore, it includes import duty. Furthermore, it is contended that
purchase value means the value of schedule goods as ascertained from original
invoice or bill. In case of imported goods the bill of indent includes import duty and,
therefore, it is included in the definition within the purchase value. The State
Government very emphatically submits that charging Section governs the levy and
is not controlled by the measure of tax. Charging Section, i.e. Section 3 of the Act
contemplates that the tax is levied on the goods brought into local area for
consumption, use or sale therein. Taxable person is the dealer or the person, who
brings or causes to be brought into the local area scheduled goods on its own
account or on account of its principal or customer or takes delivery or is entitled to
take delivery of such goods. No invidious distinction is made between the goods
brought from other local areas or outside the State or those brought from outside
the country. The State Government further pleads that Entry 52 of List II of Seventh
Schedule read with definitions of “entry of goods”. Section 2(d) and “local area”
Section 2(f) contemplates the taxable event is entry of goods into local area for
consumption, use or sale therein. “Importer” as defined in Section 2(e) of the Act
may be taken note of. The Customs Act takes care of levy of import of goods. So,
taxable event for levy of custom duty and entry tax are different and distinct. It is
further submitted that looking to the “pith and substance” and “aspect” of levy, both

                                         12
the imposts are different and distinct and there is no overlapping. It is further
brought to the notice of the Court that the order passed by this Court in Reliance
Industries Limited Vs. State of Orissa, (2008) 16 VST 85 (Ori) has been stayed
by the Supreme Court by order dated 30.10.2009 in I.A. No. 327-651 in SLP “C”
No.14454-14778 of 2008. It is further submitted that the decision rendered by the
Sales Tax Tribunal in Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd case is under challenge before
this Court in STREV Nos.34 and 35 of 2011. Hence, such findings recorded by the
Tribunal has not become final and is not applicable to the case. As far as the plant
is concerned, learned Advocate General submits that whether such plant is
scheduled good or not is the subject matter for adjudication by the statutory
authorities.
9.            Thus, to reiterate the questions framed in all these cases for
adjudication by this Court are as follows:-.
       I.        Whether the imposition of tax on goods purchased from
              outside the country is ultra vires the Constitution?
              II.     Whether the interpretation of the provisions of Orissa
              Entry Tax Act, 1999 itself shows that the entry tax is not
              leviable on goods imported outside the country ?,
              III.    Whether the plant, which has been brought into the
              local area of Balgopalpur in knock down condition is leviable
              with entry tax or not ? and
       IV.    Whether different raw materials, as described earlier in the
              case of M/s IFGL Refractories vs. State of Orissa and others
              in W.P.(c) No.7 of 2008 are liable for entry tax as they are
              not included in the schedule appended to the Act and to
              what relief the petitioners are entitled to.?
  10.         The first question relates to ban imposed under Article 286 of the
  Constitution of India on the legislative power of the State legislation to impose tax
  on sale or purchase of goods where such sale or purchase takes place in course

                                         13
  of import of goods into the country. Article 286 of the Constitution reads as
  follows:-
        “   286. Restrictions as to imposition of tax on the sale or
               purchase of goods.- (1) No law of a State shall impose, or
               authorize the imposition of, a tax on the sale or purchase of
               goods where such sale or purchase takes place-
                      (a) outside the State; or
                      (b) in the course of the import of the goods into, or
                          export of the goods out of, the territory of India.
               (2)    Parliament may by law formulate principles for
                      determining when a sale or purchase of goods takes
                      place in any of the ways mentioned in clause (1).
               (3)    Any law of a State shall, in so far as it imposes, or
                      authorizes the imposition of,-
                      (a) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods
                            declared by Parliament by law to be of special
                            importance in inter-State trade or commerce;
                      (b) a tax on the sale or purchase of goods, being a
                            tax on the nature referred to in sub-clause (b),
                            sub-clause (c) or sub-clause(d) of clause (29-A)
                            of Article 366,
               be subject to such restrictions and conditions in regard to
               the system of levy, rates and other incidents of the tax as
               Parliament may by law specify.”
               Restriction under Article 286 of the Constitution is on authorizing
imposition of tax on sale or purchase of goods by which the State legislature has a
power, which is derived from Entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution. However, power to legislate and levy on entry tax is derived from
Entry 52 of the said List. The two fields of legislation are distinct and separate. So,
the restrictions contained in Article 286 of the Constitution cannot be applied to the
legislative field contained in Entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution. This aspect arose before the Kerala High Court in Fr. William
Fernandez Vs. State of Kerala, (1999) 115 STC 591 (Ker) and has been

                                         14
answered against the petitioner though on a different aspect, the Kerala High Court
has come to the conclusion that entry tax on goods imported from outside the
country is not within the ambit of the Kerala’s Act. It is apt to quote the exact word
used by the Kerala High Court with regard to the constitutionality of entry tax in
respect of Article 286 of the Constitution.
       “12.   It was urged that the limitations in Article 286 have not
              been surmounted and as such the Act is applicable to the
              appellants, who had imported vehicles from abroad. These
              submissions seem to us to be untenable. We do not agree
              that there are any limitations upon the State’s power to
              legislate, which is covered by item 52 of List II of the
              Seventh Schedule of the Constitution as has been correctly
              held. Tax is due upon entry of goods into the local areas.
              …..xxx”
11.           So far as the scope of imposition of entry tax on goods imported from
outside the country is concerned, that aspect will be taken up by us later in this
judgment. The aforesaid view was taken by the Gauhati High Court in the case of
Primus Imaging Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of Assam, (2007) 9 VST 528 (Gau). At
paragraph-12 of the said case, the Gauhati High Court has held as follows:-
       “ 12. From a reading of Article 286 of the Constitution, it becomes
              clear that this article does not permit States to levy tax on
              the sale or purchase of goods, which takes place in the
              course of import into, or export out of the territory of India.
              The restriction, imposed on the State, is, thus, in respect of
              levy of tax on the sale or purchase of goods, which takes
              place in the course of import into, or export out of, the
              territory of India. The power to levy sales tax is derived from
              entry 54 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
              of India; whereas the power to levy entry tax is derived by
              entry 52 of the List II of the Seventh Schedule to the
              Constitution. Under entry 54, the point of levy is purchase or
              sale, but under entry 52, the point of levy is the point of entry
              into a local area. Therefore, taxable event under the Entry
              Tax Act is entry of specific goods into a local area for
              consumption, use or sale therein. Viewed thus, it is clear that
              levy of tax on sale or purchase, on the other hand, and the
              levy of tax on entry of goods into a local area, on the other,
              are covered by different entries in the Constitution and the
              incidence of taxation in both the cases is different. The

                                         15
               restriction, imposed by article 286 (1)(b) of the Constitution,
               is in respect of the levy of tax on sale or purchase of goods
               and not as regards entry of the goods into a local area for
               consumption, use or sale therein and, hence, the contention
               of the petitioners that levy of entry tax on goods imported
               from outside the State is hit by article 286 (1) (b) of the
               Constitution of India has no force and is misconceived. xxx”
12.            In course of hearing, the petitioners have submitted that Entry 83 of
List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution confers exclusive power on the
Indian Parliament to legislate on duties and customs including export duty and the
levy of entry tax on imported goods would be encroaching on the exclusive
legislative domain of the Indian Parliament conferred by Article 246(1) of the
Constitution of India. It is apt to take note the exact words used in the relevant
Entries of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution.          Entry 83 of List I of the
Seventh Schedule reads as follows:-
               “83.    Duties of customs including export duties.”
               However, Entry 52 of List II of VII Schedule of the
               Constitution reads as follows:-
               “52. Taxes on the entry of goods into a local area for
               consumption, use or sale therein”.
               Taking recourse to Article 246 of the Constitution, it is urged on
behalf of the petitioners that the State legislature cannot infringe the legislative
power of the Parliament and levy of entry tax imposed on imported goods is
directly in conflict with the exclusive legislative power of the Union of India. Article
246 of the Constitution reads as follows:
         “ 246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the
               Legislatures of States.-
               (1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3),
               Parliament has exclusive power to make laws with respect
               to any of the matters enumerated in List-I in the Seventh

                                        16
              Schedule (In this Constitution referred as to the “Union
              List”).
              (2)     xxx           xxx          xxx            xxx
              (3)     Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any
              State has exclusive power to make laws for such State or
              any part thereof      with respect to any of the matters
              enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule (in this
              Constitution referred to as the “State List”).
13.           The legislative power of the Union and the State cover altogether
different fields of legislation and the incidence of both taxes are distinct and
separate. The Parliament has enacted Customs Act, 1962 in super-session of
the “Sea” Customs Act, 1878. Section 12 of the Customs Act, 1962, levies
duties on goods imported into India as may be specified in the Customs Tariff
Act, 1975. The incidence of customs duty is on importation of goods into the
territory of India. The word “import” has been defined in Section 23 of the
Customs Act, 1962. It is apposite to quote the same.
      “  ‘Import’ will all its grammatical variations and cognate
                      expressions, means bringing into India from a
                      place outside India.”
              From the scheme of the Act it is seen that the point of levy of custom
duty is a condition precedent for importation of goods to the country, i.e., before
its clearance and before the goods are allowed to cross the custom barriers. On
the other hand, the levy of entry tax, as per Section 3 of the Act, is that entry of
goods into a local area for the purpose of consumption, use or sale therein. In
Kiran Spinning Mills Vs. Collector of Customs, 1999 (113) ELT 753 (SC), the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has examined this aspect at Paragraph-6 and held as
follows:-

                                         17
        “ 6. Attractive, as the argument is, we are afraid that we do not find
               any merit in the same. It has now been held by this Court in
               Hyderabad Industries Ltd. and Anr. v. Union of India and
               Others [1999 (108) E.L.T. 321 (SC) = JT 1999 (4) SC 95]
               that for the purpose of levy of additional duty Section 3 of the
               Tariff Act is a charging section. Section 3 sub-section (6)
               makes the provision of the Customs Act applicable. This
               would bring into play the provisions of Section 15 of the
               Customs Act which, inter alia, provides that the rate of duty
               which will be payable would be on the day when the goods
               are removed from the bonded warehouse. That apart, this
               Court has held in Sea Customs Act-1964 (3) SCR 787 at
               page 803 that in the case of duty of customs the taxable
               event is the import of goods within the customs barriers. In
               other words, the taxable event occurs when the customs
               barriers is crossed. In the case of goods which are in the
               warehouse the customs barriers would be crossed when
               they are sought to be taken out of the customs and brought
               to the mass of goods in the country. xxx"
14.            In J.V. Gokal & Co. Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Assistant Collector of Sales Tax
(Inspection), (1960) 11 STC 186 (SC), the Supreme Court has held as follows:-
        “      What does the phrase “ in the course of the import of the
               goods into the territory of India” convey ? The crucial words
               of the phrase are “import” and “in the course of “. The term
               “import” signifies etymologically “to bring in”. To import
               goods into the territory of India therefore means to bring into
               the territory of India goods from abroad. The words “course
               means “progress from point to point”. The course of import,
               therefore, starts from one point and ends at another. It starts
               when the goods cross the customs barrier in a foreign
               country and ends when they cross the customs barrier in the
               importing Country.”
               Having taken note of the ruling of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid
two cases, this Court comes to the conclusion that when the goods imported out of
the country, the incident of import ends the moment it crosses the custom barriers.
It is also brought to the notice of this Court that in Gulabdas Jagannath Vs.
The    State     of   Rajasthan,     AIR    1995   Rajasthan    225,   the    imposition
of octroi duty, which is levied under Entry 52 of List-II of the Seventh Schedule to
the Constitution on goods imported from outside the country, is held to be valid.

                                       18
15.           The petitioners, in all these cases, placed reliance on the ratio
decided in Godfrey Phillips India Ltd. Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2005) 139
STC 537 (SC). The ratio decided in the above case is distinguishable and is not
applicable to the present cases and the same is demonstrated as follows:-
              In Godfrey Phillips India Ltd.(Supra) the assesses were either
manufacturer or dealer of tobacco products. They assailed the levy of luxury tax on
tobacco and its products under Uttar Pradesh Tax on Luxuries Act, 1995; the
Andhra Pradesh Tax on Luxuries Act, 1987; and the West Bengal Tax on Luxuries
Act, 1994. While interpreting Entry 62 of List II of the Seventh Schedule to the
Constitution, the Supreme Court held that the word “Luxury” takes colour from the
words ‘entertainment, amusement, betting and gambling’ and therefore, the
legislature has no jurisdiction to levy tax on “tobacco” (a goods) in the garb of
luxury by describing Tobacco as a luxury goods. In the reported case, the Supreme
Court, further, held that since tobacco is declared as a goods, it may be liable for
additional duty on excise to be imposed in lieu of sales tax by different States.
Further, levy on sale of tobacco in the name of luxury tax is not permissible
although an attempt was made to show storage. Tax on the goods under the
Luxury Act was held to be impermissible under Entry 62 of List II. The Hon’ble
Apex Court after holding that tobacco as a good, further, held that it cannot be
taxed as luxury by interpreting Entry 62, List II. In paragraph-99 of the Judgment
the Supreme Court, further, held that the scope of Entry 62 is not answered on
other issues in the appeal and were left open. In the reported case in question, it
was held that tobacco as an article could not be said to be luxury. The Supreme
Court, further, held that the word “luxury” in Entry 62 of List II means the activity of
enjoyment or indulgence in that which is costly and generally recognized as being

                                           19
beyond necessary requirement of average number of the society and not article of
luxury. Thus, on the basis of such view taken by the Supreme Court in the
aforesaid case, it cannot be held that entry tax cannot be levied under the Act
pursuant to Entry 52 of List II since the custom duty is levied on the imported goods
under Entry 83 of List I.
                Entry 62 of List II of the Seventh Schedule reads as follows:-
        “ 62. Taxes on luxuries, including taxes on entertainments,
                       amusements, betting and gambling.”
                The taxable event of the Act is entry of goods into local area whereas
custom duty on import of goods into territory of India. When the former is a subject
matter of legislation by the State in Entry 52 of List II of the Seventh Schedule, the
latter relates to Entry 83 of List I of the Seventh Schedule. There is no overlapping
in the exercise of legislative power. Since imposition of custom duty ends once the
goods cross the custom barriers, the custom duty is levied prior to crossing of
barriers.    But, in the context of levy of entry tax under the Act, it is levied on the
entry of the scheduled goods into the local area. Taxable events in respect of the
levies, viz., “custom duty” and “entry tax” are different and distinct and there is no
overlapping. Thus, there is no conflict between legislative power under Entry 83 of
List I and Entry 52 of List II. The ratio decided in Godfrey Phillips India Ltd. (supra)
does not render any aid to the petitioners’ contention. Therefore, it is held that
entry tax can be imposed on the goods, which are imported from outside the
territory of India. The ratio decided in the aforesaid case is not applicable to the
present case.
16.             Relying upon in Central India Spinning and Weaving and
Manufacturing Company Ltd. Vs. Municipal Committee, Wardha, AIR 1958 SC

                                         20
341, the petitioners contended that the activity of importation does not end up on
the crossing of the custom barriers but continues till the imported goods reach the
godown of the importer in course of which goods have also to enter one or several
local areas. Thereupon, it is urged that the entry tax leviable on entry of goods into
the local area is essentially a tax on import of goods which is authorized only
under Entry 83 of List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The ratio
decided in the aforesaid can be distinguished and is not applicable to the present
case. In that case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court was dealing with levy of “terminal
tax” at the point of exit from a local area. There the question was whether goods
passing through Wardha Municipality by road dispatched from Yeotmal to their
destination at Nagpur without being unloaded or reloaded at Wardha are liable to
export terminal tax on the point of exit from the local Wardha Municipality. In the
reported case, the goods in question were not imported from outside the country
but the word “import” has been used to mean movement of goods from outside
Wardha Municipality. In that context, the Supreme Court has held that movement
of goods from Yeotmal to Nagpur through Wardha Municipality cannot attract levy
of “terminal tax” at exit point of local area. Thus, the said case cannot be applied to
the present fact situation to accord with the contentions raised by the petitioners.
As has been noted in Kiran Spinning Mills & J. V. Gokal & Co. Pvt. Ltd (Supra)
the import ends the moment goods brought from outside the country crosses the
custom barrier. Therefore, the levy of entry tax on imported goods is permissible.
17.            Furthermore, the provisions of Orissa Entry Tax Act does not reflect
that the legislature has no intention of imposing tax on goods, which cross the
custom barriers and are imported to the local area of the State. Entry 52 of List II of
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution provides for taxes on entry of goods into a

                                        21
local area for consumption, use or sale therein. Thus, the incidence of levy of tax
as per Entry 52 is entry of goods into a local area. There is nothing in that entry to
suggest that legislature intended to exclude levy of tax on the imports from other
country.
18.            This problem can also be seen from another angle. The Act is a tax in
lieu of octroi incident of which are similar to that of entry tax. When the levy of
octroi on imported goods was upheld by different courts, there is no reason why
entry tax on the imported goods cannot be upheld. Now, it is seen that prior to
introduction of the Act, the levy of octroi was invoked by virtue of powers conferred
on the municipality and other local bodies under Section 131 (1) (kk) of the Odisha
Municipal Act, 1950. However, on passing of the Act, the octroi has been
abolished. Clause (3) of the Statement and objects and reasons as appended to
the Tax provides that the bill further seeks for abolition of octroi duty levied and
collected under the Odisha Municipal Act, 1950 by repealing clause (kk) of sub-
section (1) of Section 131. By virtue of Section 41, such clause (kk), as described
above to the Municipality Act, was repealed. Section 36 of the Act further provides
for assignment of proceeds of tax among the local authorities. Rule 33-A of the
OET Rules and procedure prescribes the method of distribution of entry tax
collected to each local authority every year. The entry tax is, thus, in essence a tax
in lieu of octroi duty. Therefore, the decisions rendered in the context of levy of
octroi are applicable to this case.
19.            Thus, on the basis of the aforesaid discussion, this Court comes to
the conclusion that the contention of the petitioners that levy of a tax on import of
goods is within the exclusive legislative domain of the Parliament, and this power
conferred on the Parliament by the Constitution cannot be encroached upon,

                                        22
directly or indirectly, by any State Legislature. In the cases at hand, as the entry
tax has been levied on such goods which cross custom barriers by invoking the
powers conferred on the State Legislature covered under Entry 52 of List II of the
Seventh Schedule, there is no encroachment of the powers of the Parliament.
20.            The next question that arises for determination is whether the
interpretation of provision of the Orissa Entry Tax Act itself shows that entry tax is
not leviable on the goods imported from outside the country. For this aspect of the
case, it is appropriate to take note of Section-3, which provides for levy of tax. It
reads as follows:-
               “3. Levy of Tax.-
        (1)    There shall be levied and collected a tax on entry of the
               scheduled goods into a local area for consumption, use or
               sale therein at such rate not exceeding twelve percentum
               of the purchase value of such goods from such date as
               may be specified by the Government and different dates
               and different rates may be specified for different goods and
               local areas subject to such conditions as may be
               prescribed.
        Provided that the State Government may direct that in such
               circumstances and under such conditions and for such
               period as may be prescribed, a dealer shall pay in lieu of
               tax payable under this Act a sum fixed in the prescribed
               manner, and in such a case the tax shall be deemed to
               have been compounded.
        (2) The tax leviable under this Act shall be paid by every dealer in
               scheduled goods or any other person who bring or causes
               to be brought into a local area such scheduled goods
               whether on his own account or on account of his principal
               or customer or takes delivery or is entitled to take delivery
               of such goods on such entry:
             Provided that no tax shall be levied under this Act on the
               entry of scheduled goods into a local area if it is proved to
               the satisfaction of the assessing authority that such goods
               have already been subjected to entry tax or that the entry
               tax has been paid by any other person or dealer under this
               Act.
               Explanation.-

                                        23
             Whether the goods are taken delivery of on their entry into
             a local area or brought into the local area by a person other
             than a dealer, the dealer who takes delivery of the goods
             from such person or makes carriage of the goods shall be
             deemed to have brought or caused to have brought the
             goods into the local area.
      (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) and
             (2), but subject to the provisions of this Act, there shall be
             levied and collected a tax on the entry of any motor vehicle
             into any local area for use or sale therein which is liable for
             registration in the State of Orissa under the Motor Vehicles
             Act, 1988 (59 of 1988), and rate of tax shall be at such rate
             or rates as may be specified by the State Government by
             notification on the purchase value of such motor vehicles.
             Explanation.-
             For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that where
             any scheduled goods have been subjected to the levy of
             octroi under the Orissa Municipal Act, 1950 ( Orissa Act 23
             of 1950), prior to the commencement of this Act for entry
             into any local area, those goods shall not be subjected to
             the levy of entry tax under this Act for their entry into that
             area on or after such commencement.”
21.          From the plain reading of the above provision, it is clear that the
legislature has no intention that imported goods are intended to be left out from
the charging Section. The entry tax is leviable on scheduled goods brought into a
local area for consumption, use and sale therein.
22.           In Polestar Electronics (Pvt) Ltd. Vs. Additional Commissioner
of Sales Tax, (1978) 41 STC 409 (SC), it is held that :
             “ xxx it is only from the language of the Statute that the intention
             of the legislature must be gathered, for the legislature means no
             more and no less than what it say. It is not permissible to the
             Court to speculate as to what the Legislature must have
             intended and then to twist or bend the language of the statute of
             the statute to make it accord with the presumed intention of the
             legislature.

                                        24
23.            Similar view has been expressed by the Supreme Court in the case
of Muralidhar Mahabir Prasad vs. B.R. Vad (1976) 37 STC 77 (SC), wherein it
has been held that:
         “ xxx equitable construction may be admissible in relation to other
               statutes, but such an interpretation is not permissible to a
               charging or taxing provision of a statute.”
24.            Thus, it is clear from the aforesaid cases that the plain language of
the charging provision has to be taken into consideration. In the schedule of goods
also there is no exclusion from levy of tax on imported goods. Section 6 of the Act
has provided the State Government to notify to exempt any scheduled goods either
in part or full in public interest from levy of entry tax or to exempt any class or
classes of persons engaged in charity or social services from such levy. The State
Government has not issued any notification exempting any scheduled goods from
levy of entry tax on their being brought from foreign countries.
25.            The learned counsel for the petitioners has relied heavily on the
definition of “purchase value” of the goods on which tax is to be calculated and it is
submitted that since the purchase value does not include customs duty, the
legislature intended that the goods imported from outside the country are not to be
subjected to the entry tax.
26.            The    Supreme     Court   in  Govind     Saran   Ganga   Saran   Vs.
Commissioner of Sales Tax, (1985) 60 STC 1 (SC) has laid down that the levy
of tax to be operative four elements are to be provided.
               (i)    Character of imposition known by its nature, which prescribes
                      the taxable event attracting levy,
               (ii)   Clear indication of the person on whom levy is imposed and
                      who is obliged to pay the tax,
               (iii)  The rate of tax at which the tax is imposed,

                                        25
               (iv)    The measure or value to which the rate will be applied for
                       computing the tax liability.
27.            Charging Section 3 is the prime purpose of taxing legislation and the
other three components are subservient of main purpose of levy. The charging
section shall control the other three components including the measure of levy and
not vice versa. The measure of levy cannot be used to interpret the nature and
scope of charging section. This view has been expressed in the case of Tamil
Nadu Kalyana Mandapam Association Vs. Union of India, (2004) 135 STC 480
(SC). At paragraph-44 the Supreme Court has held that it is well settled that the
measure of taxation cannot affect the nature of taxation and, therefore, the fact that
service tax is levied as a percentage of gross charges for catering cannot alter or
affect the legislative competence of Parliament in the matter.
28.            Viewed in a slightly different context, it is seen that purchase value
has been defined under Section 2(j) of the Act and it reads as follows:-
               “(j)    “Purchase Value” means the value of scheduled
               goods as ascertain from original invoice or bill and includes
               insurance charges, excise duties, countervailing charges,
               sales tax, [value added tax or, as the case may be, turnover
               tax] transport charges, freight charges and all other charges
               incidental to the purchase of such goods;
               Provided that where purchase value of any scheduled goods
               is not ascertainable on account of non-availability or non-
               production of the original invoice or bill or when the invoice or
               bill produced is proved to be false or if the scheduled goods
               are acquired or obtained otherwise than by way of purchase,
               then the purchase value shall be the value or the price at
               which the scheduled goods of like kind or quality is sold or is
               capable of being sold in open marked;”
               A plain reading of the above provision reveals that “purchase value”
of the goods has to be derived from invoice of goods and any subsequent levies
thereafter to form part of purchase value for the purpose of levy of entry tax. The
invoice of the imported goods purports to indicate the custom duty on such goods

                                        26
and the said duty has to form part of the sale price and deemed to have been
passed on to the purchaser. Section 28C of the Customs Act lays down that the
price of goods to indicate the amount of duty paid thereon. It reads as follows:-
               “28C.Price of goods to indicate the amount of duty paid thereon.-
                      Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any
               other law for the time being in force, every person who is
               liable to pay duty on any goods shall, at the time of
               clearance of the goods, prominently indicate in all the
               documents relating to assessment, sales invoice, and other
               like documents, the amount of such duty which will form part
               of the price at which such goods are to be sold.
29.            Thus, the customs duty is bound to be indicated in the original invoice
or bills. The value of goods is ascertainable from the invoice itself, which is inclusive
of the customs duty. The purchase value, which includes other kinds of levy such as
insurance, excise duty, countervailing duty, sales tax, value added tax, turnover tax.
Even on top of it the clause “all other charges incidental to the purchase of such
goods” would take within its sweep any other duties including the customs duty as
well.
30.            In Garware Nylons Ltd. Vs. Pimpri Chinchwad Mahanagar, 1995
(77) ELT 22 (SC), the Supreme Court considered the question whether custom
duty is included while determining the value for charging of octroi, and held that
octroi is leviable on imported goods and the custom duty shall form part of the
value of the goods. In doing so, the Supreme Court has relied upon the reported
case of Shroff and Co. Vs. Municipal Corporation of Greater Bombay, (1989)
Supp. 1 SCC 347. In that case, the Supreme Court has held that octroi duty is
leviable on imported goods and the countervailing duty will form part of value for
purpose of levy. Thus, the argument of the petitioners that since customs duty is
not specifically mentioned in the definition of purchase value in Section 2(j) of the

                                          27
Act, it will give rise to the inference that legislature intended not to levy entry tax on
imported goods is without substance.
31.             The learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the definition of
entry tax as defined in sub-Section 2(d) of the Act does not include “from outside
the country” and, therefore, the tax on imported goods is clearly beyond the ambit
of entry tax. However, if we adopt the literal construction of statute, as has been
discussed in the earlier paragraphs, without adding anything, “outside the State “
means any place outside the State and includes all places outside the State as well
as outside the country. Had the legislature intended to exclude imported goods
from the net of taxation, the words “except goods brought from outside the country”
would have been mentioned in the above definition. The two phrases “any place
outside that local area” and “any place outside the State” were used to signify that
entry tax will be levied on (a) when goods move into the local area from another
local area within the State and (b) when the goods are brought into the State.
32.             By applying the principle of interpretation of the taxing law that
charging section is not to be controlled by subservient components, the definition
“entry of goods” cannot be taken help to urge that the entry tax on imported goods
cannot be levied.
33.             As has been pointed out earlier, in a taxing Act, the Court has to look
merely at what is clearly said. There is no room for adding or subtracting anything
from the statute. There is also no equity about a tax and there is no presumption as
to tax. Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied. One can only look fairly at
the language used. In this connection, the reported cases of Commissioner of
Income Tax vs. Ajax Products Ltd., AIR 1965 SC 1358; Commissioner of

                                        28
Income Tax vs. Kharwar, AIR 1969 SC 812; Calcutta Jute Manufacturing Co.
Vs. Commercial Tax Officer, (1997) 106 STC 433 (SC) are relied upon.
34.            In Commissioner of Sales Tax vs. Parson Tools and Plants,
(1975) 35 STC 413 (SC), the Supreme Court has held that where the legislature
clearly declares its intent in the scheme and language of a statute, it is the duty of
the Court to give full effect to the same without scanning its wisdom or policy, and
without engrafting, adding or implying anything which is not congenial to or
consistent with such expressed intent of the law-giver; more so if the statute is a
taxing statute.
35.            The Supreme Court in Federation of Hotels and Restaurants
Association Vs. Union of India, (1989) 74 STC 102(SC) has applied the principle
of pith and substance to interpretation of the statute and laid down that the true
nature and character of the legislation must be determined with respect to the
question of power of legislature. The consequence and effect of the legislation are
not same thing as the legislative subject matter. The true nature and character of
the legislation but not the ultimate result that matters.
36.            Thus, on the basis of the discussions resorted to above, this Court
comes to the conclusion that the argument advanced by learned counsel for the
petitioners that entry tax is not leviable on the goods imported through buyers is
attractive but is without substance.
37.            The next question that requires adjudication is, whether the plant,
which has been brought into local area of Balgopalpur in knock down condition, is
leviable with entry tax or not. This question is to be decided in the writ petition filed
by M/s Emami Paper Mills Vs. State of Orissa (W.P.(c) No.13978 of 2008). The
learned counsel for the petitioner, in this case, has submitted that since the

                                        29
aforesaid plant and machinery were brought in knock down condition, as it was
impossible to move the plant to USA to the site on which the plant is to be
established, the said plant and machinery brought in knock down condition were
transported in parts. As such it is contended that since the plant is not a scheduled
item in the entry tax Act, the petitioner is not liable to pay entry tax on the same.
38.            Part-II of Schedule-1 Entry 9 reads as follows:-
       “      Machinery and equipments including earthmovers,
               excavators, bulldozers and road-rollers and spare parts
               and components used in manufacture, mining,
               generation of electricity, or for execution of work of
               contract or for any other purpose”
39.            Thus, it is to be seen whether the plant and machinery, which are
brought from USA to establish a factory at Balgopalpur for production of papers,
are liable to entry tax or not. As Plant has not been defined separately in the Act,
we have to go by the grammatical definition of ‘Plant’. ‘Plant’, as per the Concise
Oxford Dictionary, means ‘a place where an industrial manufacturing process takes
place’ and ‘machinery used in an industrial or manufacturing process’. So, plant is
a combination of various machinery, which are used in a manufacturing of product.
As has been mentioned earlier, in a taxable statute, nothing has to be added or
subtracted from the plain meaning of words appearing in the statute. We are of the
opinion that the plant, which is brought in knock down condition, is a combination of
machinery in a systematic manner so as to produce goods and, therefore, it is
coming within the definition of machinery and, hence, it is liable for entry tax.
40.            The next question relates to certain raw materials and spares, as
described in paragraph-6 of our judgment, which have been imported and
purchased from other States out of the country by M/s IFGL Refractories (W.P.(c)
No.7 of 2008). Having carefully examined the items described in the 3rd sub-

                                       30
paragraph of paragraph 6, we come to the conclusion that the items like Ladle
Shrouds, Sub entry Nozzels, Monoblock Stopper, Tundish Nozzle, Slide Gate
Plates and raw materials like Fused Silica, Lime stabilize Fused Zirconia, Fused
Magnesia, Sintered Magnesia, Silicon Metal, Natural PVC, Refractory Glaze,
Furfular Alchohal and Micro Silica, etc are not included in the schedule. Similarly,
the raw materials described in the 4th sub-paragraph of paragraph-6, at page-9,
like Mag Alumina Spinel, Zircon sand/Flour, Bauxite (Rotary Kiln/Calcined), Tabular
Alumina, Brown Fused Alumina, While Fused Alumina, Reactive Alumina, Dead
Burn Magnesia, Silicon Carbide, Borax, Allu Metal, Carbon Black are not included
in the Ist schedule. Therefore, they are not liable for entry tax. Accordingly, this
question is decided in favour of the petitioner.
               Thus, on the basis of aforesaid discussion, this Court comes to the
conclusion that the imposition of tax on goods purchased from outside the country
does not violate the ban imposed under Article 246 of the Constitution to enact law
from Entry 52 of List II of Seventh Schedule. It is further held that the provisions of
Orissa Entry Tax Act itself do not reveal the intention of the legislator not to tax
goods, which has been purchased from outside the country. The paper plant, which
is brought in a knock down condition by Emami Paper Mills, comes within the
definition of machinery and is liable for entry tax. Lastly, the various raw materials
and spares, as described in the case of IFGL Refractories Ltd. Vs. State of Orissa,
are not liable for entry tax. Accordingly, the issues are decided and all the writ
petitions, except W.P.(C) No.7 of 2008, are dismissed in the light of above
observations. W.P.(C) No.7 of 2008 is allowed to the extent indicated above. All the
Misc. Cases, arising out of the writ petitions, are disposed of.

                                    31
                                       …………………………
                                          S.K. Mishra,J.
V. Gopala Gowda, C.J.      I agree.
                                       ……………………………..
                                        V. Gopala Gowda, C.J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated, 9th October, 2012/PCD


