                            ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
                                          W.P. (C) No. 4491 of 2013
         In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution
         of India.
                                                      ---------------
         Balaram Dixit and others.                                    …                Petitioners
                                                          Versus
         Tadit Kumar Rout                                              …               Opposite party
                     For petitioners               -                  M/s. Ramakant Mohanty, D.Mohanty,
                                                                           Ch. N.C.Das, A.Mohanty,
                                                                           D.Haradwaj, S.Mohanty,
         S.N.Biswal
                     For opposite party             -                 M/s. Sanjib Swain, S.C.Panda and
                                                                           B.R.Swain.
                                                        ---------------
         PRESENT
                              THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K.MISHRA
         -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Date of hearing- 13.03.2013                  :        Date of judgment - 17.04.2013
         -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S.K.Mishra, J.             In this writ petition, the petitioners, who are defendants in Civil
         Suit No. 650 of 2011, assail the order passed by the learned Civil Judge
         (Senior Division), Ist Court, Cuttack rejecting their application under Order
         VIII, Rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, hereinafter referred as the
         ‘Code’ for brevity, to accept the written statement –cum-counter claim filed by
         the defendants.
         2.                The defendants on 13.09.2012 filed their written statement-
         cum-counter claim along with a petition to accept the same. The defendants

                                        2
contended that the statutory period prescribed under Order VIII, Rule 1 of the
Code had expired, but the defendants were not yet set ex parte. However,
the defendants were precluded from filing their written statement and the
case was posted for hearing. They further contended that due to bona fide
reasons they could not file their written statement in time. It is the case of the
petitioner that both the parties belong to same locality and there was
possibility of mutual settlement at the intervention of Sahi Panchayat, for
which defendants were advised not to file their written statement. But such
possibility of mutual settlement no more subsists due to high handed attitude
of plaintiff. They have also stated that hearing of suit not yet commenced, so
no prejudice would be caused to the plaintiff if the time period for filing of
written statement is extended and the written statement is accepted. On the
other hand, there will be failure of justice, if the matter is not properly
contested by both the parties and the defendants are not allowed to file their
written statement. It is further contended that unless the written statement is
accepted, they will suffer irreparable loss and injury which cannot be
compensated in any manner. The defendants also stated that there has been
no deliberate laches or negligence on their part. On the above averments the
defendants prayed to accept their written statement cum counter claim and
allow them to contest the suit.
3.              The plaintiff-opposite party filed his objection challenging the
maintainability of petition filed by the defendants. The plaintiff specifically
stated that pursuant to the summons, the defendants entered appearance on
26.09.2011 by executing Vakalatnama and the matter was adjourned to
03.11.2011 for filing of written statement. On 03.11.2011, 16.01.2012 and
17.03.2012, time was allowed on the prayer of defendants to file their written
statement and the case was posted on 07.05.2012 for filing of written
statement subject to period of limitation. In spite of specific order, the
defendants did not file any written statement and again filed a petition for time
to file written statement on 07.05.2012, which was rejected and the
defendants were precluded to file written statement and the case was posted

                                         3
on 13.09.2012 for hearing of suit. On 13.09.2012, the defendants have filed
their written statement cum counter claim along with petition under Order VIII,
Rule 9 of the Code for acceptance of the written statement. It is also stated
that on various dates, the defendants prayed for time for arranging
documents for preparation of written statement, but in the petition for
acceptance of the written statement, they have stated that they could not file
the written statement within the time as there was possibility of mutual
settlement of the parties. The plaintiff also submitted that as per Order VIII,
Rule 1 of the Code, the defendants should have filed their written statement
within 30 days from the date of receipt of summons and where the
defendants failed to file written statement within the period of 30 days, they
may be allowed to file the same on such other day as would be specified by
the Court for reasons to be recorded in writing, but the same shall not be later
than 90 days from the date of receipt of summon. The plaintiff further stated
that in the present case, the defendants appeared on 26.09.2011 and after
lapse of one year i.e. on 13.09.2012, they filed written statement along with
the petition without any other petition for condonation of delay. The plaintiff
also stated that the provision under Order VIII, Rule 9 of the Code is not
applicable to the fact of the present case and the averments of the petition
are absolutely false. On such pleading, the plaintiff submitted to reject the
petition filed by the defendants.
4.              After hearing the parties and considering the materials on
record, learned Civil Judge (Senior Division), Ist Court, Cuttack rejected the
petition, inter alia, holding that the inordinate delay of eleven months after
appearance of defendants for filing of their written statement has not been
explained satisfactorily. It is further noted by the learned Civil Judge (Senior
Division) that the ground stated in the time petitions filed on various dates
and the ground stated in the petition under Order VIII, Rule 9 of the Code are
contradictory. Such order of rejection has been assailed in this writ petition.
5.              Order VIII, Rule 1 of the Code provides for filing of written
statement by the defendants, which reads as follows :

                                         4
             “1. Written statement – The defendant shall, within thirty
             days from the date of service of summons on him,
             present a written statement of his defence :
                   Provided that where the defendant fails to file the
             written statement within the said period of thirty days, he
             shall be allowed to file the same on such other day, as
             may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be
             recorded in writing, but which shall not be later than
             ninety days from the date of service of summons. “
                       Order VIII, Rule 9 of the Code provides for subsequent
pleadings, which reads as follows:
             “9. Subsequent pleadings – No pleading subsequent to
             the written statement of a defendant other than by way of
             defence to set off or counter-claim shall be presented
             except by the leave of the Court and upon such terms as
             the Court thinks fit; but the Court may at any time require
             a written statement or additional written statement from
             any of the parties and fix a time of not more than thirty
             days for presenting the same. “
             On a simple reading of the provision, it is clear that an application
filed under Order VIII, Rule 9 of the Code is not appropriate in this case,
because the petitioner has not filed any written statement and therefore, there
is no question of filing subsequent pleadings.
6.             However, the nomenclature of the petition filed by the litigant
should not be taken into consideration, if it is held that the petitioners are
entitled to the relief claimed. It has to be examined, whether the petitioners
are entitled to file the written statement/counter claim in the suit beyond the
time period prescribed under Order VIII, Rule 1 of the Code. Learned counsel
for the opposite party has relied upon the reported case of Mohammad
Yusuf v. Faij Mohammad and others, (2009) 3 SCC 513, wherein the
Supreme Court took into consideration the reported case of Kailash v.
Nanhku and others, (2005) 4 SCC 480 and M/s. R.N.Jadi & brothers and
others v. Subhash Chandra, (2007) 6 SCC 420 and held that in the facts of
the case the defendants may be permitted to file written statement after expiry
of period of ninety days only on exceptional situations.

                                        5
7.             In the case of Kailash v. Nanhku and others (supra), a Three-
Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered the impact of Order VIII, Rule
1 of the Code and held that all the rules of procedure are handmaid of justice.
The language employed by the draftsman of processual law may be liberal or
stringent, but the fact remains that the object of prescribing procedure is to
advance the cause of justice. In an adversarial system, no party should
ordinarily be denied the opportunity of participating in the process of justice
dispensation. Unless compelled by express and specific language of the
statute, the provisions of the Code or any other procedural enactment ought
not to be construed in a manner which would leave the court helpless to meet
extraordinary situations in the ends of justice. The Supreme Court further held
that merely because a provision of law is couched in a negative language
implying mandatory character, the same is not without exceptions. The
courts, when called upon to interpret the nature of the provision, may, keeping
in view the entire context in which the provision came to be enacted, hold the
same to be directory though worded in the negative form. The aforesaid case
is taken note of by the Supreme Court in M/s. R.N.Jadi & brothers and
others v. Subhash Chandra (supra), wherein the Supreme Court has held
that the Order VIII, Rule 1 of the Code after the amendment casts an
obligation on the defendant to file the written statement within 30 days from
the date of service of summons on him and within the extended time falling
within 90 days. The provision does not deal with the power of the court and
also does not specifically take away the power of the Court to take the written
statement on record though filed beyond the time as provided for. The
Supreme Court further held that the nature of the provision contained in Order
VIII, Rule 1 is procedural. It is not a part of the substantive law. Substituted
Order VIII, Rule 1 intends to curb the mischief of unscrupulous defendants
adopting    dilatory   tactics, delaying   the    disposal of   cases   causing
inconvenience to the plaintiffs and petitioners approaching the Court for quick
relief and also to the serious inconvenience of the Court faced with frequent
prayers for adjournments. The object is to expedite the hearing and not to
scuttle the same. While justice delayed may amount to justice denied, justice

                                        6
hurried may in some cases amount to justice buried. The aforesaid two cases
have been taken note of by this Court in Smt. Sarbati Devi Goinka v. Durga
Prasad Agarwal, 2009 (I) OLR 48; wherein the delay in filing of a written
statement was condoned and the written statement has been accepted.
8.             Coming to the case in hand, it is seen that the main ground on
which the opposite party resisted the application of the petitioners is that the
defendant has filed time petitions on several occasions indicating that they
need adjournment because of the fact that they were collecting certain
documents for filing the written statement. However, in the petition to accept
the written statement, they have stated that there was a chance of settlement
between the parties at the behest of the Sahi Panchayat. There is an
apparent contradiction. Learned Civil Judge (Senior Division) has rejected the
application of the defendants-petitioners on such facts. However, the fact
remains that the time petitions do not contain verification of the parties. Time
petitions are filed by the Advocates without signature of the parties. It is also
well known that petitions for adjournment are most often drafted/prepared by
junior associates of the conducting counsel. Sometimes, it is written by the
Advocates’ clerks. Therefore, the same cannot be taken into consideration to
hold that the party himself has instructed the lawyer to file a petition for time
on the ground stated therein. On the other hand, the petition filed for
acceptance of the written statement is supported by an affidavit sworn by a
party. Thus, the grounds submitted or pleaded in a petition supported by an
affidavit of the party have to be accepted as the version of the party or the
litigant and merely because a petition for time does not reflect the same
ground it cannot be rejected. It will cause injustice to the party.
9.             In that view of the matter, this Court comes to the conclusion
that approach adopted by the learned Civil Judge (Senior Division) was
erroneous. This Court however held that the petition filed by the defendants
that there was talk of compromise between the parties, is a good ground for
extending time beyond prescribed limit by filing written statement. Hence, the
writ petition succeeds. The petition filed by the defendants-petitioners to

                                       7
accept the written statement is allowed, subject to payment of cost of
Rs.1,000/- (Rupees one thousand) by 6th May, 2013 before the court below.
The parties are directed to appear before the Court on 6 th May, 2013. The
Court of original jurisdiction shall accept the written statement-cum-counter
claim filed by the defendants-petitioners.
               With the aforesaid observation, the writ petition is allowed.
                                                ……………………….
                                                  S.K.Mishra, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated, April 17, 2013/JNSahu


