             ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
      W. P(C) Nos.8667,4809 and 7390 of 2011 AND CONTC.
               No.2172/2011 & CONTC. NO.1906/2012
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India and Section 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act,
1971.
                            ----------------
W.P.(C) No.8667 of 2011
Sri Dillip Kumar Mohanty                     …         Petitioner
                                 Versus
State of Odisha and others                   …        Opposite parties
     For Petitioner                     - M/s. Satyabrata Mohanty
                                                and associates.
     For Opposite Party No.1,2 & 4 -           Government Advocate.
     For Opposite Party No.3           - M/s. L.Samantray & associates.
     For Opposite Party No.5           - M/s. Ashok Mohanty,Sr.Adv.
                                               and associates.
     For Opposite Party No.6           - M/s. Pitambar Acharya
                                               and associates.
W.P.(C) No.4809 of 2011
Sri Dillip Kumar Mohanty                     …         Petitioner
                                 Versus
State of Odisha and others                   …        Opposite parties
    For Petitioner                      - M/s. Satyabrata Mohanty
                                                and associates.
    For Opposite Party No.1,2,4 & 5 - Government Advocate.
    For Opposite Party No.3             - M/s.Ashok Mohanty,Sr.Adv.
                                               and associates.
    For Opposite Party No.6             - M/s.Pitambar Acharya
                                               and associates.

                                  2
W.P.(C) No7390 of 2011
Sri Ashok Kumar Jena & others              …        Petitioners
                               Versus
Commissioner-Cum-Chairman,
S.T.A., Odisha and others                  …        Opposite parties
     For Petitioners            - M/s. Biraja Prasad Das,
                                            And associates.
     For Opposite Party No.1   - M/s. B.Pal & Associates.
     For Opposite Party No.2   - M/s. U.C.Mohanty & Associates.
     For Opposite Party No.3   - Government Advocate.
     For Opposite Party No.4   - M/s. P.K.Nayak & Associates.
CONTC No.2172 of 2011
Sri Dillip Kumar Mohanty                 …         Petitioner
                               Versus
Sri Nikunja Behari Dhal                  …         Opposite party
     For Petitioner                 - M/s. Satyabrata Mohanty
                                             and associates.
     For opposite party            -         None.
CONTC No.1906 of 2012
Sri Ashok Kumar Jena                       …        Petitioner
                               Versus
Gyana Ranjan Samal
and another                                …        Opposite parties
    For Petitioner             - M/s. Biraja Prasad Das,
                                         and associates.
    For opposite parties        -        None.
                             -------------

                                                        3
         PRESENT:
                     THE HONOURABLE CHIEF JUSTICE MR.V.GOPALA GOWDA
                                                             AND
                                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K.MISHRA
         ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
         Date of conclusion of hearing:11.9.1012: Date of judgment: 12.11.2012
         ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S.K.Mishra, J.            Whether the Secretary, Regional Sub-Divisional Private Bus
         Owners’       Association,        Athagarh,       opposite       party     no.6,     in    W.P.(C)
         No.8667/2011 should be directed to park their Buses in the Orissa State
         Road Transport Corporation(OSRTC) Bus Stand, which has been leased
         to the petitioner is the question that arises in these bunch of cases.
         2.             In CONTC.No.2172/2011, the petitioner prays that the
         opposite party be punished for violation of the order passed by this Court
         on 10.5.2011 in W.P.(C) No.8667/ 2011 & Misc. Case No.5518/ 2011.
                        In W.P.(C) No.8667/2011, the petitioner prays that the
         mandamus be issued to the opposite parties to remove or demolish the
         unauthorized Bus Stand constructed by opposite party no.6 on P.W.D.
         road and public road              and to issue a writ of certiorari quashing the
         resolution/order of the NAC declaring the second temporary Bus Stand
         in    Athagarh.       He    also     prays     that    opposite       party     no.4,    i.e.   the
         Commissioner S.T.A., to take stringent action cancelling or withdrawing
         the    route permits of the Bus operators, who operate their                           Buses via
         Athagarh and prevent opposite party no.6 to make any obstruction in
         entering the Buses into the OSRTC Bus Stand in collecting the parking
         fees.
                        W.P.(C) No.4809/2011 has been filed by the same petitioner,
         who had taken the Bus Stand on lease from the OSRTC. He has filed
         this writ petition almost with similar prayer. He prays that mandamus
         be issued directing the opposite parties 1 to 5 to restrain opposite party
         no.6     for interference        in operation of the Bus Stand and collection of
         parking fees in Athagarh Bus Stand and direct the opposite party nos.4

                                    4
and 5 to see the smooth entry of private Buses into the Athagarh Bus
Stand and stop the parking of the said Buses on public road.          Further
direction has been sought against opposite party no.4 not to open a new
Bus Stand or permit the same in Athagarh deviating the law and direct
opposite party no.5 to check the illegal activities of opposite party no.6.
            W.P.(C) No.7390/2011 is in the nature of Public Interest
Litigation, wherein the same prayer has been made by the petitioners.
They seek direction to opposite party nos.1 to 4 to restrain opposite party
no.5     from creating hindrances     and obstructions in entering        the
private Buses to OSRTC Bus Stand, Athagarh and in collecting the
parking fees and direct the opposite party nos.3 and 4 to take actions
against opposite party no.5, who creates obstructions of entrance of
Buses into the Bus Stand       direct the opposite party nos.1 and 2 to
withdraw or cancel the road permits of the Buses or Bus owners who
violate the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act.
            CONTC. No.1906/2012 has been filed against the opposite
parties namely, the Inspector-in-Charge, Athagarh Police Station and the
Secretary of Regional Sub-Divisional Private Bus Owners’ Association,
Athagarh for violation of the order passed by this Court on 03.7.2012 in
W.P.(C) No.7390/2011.
3.          The OSRTC has been allotted Ac.1.600 decs. of land on lease
by the Government of Orissa in the year 1981 for 99 years in Athagarh
Town to open the Bus Stand. After execution of the lease deed the
mutation has been carried out.      The OSRTC has constructed the Bus
Stand     and was operating the same. The basic facilities required in a
Bus Stand are also provided. In order to raise its revenue and for smooth
running and management of the Bus Stand, the said Bus Stand was
allotted in favour of Athagarh N.A.C. on execution of the agreement with
certain terms and conditions for maintenance of the Bus Stand and
collection of parking fees from the Bus Owners. Since the NAC did not

                                    5
pay any collected parking fees to opposite party no.5 and non-execution
of renewal agreement, the allotment was cancelled on 9.12.2010.
4.          The OSRTC on 10.12.2010 invited open tenders for license of
OSRTC Land/Bus Stand, Athagarh for collection of parking fees from
Private Buses for 36 months in question. In pursuance of such      tender,
the petitioner participated in the Tender process on payment of required
fees and after due negotiation agreed to pay monthly rent @ Rs.6,100/-
per month for such collection of parking fees from vehicles inside the
Bus Stand and agreed to undertake sanitation work in the Bus Stand
by engaging     his own personnels.    The allotment order was issued on
15.1.2011.
5.          In pursuance of the allotment order in favor of the petitioner
an agreement was entered into between the OSRTC and the petitioner to
license the said Bus Stand for collection of parking fees from private
Buses through selected agents.        The petitioner has already deposited
the security amount of Rs.50,000/- and six months advance of
Rs.36,000/- with the OSRTC at the time of execution of the agreement.
It is stipulated in the agreement that the petitioner will collect Rs.15/-
only per Bus per day excluding OSRTC vehicles and other Government
vehicles.
6.          Opposite party no.5(OSRTC) wrote a letter on 01.2.2011 to
the District Transport Manager (A), OSRTC, Cuttack, to handover
physical possession of Athagarh Bus Stand and Station Office to the
petitioner immediately and intimate the same to him.        Opposite party
no.5 through its officials handed over the physical possession of
Athagarh Bus Stand to the petitioner       and the petitioner operated the
Bus Stand      w.e.f. 10.2.2011 and started collecting parking fees from
private buses parked in the said Bus Stand. While the petitioner was
operating his business and collecting parking fees peacefully in the said
Bus Stand, opposite party no.6 with his henchmen, antisocials and hired

                                     6
goondas started making disturbances relating        to the entry of Buses
inside the Bus Stand and interfered in the parking collections.   Opposite
party no.6 obstructed the private Buses to enter into the Bus stand and
compelled them not to pay the parking fees.         It is pleaded that the
actions of opposite party no.6 are wrong, illegal, arbitrary and mala fide.
Thus, the petitioner has approached this Court by filing various
applications to issue a mandamus to the authorities to enforce parking of
Buses inside the OSRTC Bus Stand.
7.         The Sub-Collector, Athagarh, opposite party no.2, has filed a
counter affidavit in this case. Opposite party no.2 pleads that the
petitioner started collection of parking fees from buses that entered
inside the said bus stand after the bus stand was handed over to him by
OSRTC.     However, it is further pleaded that only two Buses are entering
inside the said Bus Stand and other Buses are not entering into the said
Bus Stand, which is alleged to have been decided in their Association
Meeting.    No information has been received by opposite party no.2
regarding any obstruction to the private Buses that are entering into
the said Bus Stand.       The Inspector-in-charge, Athagarh Police Station
has been directed to ensure that no one creates any obstruction to the
buses entering into the said Bus Stand.       The said Inspector-in-charge
has    also registered a F.I.R. on the submission of the petitioner and is
investigating the case.
8.         Opposite party no.2 further pleads that the Buses are not
being parked on public road for which the road is being unnecessarily
blocked and overcrowded. It s further pleaded that at present the Buses
are parked in an open place near the OSRTC Bus Stand, which is half
portion of Taxi Stand, Athagarh, and not on public road.          Opposite
party no.2 denies that opposite party no.6 has influenced the officials
and therefore they have remained silent and inactive.      Such allegations
are unfounded and therefore denied. Opposite party no.2 took special
interest in resolving the dispute between the petitioner and the Bus

                                    7
Owners’ Association. Petitioner’s submission that the dispute was
received by opposite party no.2. However, without waiting for the
submission of the petitioner and immediately after receiving information
regarding the dispute of the Bus Stand from local sources, opposite party
no.2 has called for a meeting on 14.2.2011 for amicable settlement of
the dispute through discussion.       However, due to the attitude of the
petitioner, the dispute could not be resolved. Again for amicable
settlement of the dispute through      mediation, meetings were called on
9.3.2011 and 22.3.2011. On both the occasions the petitioner remained
absent. Opposite party no.2 also asked for a clarification from the RTO,
Cuttack regarding the Bus Stand dispute.
9.          Local   public    and     College   Students     Union    made
representation to opposite party no.2. The matter was looked into the by
opposite party no.2. As per decision of the Notified Area Council,
Athagarh, a temporary Bus Stand has been declared and Buses are
parked in an open place near the OSRTC Bus Stand, which is a portion
of existing taxi stand of Athagarh. The Inspector-in-charge has been
directed to ensure that law and order is maintained, authorities of NAC,
Athagarh have also been directed to provide basic facilities to the
passengers like drinking water, sanitation, rest shed etc. Further, on the
petition of local public, one case under Section 133 of Cr.P.C. has also
initiated in the court of opposite partyno.2. Opposite party no.2 further
pleads that he is taking sincere steps to resolve the conflict because it is
not the issue of any two persons, rather interest of people of Athagarh is
hampered and they are suffering a lot.
10          Other opposite parties have also filed their counter affidavits.
Similar facts as pleaded by opposite party no.2 have been pleaded by
them. Additionally it is contended by the opposite parties that the writ
petition is not maintainable and the authorities cannot be directed to
force opposite party no.6 to park the Buses of its member in the OSRTC
Bus Stand as there is an alternative Bus Stand is available to them.

                                      8
11.        Thus, from the above pleadings it is clear that the OSRTC Bus
Stand has been taken on lease by the petitioner on the expectation that
all  the private Buses will be parked in that Bus Stand and he           shall
collect parking fees from each. There is no pleading anywhere in the writ
petition that prior to his taking lease, the private Buses were being
parked inside the OSRTC Bus Stand and, therefore, he has reasonable
expectation that all the buses shall continue to park inside the OSRTC
Bus Stand. It is in essence that the dispute is between the petitioner and
Private Bus Owners’ Association. The question is whether the writ of
mandamus can be issued against the officials to compel opposite party
no.6 to use the OSRTC Bus Stand for the purpose of parking.         In fact, it
is seen from the records and also not disputed that a portion of the Taxi
Stand has been earmarked for parking of private Buses and it has been
provided with basic facilities to the passengers like drinking water,
sanitation, rest shed etc. .
12.        In that view of the matter, we are of the considered opinion
that a mandamus cannot be issued against the opposite party officials to
compel opposite party no.6 to park their Buses inside the Bus Stand
leased to the petitioner. It may be noted here that the Buses operated by
the private owners have no nexus with the OSRTC. The OSRTC itself
runs several Buses and they have properties in almost all the districts
where they park their vehicles. Such Bus Stands are used exclusively by
the OSRTC. So, it does not follow necessarily that all the Buses that pass
through Athagarh and should enter inside the OSRTC Bus Stand and pay
fees to the licensee, i.e. the petitioner. Accordingly, the writ petitions are
devoid of any merit.
13.        CONTC. N0.2172/2011 has been filed on the ground that this
Court had passed an order to the effect that Buses should park inside
the OSRTC Bus Stand and the petitioner should collect rent from the

                                    9
Bus owners.     However,    It is seen that as per order dated 10.5.2011,
this Court has passed the following interim order:-
            “As an interim measure, we direct that the
                  Commissioner, State Transport Authority-
                  O.P.3, shall ensure that the stage carriage
                  permit holder buses shall not pick up the
                  passengers and leave the passengers from
                  the points save and except the points
                  specified in their permit.”
           Thus, this being the situation, no contempt shall lie against
the Commissioner, State Transport Authority.
14.        As far as C0NTC. N0.1906/2012 is concerned, an interim
direction was given by this Court which reads as follows:-
            “This PIL has been filed by the residents of
                  Athagarh bringing allegation against the
                  Private     Bus     Owners’     Association,
                  Athagarh, opposite party no.4, in parking
                  their Buses on the road adjacent to the
                  OSRTC Bus Stand thereby free movement
                  of the public in that road is being affected.
                  Hence, we direct opposite party no.4 to
                  park their vehicles in the OSRTC Bus
                  Stand on paying usual parking charges
                  that     will    be    charged     by     the
                  lessee/licensee. If any stage carriage
                  motor vehicles are parked on the road
                  adjacent to the OSRTC Bus Stand, the
                  jurisdictional Police is directed to register
                  cases and take action against them in
                  accordance with law. If they repeat the
                  same in parking their vehicles on the road,
                  necessary seizure of the vehicles shall be
                  done to see that they abide the provisions
                  of the Motor Vehicles Act and the local
                  Municipal law.”
           However, from the discussions made in the precedent
paragraph, it is clear that the stage carriage motor vehicles are being
parked in a area earmarked for parking of Buses. They are not being

                                    10
parked on the public road or causing any inconvenience to the public at
large.  That being the case, the petitioner has not made out a case of
contempt against the opposite party, i.e. the Inspector-in-charge of
Athagarh Police Station and opposite party no.6. Accordingly, the
Contempt Petition is without merit.
15.        As far as the PIL, i.e. W.P.(C) No.7390/2011 is concerned, we
are of the opinion that directions should be given to the Notified Area
Council and the authorities to fix an appropriate parking fee per day per
Bus for the purpose of collecting the same from the private Bus owners,
who are using the Bus stop (a part of the Taxi Stand) and collect the
same from the Bus owners for using            the said parking space for
commercial activity. Therefore, it is in the larger interest of public they
should pay the legitimate dues to the Notified Area Council for parking
the buses.
             On the basis of the aforesaid discussions, all the writ
petitions and the related Misc. Cases, except W.P.(C) No.7390 of 2011,
are    devoid   of   any   merit     and    the   same    are    dismissed.
W.P.(C) No.7390 of 2011 is disposed of with the observations given in
the preceding paragraph. Both the Contempt Petitions are devoid of any
merit and the same are dropped.
                                                       .….…..…………..
                                                        S.K.Mishra, J
       V.Gopala Gowda, C.J.       I agree
                                                    ...…..….…….……
                                                      Chief Justice
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated 12th November, 2012/A.K.Behera

11
12

