$~6
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+      CRL.M.C. 4043/2014
       SADAKAT                                                ..... Petitioner
                         Through:     Mr. Dalip Kumar Santoshi, Advocate
                                      with petitioner in person.
                         versus
       STATE & ANR                                         ..... Respondents
                         Through:     Mr. P.K. Mishra, APP for the State
                                      with SI Vandana, PS Bhajanpura.
                                      Mr. S.K. Bhardwaj, Advocate for R-2
                                      with R-2 in person.
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
       %       SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA, J. (Oral)
1.     This petition has been filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking
quashing of FIR No. 502/2011 registered under Sections 498A/406/34 IPC
and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act at Police Station Bhajanpura on 26th
November, 2011 on the ground that the matter has been amicably settled
between the parties.
2.     Issue notice.
       Mr. P.K. Mishra, Additional Public Prosecutor and Mr. S.K.
Bhardwaj, Advocate enter appearance and accept notice on behalf of the
State and respondent No. 2, respectively.
3.     Petitioner as well as complainant/respondent No.2 are present in
person and are identified by the Investigating Officer/ Sub-Inspector
Vandana, Police Station Bhajanpura.
CRL.M.C. 4043/2014                                                          Page 1 of 7

4.     The aforesaid FIR is stated to have been lodged by respondent
No.2/complainant consequent upon certain matrimonial and domestic
disputes that had arisen between the parties pursuant to her marriage with
petitioner No.1-Sadakat on 6th January, 2008. Ultimately, the parties have
entered into a settlement on 13th January, 2014 whereby the parties have also
divorced each other in terms of their personal law.
5.     The complainant approbates the aforesaid settlement. She further
states that she has no further claims against the petitioner and that she is now
happily remarried and is settled. No child was born out of the said wedlock.
Complainant further states that she does not wish to continue with the matter
any further and prays that the same be closed.
6.     Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the State submits that
looking to the overall circumstances; and since the matter pertains to
domestic and matrimonial disputes; where the parties have amicably settled
the matter and have obtained a talaknama; and the complainant is no longer
interested in supporting the prosecution, no useful purpose will be served in
continuing the proceedings.
7.     Under the circumstances and looking to the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Gian Singh v. State of Punjab, (2012) 10 SCC 303,
which has referred to a number of matters for the proposition that even a
non-compoundable offence can also be quashed on the ground of a
settlement agreement between the offender and the victim, if the
circumstances so warrant; by observing as under:
               “58. ....However, certain offences which overwhelmingly
               and predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of
               civil, mercantile, commercial, financial, partnership or
CRL.M.C. 4043/2014                                                           Page 2 of 7

               such like transactions or the offences arising out of
               matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the
               family dispute, where the wrong is basically to the victim
               and the offender and the victim have settled all disputes
               between them amicably, irrespective of the fact that such
               offences have not been made compoundable, the High
               Court may within the framework of its inherent power,
               quash the criminal proceeding or criminal complaint or
               FIR if it is satisfied that on the face of such settlement,
               there is hardly any likelihood of the offender being
               convicted and by not quashing the criminal proceedings,
               justice shall be casualty and ends of justice shall be
               defeated.”
      And also in Narinder Singh and Ors. v. State of Punjab and Anr.
2014(2) Crimes 67 (SC) where the Supreme Court held as follows:-
               “29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and
               lay down the following principles by which the High
               Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
               the settlement between the parties and exercising its
               power under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the
               settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
               accept the settlement with direction to continue with the
               criminal proceedings:
               29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is
               to be distinguished from the power which lies in the
               Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
               Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High
               Court has inherent power to quash the criminal
               proceedings even in those cases which are not
               compoundable, where the parties have settled the matter
               between themselves. However, this power is to be
               exercised sparingly and with caution.
               29.2 When the parties have reached the settlement and
               on that basis petition for quashing the criminal
CRL.M.C. 4043/2014                                                         Page 3 of 7

               proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases
               would be to secure:
                   (i) ends of justice, or
                   (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
               While exercising the power the High Court is to form an
               opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
               29.3 Such a power is not be exercised in those
               prosecutions which involve heinous and serious offences
               of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,
               dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature and
               have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences
               alleged to have been committed under special statute like
               the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences
               committed by Public Servants while working in that
               capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
               compromise between the victim and the offender.
               29.4 On the other hand, those criminal cases having
               overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character,
               particularly those arising out of commercial transactions
               or arising out of matrimonial relationship or family
               disputes should be quashed when the parties have
               resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
               29.5 While exercising its powers, the High Court is to
               examine as to whether the possibility of conviction is
               remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases
               would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice
               and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
               quashing the criminal cases.
               29.6 Offences under Section 307 Indian Penal Code
               would fall in the category of heinous and serious offences
               and therefore is to be generally treated as crime against
               the society and not against the individual alone.
               However, the High Court would not rest its decision
               merely because there is a mention of Section 307 Indian
CRL.M.C. 4043/2014                                                        Page 4 of 7

               Penal Code in the FIR or the charge is framed under this
               provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine
               as to whether incorporation of Section 307Indian Penal
               Code is there for the sake of it or the prosecution has
               collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead
               to proving the charge under Section 307 Indian Penal
               Code. For this purpose, it would be open to the High
               Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether
               such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the
               body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in
               respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally be
               the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie
               analysis, the High Court can examine as to whether there
               is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of
               conviction are remote and bleak. In the former case it can
               refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal
               proceedings whereas in the later case it would be
               permissible for the High Court to accept the plea
               compounding the offence based on complete settlement
               between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
               swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties
               is going to result in harmony between them which may
               improve their future relationship.
               29.7 While deciding whether to exercise its power under
               Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play
               a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived
               at immediately after the alleged commission of offence
               and the matter is still under investigation, the High Court
               may be liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the
               criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of the
               reason that at this stage the investigation is still on and
               even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those
               cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet
               to start or the evidence is still at infancy stage, the High
               Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers
               favourably, but after prima facie assessment of the
               circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other
               hand, where the prosecution evidence is almost complete
CRL.M.C. 4043/2014                                                          Page 5 of 7

               or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the
               stage of argument, normally the High Court should
               refrain from exercising its power under Section 482 of
               the Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in a
               position to decide the case finally on merits and to come
               a conclusion as to whether the offence under
               Section 307 Indian Penal Code is committed or not.
               Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already
               recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the
               appellate stage before the High Court, mere compromise
               between the parties would not be a ground to accept the
               same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has
               already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is
               proved under Section 307 Indian Penal Code and
               conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and,
               therefore, there is no question of sparing a convict found
               guilty of such a crime.”
      And specifically in respect of matrimonial disputes in Jitendra
Raghuvanshi & Ors. v. Babita Raghuvanshi & Anr. (2013) 4 SCC 58,
where the Supreme Court held as follows:-
               “15. In our view, it is the duty of the courts to encourage
               genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes, particularly,
               when the same are on considerable increase. Even if the
               offences are non-compoundable, if they relate to
               matrimonial disputes and the Court is satisfied that the
               parties have settled the same amicably and without any
               pressure, we hold that for the purpose of securing ends of
               justice, Section 320 of the Code would not be a bar to the
               exercise of power of quashing of FIR, complaint or the
               subsequent criminal proceedings.
               16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes in
               recent times. They institution of marriage occupies an
               important place and it has an important role to play in the
               society. Therefore, every effort should be made in the
               interest of the individuals in order to enable them to settle
CRL.M.C. 4043/2014                                                           Page 6 of 7

               down in life and live peacefully. If the parties ponder
               over their defaults and terminate their disputes amicably
               by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out in a court
               of law, in order to do complete justice in the matrimonial
               matters, the courts should be less hesitant in exercising
               their extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite to state that the
               power under Section 482 should be exercised sparingly
               and with circumspection only when the Court is
               convinced, on the basis of material on record, that
               allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse
               of process of court or that the ends of justice require that
               the proceedings ought to be quashed….”
       I am of the considered opinion that this matter deserves to be given a
quietus, since the parties have resolved their differences and have obtained
talaknama; and since the complainant is no longer interested in supporting
the prosecution because of which, the chances of success in the matter are
now greatly diminished.
8.     Consequently,      FIR    No.   502/2011     registered     under    Sections
498A/406/34 IPC and Section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act at Police Station
Bhajanpura on 26th November, 2011 and all proceedings emanating
therefrom, are hereby quashed.
9.      The petition stands disposed off.
                                            SUDERSHAN KUMAR MISRA
                                                      JUDGE
OCTOBER 16, 2014/AK
CRL.M.C. 4043/2014                                                             Page 7 of 7


