*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                       Crl. Appeal No. 1097/2012
                                Reserved on: 25th February, 2013
%                               Date of Decision:13th March, 2013
RAVI SHANKAR                                           ....Appellant
                     Through     Mr. Sumer Kumar Sethi, Advocate.
                 Versus
STATE                                                …Respondent
                     Through      Mr. Sanjay Lao, APP.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SIDDHARTH MRIDUL
SANJIV KHANNA, J.
    The appellant Ravi Shankar by the impugned judgment dated 21st
December 2010 has been convicted under Section 363/366/302 IPC for
kidnapping the minor girl S (name withheld), aged 5, with intent of
having an illicit intercourse, and thereafter strangulating her to death. By
order of sentence dated 13th January 2011, the appellant has been
sentenced, under Section 302 IPC, to undergo life imprisonment, and to
make payment of fine of Rs 10000/-, in default of which he is to undergo
RI for six months. Under Section 366 IPC he is to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for 10 years and pay fine of Rs 5000/-, in default of which,
he shall undergo SI for six months. Under Section 363 IPC he has been
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                           Page 1 of 18

sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for seven years and a fine of Rs
5000/-, in default of which, simple imprisonment for six months shall be
undergone. All the sentences are to run concurrently and benefit under
Section 428 Cr.P.C. is given. He has however been acquitted under
Section 376 IPC for lack of evidence.
2.       Prosecution version in a nutshell is as follows: on 28th December
2006 the appellant, who worked as a „baildar‟ with the deceased‟s father
(PW-6), came to their house at A-39 Prem Nagar- I, Sultan Puri, Delhi
and at 6.00 P.M. took along 5 years old S (now deceased) for a walk on
the pretext of treating her to toffees. The two did not return. After much
search, the next day on 29th December 2006, at 2.30 P.M. FIR No.
2107/06 (Ex.PW 1/A) was registered under Section 363 IPC on the basis
of statement (Ex PW 6/A) made by Prem Pal (PW-6), girl‟s father, in
which it is alleged that the appellant had taken away S in the ruse of
buying her toffees. Thereafter, efforts were made by the police to trace
the appellant and finally, seven days after the occurrence, on 4th January,
2007 the police team managed to apprehend him from Swarna Park,
Nagloi. Pursuant to the disclosure made by the appellant, the dead body
of S was ultimately recovered from the mustard fields situated towards
the south side of main Rohtak Road near village Hiran Khudna, Delhi,
belonging to Sukbir Singh Rana (PW-8). He was arrested vide arrest
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                         Page 2 of 18

memo (Ex.PW 10/A) at 5.15 P.M. on the same day and the father (PW-6)
and his brother Banwari Lal came for identification of the corpse at
around 7.00 P.M. The next day, on 5th January 2007, post mortem of the
deceased was conducted.
3.       Post Mortem Report (Ex. PW-22/A) delineates that body of S,
aged 5, was brought by Inspector Ravinder Singh (PW-21) on the said
date. Dr. Manoj Kumar (PW-22) who had conducted the post mortem had
concluded that the death was due to asphyxia consequent to pressure over
neck structure produced by strangulation. Time since death was estimated
to be eight days. In the Post Mortem Report (Ex.PW-22/A) the external
injuries were as mentioned:
               “dead body that of female, soft tissue missing from
               face and bilateral dorsum of foot and bilateral wrist
               and neck. On neck soft tissues bones haematoma
               present over right horn of hyoid bones.little finger
               missing from right hand.”
4.       On Internal examination “lavia majora b/c boosead lancination of
lavia minora smeared with mucord discharge” was found on the genital
organs. The appellant was medically examined on 5th January 2007 at
1.25 A.M. by Dr. Indermeet Singh (PW-18) at CMO Sanjay Gandhi
Hospital and it was verified that the appellant was sexually potent.The
post mortem is suggestive of the fact that the deceased was sexually
assaulted before she was strangulated to death; although the Trial Court
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                          Page 3 of 18

has held that charges against the appellant under Section 376 IPC could
not be proved because as per the FSL reports (Ex. PX and PX-1) as no
semen could be detected from the clothes or vaginal swab of the
deceased. On the appellant‟s undergarment and deceased‟s clothes Blood
Group „A” was found, but the blood group could not be matched with the
appellant‟s blood sample as the same had putrefied. However, we shall
not dwell further into these aspects as the State has not appealed against
appellant‟s acquittal under Section 376 IPC.
5.       Prosecution case is premised on circumstantial evidence including
the evidence of last seen and the recoveries, of the dead body and other
incriminating material, pursuant to the arrest. The appellant‟s counsel, on
the other hand, has contended that the manner of arrest and alleged
disclosures are debatable and cannot be believed. Let us examine these
aspects in detail.
6.       On the evidence of last seen we have testimonies of Savitri
Devi(PW-4) mother of the deceased and Sikander Ali (PW-9) the next
door neighbour. At that time when the appellant took the girl out of the
house for buying her toffees, Savitri Devi (PW-4) mother of the deceased
was present at the house and she has averred that she did not object to this
because the appellant was known to them. He was from the same village
and had worked with her husband. She has stated that they waited for the
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 4 of 18

entire night but when the appellant did not return and their search in the
nearby area went futile, they went to the police on 29 th December 2006.
In the cross-examination she has reiterated the familiarity with the
appellant who use to call her “bhabhi” and visited them occasionally. She
was alone in the house when the appellant took S away. She has further
stated that at the time, the appellant wanted to take the son too but S had
stated she would bring him eatables. She has accepted that the appellant
had never taken liquor at the house and she did not know whether he was
an alcoholic.
7.       Sikander Ali (PW-9), who was running a tailor shop and lived next
door, has averred that on 28th December 2006 at about 6.00 P.M. he had
seen S with appellant who had come to Prem Pal‟s (PW-6) house. At that
time PW-9 was sitting on the takhat outside his house. Appellant had
passed by wishing him and said that he was taking S for toffee. He knew
that the appellant who use to visit his neighbour Prem Pal (PW-6) even
prior to the incident. There is nothing in the cross-examination which
perforates his statement.
8.       Prem Pal (PW-6) who is the father of the deceased girl S has
averred that appellant was from the same village and also sometimes
worked as Beldar with him which had led to the appellant‟s familiarity
with his family. The appellant frequented their house often. At the day of
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 5 of 18

the incident, PW-6 was ill and had gone to the doctor. When he returned
at 7.00 P.M., he was apprised that appellant had taken S and had not
returned. They waited for some time but when S did not return, PW-6,
PW-4 and PW-6‟s brother Banwari searched in the nearby area. Next day
i.e. on 29th December 2006 PW-6 went to the Police Station Sultan Puri
and recorded his statement (Ex.PW 6/A). Thereafter, he did not hear any
news till 4th January 2007 when Ct. Devender (PW-10) from police
station Sultan Puri called at his house, in the evening, and apprised that
the appellant had been arrested and his daughter‟s body was found in the
mustard crops at Village Hiran Kudana. PW-6 with his brother went to
the crime spot and identified the body. In the Court, PW-6 identified the
clothes worn by the deceased at the time of the incident (marked as
Ex.P1). In the cross-examination PW-6 revealed that the appellant was
known to him since childhood and was residing in Delhi for last eight-
nine years. He knew that the appellant was residing in Mundka and was
related as a distant cousin. When the two went missing, PW-6 had
searched Prem Nagar while brother Banarsi went to village Mundka
where the villagers told him that appellant had not come there. He called
the police on No. 100, the next day and went to Police Chowki thereafter.
He has accepted that on that particular day of the incident it was only his
wife who told him that appellant had taken S and no one else but has
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                       Page 6 of 18

repudiated that he was falsely implicating the appellant because of a
quarrel between them.
9.       From these statements it clearly transpires that the appellant was a
trusted person who had often visited the family. Even nearby neighbours
were aware of this fact and knew him by name. PW-9 lived next door and
was sitting outside at the time when the appellant took S.              Their
testimonies have clearly established that S was last seen on 28th
December 2006 at 6.00 P.M. with the appellant who was taking her to
buy her toffees. Neither the appellant nor the girl S was seen, thereafter
by anybody.
10.      It can also be seen that the appellant was the prime suspect from
the very beginning.       The first DD Entry No. 14 registered on 29th
December, 2006 at 2.30 P.M. mentions that “a neighbour‟s boy had taken
the girl.” On the same day, at 4.40 P.M. PW-6‟s statement was recorded
that “on 28th December 2006 a boy from his village named Ravi, son of
Laturi, age thirty years, who use to frequently come to his house,
yesterday evening at 6.00 P.M. came and took S (description provided) to
buy her sweets. They have not returned and cannot be found.” On the
basis of PW-6‟s statement rukkaa was made and FIR was registered at
5.15 P.M. under Section 363 IPC which mentions “Ravi (s/o) Laturi” as
the main suspect. After 28th December 2006, the appellant could not be
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                           Page 7 of 18

traced, even when searches were conducted at his Delhi and native
residence. He was absconding for seven days till his arrest at Swarna
Park, on the basis of information provided by a secret informer.
11. Now comes the contentious point of arrest and the subsequent
recoveries made pursuant thereto. The involved police officials were
Inspector Ravinder Singh (PW-21), ASI Kishan Kumar (PW-11), Ct.
Devender (PW-10) and Ct. Suresh. ASI Kishan Kumar (PW-11), who is
the first investigating officer has stated that on 29th December 2006 on
receiving DD. NO. 14 he reached A-39 Prem Nagar and was apprised
about the kidnapping. He recorded the statement of Prem Pal (Ex.PW6/A)
on the basis of which rukka (Ex.PW11/A) bearing his signature was sent
to the police station and FIR (Ex.PW 1/A) was registered. Search for S
and the appellant started, wireless messages were sent to different Police
Stations and a team went to appellant‟s village in U.P. but the appellant
could not be traced. On 4th January 2007 a secret informer apprised that
the appellant was present at Swarna Park, Kamruddin Nagar country
liquor shop. PW-11, along with PW-10 and Ct.Suresh reached the wine
shop and, on pointing out of the informer, apprehended him. The
appellant was interrogated and he made a disclosure statement confessing
his involvement and murdering S.          PW-10 informed SHO Ravinder
Singh (PW-21) who reached there and was handed over the appellant.
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 8 of 18

The appellant was arrested vide arrest memo Ex. PW-10/A to which PW-
11 was a witness with Ct. Suresh. Appellant‟s disclosure statement
(Ex.PW11/C) was signed by PW-11. Thereafter, the appellant led them
to the mustard crop fields near Hiran Khudna Village main Rohtak Road
Highway towards south side at a distance of about half kilometres from
the road. Inside the mustard crop field dead body of the girl was found.
One empty quarter bottle of liquor, two DTC Bus tickets, one cover of
biri bundle, one cover of Parle G biscuits packet were lying at a distance
of 10-12 steps near the dead body. PW-21 directed PW-10 Devender to
call PW-6 Prem Pal for identification. PW-6 came with his brother
Banwari and identified the dead body. The Crime Team and photographer
were called who inspected the place and took photographs. Earth mixed
with hair was collected vide memo Ex. PW-21-C, earth control was taken
vide memo Ex. PW-11/F and empty quarter bottle of liquor make
„Shokeen Masaledar Desi Sharab‟, two tickets of DTC bus, one cover of
Bidi Bundle, one cover of Parle G Biscuit were sealed vide memo Ex.
PW-11/G. These were correctly identified in the Court by PW-11.
Inquest report was prepared and body was sent to SGM Mortuary. In the
cross-examination he has averred that he had seen the appellant first at
3.30 P.M. on 4th January 2007, after 45 minutes PW-21 Ravinder Singh
came to the wine shop from where the appellant was apprehended. PW-
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                      Page 9 of 18

21 recorded his disclosure statement and arrest was made. All this took
half an hour, after which they left for the place of crime in a government
vehicle Tata 407 with police officials. They remained at the spot Hiran
Khudna for around two hours for investigation purposes. He has stated
that none of the public witnesses were recorded since they declined to
oblige. The residence of the complainant is five kilometres away from the
spot i.e. mustard field, Hiran Khudna. He has specifically averred that he
had not informed the senior police officers regarding information of the
suspect but, after apprehension of the appellant and after making the
complete enquiry regarding the crime which took around thirty minutes,
he had informed the senior police officers. He, however, could not
remember the appellant‟s clothes on the day he was apprehended. He was
also not aware of any statement being recorded from the native village of
the appellant or if the local police was intimated on this regard. He has
repudiated the allegation that recoveries were planted.
12.      Statement of Ct. Devender (PW-10) is on a similar line, that he
along with PW-11 and Ct. Suresh had left the police station in search for
the appellant for Kamruddin Nagar. When they reached the appellant was
present there and was apprehended. Thereafter, Inspector Ravinder Singh
(PW-21) from PS Sultan Puri was informed who interrogated and arrested
him vide arrest memo (Ex. PW10/A). After this the appellant led them to
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 10 of 18

the crime spot south side of Rohtak Road to fields with mustard crops and
pointed out dead body from around which recoveries, one empty quarter
of liquor, two bus tickets, one bidi bundle, one parle biscuits packet,
seized vide seizure memo (Ex. PW 11/G), were also made. He was
directed to call the father of the deceased while the crime team and
photographer collected the evidence. In his cross-examination he has
stated that the appellant was apprehended at 4.30-5.00 P.M. near wine
shop. ASI had asked him to join at 4.00-4.30 P.M. and the distance
between the police post and place of arrest was around 2-3 kilometres. He
denied all allegations of false investigation.
13.      Inspector Ravinder Singh (PW-21) has stated that on 4th January,
2007 he reached Swarna Park Nangloi where PW-11 who had informed
about this case earlier on 29th December 2006, and PW-10 were present.
PW-21 had arrested him vide arrest memo (Ex. PW10/A) and recorded
the disclosure statement (Ex. PW11/C). Thereafter, the appellant led the
police party to the field near village Dharam Pudna and pointed towards
the place from where recoveries were made. Earth control was seized
vide Ex. PW11/F and recovery articles were seized vide Ex. PW11/G. On
5th January 2007, post mortem was conducted after which body was
handed over to the father. Later on case properties were deposed in the
malkhana, exhibits were sent to FSL Rohini and scaled site plan was
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                      Page 11 of 18

prepared. In the cross-examination he has averred that he had received the
information at 4.30 P.M./4.45 P.M. on 4 th January 2007 on the telephone
and had reached there within 15 minutes.
14.      Appellant‟s counsel has contended that there is material
discrepancy to the extent that the crime team report(Ex. PW-15/A) was
recorded on 4th January 2012 at 4.50 P.M. while the arrest of the appellant
(Ex.PW 10/A) specifies the time of arrest as 5.10 P.M. on the same day.
Through this he seeks to establish that the body of the deceased was not
recovered pursuant to the appellant‟s disclosure, after his arrest, but was
already discovered or was in knowledge of the police from before, and
therefore, no recovery can be attributed to the appellant.           This is
ostensibly an attractive argument but cannot stand if we look at the
evidence carefully. The appellant was apprehended at about 4/4.30 P.M.
by ASI Kishan Chand (PW-11).         The said witness has deposed that
information regarding the appellant was spotted near the wine shop at
Swarn Park was received by him at around 3.30 P.M. PW-10 has also
deposed that he had joined investigation around 4/4.30 P.M. and the
appellant was apprehended at 4.30/5.00 P.M. The appellant after being
apprehended was interrogated by PW-11. It is then he revealed that he
had murdered S in the fields of Rohtak Road. Thereupon, Ravinder
Kumar (PW-21) was informed at Police Station at around 4.30/4.45 P.M.
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                       Page 12 of 18

PW-21 reached the spot and took over the investigation. PW-21 formally
arrested the appellant vide arrest memo (Exhibit PW-10/A) and written
disclosure statement (Exhibit PW-10/C) was recorded.             Thus, it is
apparent that before the formal written disclosure statement was recorded,
PW-11 had orally interrogated the appellant who disclosed and revealed
for the first time that S had been murdered and her body was in the fields
of the Rohtak Road. After the initial oral disclosure was made, PW-11
intimated and informed Ravinder Singh (PW-21) at Police Station
Sultanpuri at about 4.30/4.45 P.M. This explains how the crime team was
informed and the time mentioned of the crime team report (Exhibit PW-
15/A), i.e., 4.50 P.M. on 4th January, 2007. Learned counsel for the
appellant submitted that the oral interrogation and disclosure should be
disregarded. Normally there will be an interregnum between the oral
statement made by the accused and before the disclosure statement is
recorded or reduced into writing. It will be highly unusual and peculiar
that the accused would make a disclosure statement in writing without
being first interrogated and making an oral statement. Moreover, Section
27 of the Evidence Act does not postulate that the disclosure statement
must be mandatorily in writing. It is not a statutory prescription, though
it is advisable. It may not be a fatal blow to the prosecution case.
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 13 of 18

A Full Bench of the Gauhati High Court, in the case of Rajiv Phukan v.
State of Assam (2010 CriLJ 338) came to this conclusion and held that:
               “ (28)…………When the statute has not made it
               mandatory for a police officer to reduce into
               writing the disclosure statement of an accused
               person, it would be impossible to treat the
               evidence of the co-villagers as inadmissible and
               thereby reject the same. The written record of the
               disclosure statement is really required for the
               purpose of inspiring confidence of the Court that
               the statement, as deposed to, had indeed been
               made and such a written record would further help
               the Court know as to what exactly the accused had
               stated to the police and what statement or which
               part of a given statement of the accused had really
               led to the discovery of the fact.
               (56) Because of what have been discussed and
               pointed out above, we conclude that a 'disclosure
               statement', to be admissible under Section 27 of
               the Evidence Act, is not statutorily required to be
               reduced into writing, though prudence demands
               that such an information should be reduced into
               writing in order to enable the Court to know
               exactly as to what the accused is allegedly to have
               stated and the extent to which the information
               given by him is admissible. The reference shall
               stand answered accordingly.”
15.      From facts of the present case, it can be concluded that it was
pursuant to the disclosure made to PW-11 that the dead body of S was
recovered from the field. It has also come on record that the place of
arrest Swarna Park was approximately 2-3 kms from the crime spot at
side of Rohtak Road. The police station was about 15 minutes away from
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 14 of 18

the place of arrest. Therefore, the apprehension, arrest and recoveries
were made swiftly within a span of few hours. After the arrest was made
at 5.10 P.M. the police officials (PW-10, PW-11 and PW-21) also
reached the place of recoveries and conducted further investigation. The
recoveries made pursuant to the disclosure are, in our view, admissible,
reliable and cannot be doubted.
16.      The appellant has contended that it is difficult to believe that
nobody had chanced upon the dead body in the seven-eight days it was
lying there. There is no force in this contention as the un-scaled plan of
the recoveries drawn on 4th January, 2007 (Ex. PW21/B) and the scaled
map drawn on 3rd March 2007 (Ex. PW21/A) reveal that the body was
found within the fields which had fully grown crops, since it was the time
just before the harvesting season. On two sides, after the crops, there was
open land, on another side there was wheat cultivation, followed by 220
cms boundary wall and the rest of the view was obstructed by the mustard
crops. It can also be seen that the spot was away from the foot way and
was on the other side of Kacha Road. Therefore, it would have been
difficult for passer-by or public to spot the body. Importantly, Sukhbir
Singh Rana (PW-8), who was the owner of the agricultural land where
the body was found, has not stated that he had knowledge regarding the
body and no question was put forth in his cross-examination suggesting
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 15 of 18

the same. The other incriminating materials were found within 250
meters of the body inside the field of mustard crops.
17.      To recapitulate, testimonies of PWs 4 and 9 establish that the girl
S was last seen with the appellant on 29 th December, 2006 at 6 P.M.
Thereafter, her dead body was recovered from the mustard fields in the
evening of 4th January, 2007. As per the post-mortem report (Exhibit
PW-22/A), time since death was estimated as eight days. The post-
mortem was conducted on 5th January, 2007.Thus, the estimated time of
death was soon after S was taken by the appellant on 29th December,
2006 at 6 P.M. The last seen theory comes into play when the time gap
between the point of time when the accused and the deceased were last
seen alive and when the deceased died is approximate. The principle
being there is a possible link between the accused and the death of the
deceased. There is proximity between the time when S went missing and
she was seen with the appellant and when she was murdered. The post-
mortem report which delineates that time of death was approximately
eight days relates us back to the day of disappearance of the deceased
with the appellant. It supports the last seen evidence.
18.      To establish an offence of kidnapping from lawful guardianship
under Section 363 IPC it has been verified that the girl was minor and
was kidnapped by appellant who had taken her on pretext of buying her
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 16 of 18

toffees but did not drop her back. Being a girl of small age, it is difficult
to perceive that she could have ventured out so far on her own. It was the
appellant in whose custody she was when she went missing. After 28th
December 2006 when the two, appellant and S, went missing, he could
not be found anywhere. PW-6 has averred that he had searched the whole
colony and his brother went to appellant‟s place but still they could not
find the appellant or S that night. The police investigation took them to
his Mundka residence in Delhi and his native place but it was to no avail.
Thus, the abscondence of appellant corroborates his involvement.
19.      To additionally prove charges under Section 366 IPC that of
kidnapping, abducting a woman, including for the purpose of forced or
seduced illicit intercourse, the intent of the appellant has to be gathered
through his conduct. Further in the present case, no call or demand for
ransom was made and there was no enmity between the appellant and the
deceased‟s parents. Thus, possibility of kidnapping her for any other
reason is completely ruled out.
20.      The Post Mortem Report (Ex. PW-22/A) delineates that the
deceased was strangulated to death, thus the fact that the deceased had a
homicidal death cannot be disputed. For the offence of murder, apart
from the last seen evidence, it has to be kept in mind that till the time
appellant was arrested, on 4th January 2007, for about seven days no one
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                        Page 17 of 18

knew the whereabouts of the body. The recovery of the dead body and
other incriminating material, including empty quarter bottle of liquor, two
tickets of DTC bus, one cover of Bidi Bundle, one cover of Parle G
Biscuit (sealed vide memo Ex. PW-11/G), was pursuant to the appellant‟s
disclosure statement. Thus, it was only the appellant who had the
knowledge regarding the spot from where the body could be recovered. In
totality, the evidence produced before us prove the involvement of the
appellant, beyond doubt, in the present case.
21.      In view of the above findings, we uphold the conviction and
sentence of the appellant under Section 363/366/302 IPC. Appeal is
accordingly disposed of.
                                                   -sd-
                                           (SANJIV KHANNA)
                                                  JUDGE
                                                   -sd-
                                         (SIDDHARTH MRIDUL)
                                                    JUDGE
MARCH 13th, 2013
VKR
Crl.A. 1097/2012                                      Page 18 of 18


