3.
*IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+       W.P.(C) 5970/2007
        SURAJ BHAN & ORS.                        ..... Petitioners
                             Through Mr. V.P. Rana, Advocate.
                      versus
        GOVT OF NCT DELHI & ORS.                      ..... Respondents
                             Through Ms. Reeta Kaul, Advocate for respondent No. 1.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
                ORDER
%                23.02.2010
1.      The petitioners have initiated proceedings under Section 85 of the Delhi Land
Reforms Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as the Act, for short) claiming bhumidari
rights in respect of khasra Nos. 13/5 (4-5), 13/6 (4-5), 13/15 (4-5) and 13/16 (3-10) in
village Singhu, Delhi. It is the contention of the petitioners that this land was allotted
to them in the year 1951-52 in the consolidation proceedings and he has relied upon
oral partition with other co-sharers. The petitioners also rely upon khatoni pamaish
for the year 1951-52. It is alleged that the land was subsequently vested in Gaon
Sabha under Section 7 of the Act as barren land. However, the petitioners allege that
they have been in cultivatory possession of the land and the petitioners are growing
crops. It is alleged that the respondents were not recording cultivatory possession of
the petitioners though the petitioners had moved applications on 26th September,
2000, 11th September, 2005 and 4th August, 2007.               The respondents have not
specifically controverted the said averments in paragraph 4 of the writ petition and
have not denied receipt of the said letters/applications moved by the petitioners.
2.      In the counter affidavit filed by the respondents, it is stated that as per the
records this land was barren (banjar) and by a letter dated 26th December, 2006 the
land was handed over to PWD. It is also alleged that in case the land was under
cultivation, the patwari should have made entry in column No. 7. No entry was made
WPC No.5970/2007                                                                    Page 1

in column No. 7 and it was left blank. At the same time, it is averred that the
petitioners have not exhausted remedy available to them under the Act and have
claimed possession of the land. Accordingly, it is stated that no rights have accrued
in favour of the petitioners.
3.      To verify and decide whether the land in question was in actual possession of
the petitioners, a Local Commissioner was appointed by this Court. The Local
Commissioner has submitted his report along with photographs. The photographs
show that the petitioners were growing crops and were in cultivatory possession of
the said land on the date when the Local Commissioner had visited the spot. It is,
however, noticed that there was no boring and it was the stand of the petitioners that
the fields were watered with the help of a hose pipe connected with a tractor-trolley
with water.
4.      In view of the aforesaid facts, it is directed that the petitioners will not be
dispossessed till the matter is examined by the Revenue Assistant in the proceedings
initiated by the petitioners under Section 85 of the Act. The Revenue Assistant will
independently apply his mind and decide whether or not the petitioners have been
able to establish possession or the petitioners had merely cultivated the said land to
enable them to approach this Court. The proceedings before the Revenue Assistant
will be decided and disposed of expeditiously. It is open to the respondents to
produce relevant evidence and material before the Revenue Assistant. It is also open
to the respondents to file an application, if required, under Section 86A of the Act.
5.      It is clarified that the observations made in this order are tentative and prima
facie and will not influence and will not be binding on the Revenue Assistant, who
will independently apply his mind. The Revenue Assistant will be entitled to modify
the order passed above while deciding any interim application.
        The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
        DASTI.
                                                                 SANJIV KHANNA, J.
        FEBRUARY 23, 2010
        VKR
WPC No.5970/2007                                                                   Page 2


