21.
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+       W.P.(C) 10505/2009
                                        Date of decision: 29th July, 2009
        ICOS ENTERTAINMENT                                     ..... Petitioner
                           Through Mr. Vineet Bhagat & Ms. Neha Jain,
                           Advocates.
                     versus
        ZEE TURNEE LTD.                                     ..... Respondent
                           Through Mr. Maninder Singh, Sr. Advocate with
                           Mr. T. Singhdev, Advocate for respondent No. 1.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
        1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
        allowed to see the judgment?
        2. To be referred to the Reporter or not ?
        3. Whether the judgment should be reported
        in the Digest ?
                                 O R D E R
%
1.      The petitioner herein has impugned orders dated 3rd July, 2009 and
15th July, 2009 passed by Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate
Tribunal, New Delhi.
2.      I have heard learned counsel for the respondent No. 1, who is
present on advance notice.
3.      By the interim order, the respondent No. 1 has been directed to
W.P. (C) No. 10505/2009                                                    Page 1

continue to supply the feed/signals to the petitioner subject to the
petitioner depositing subscription charges payable on subscriber base of
Rs.15,000/- per month with effect from 19th December, 2008.
4.      On the question of subscriber base, the petitioner claims that he has
5460 subscribers whereas the respondent No. 1 claims that signal feed is
being supplied to more than 30000 subscribers. Learned counsel for the
respondent No. 1 states that they are relying upon documents obtained by
them from Star TV that subscriber base of the petitioner is more than
30000. The said document is disputed by the counsel for the petitioner on
the ground that it does not pertain to the petitioner as the petitioner is a
partnership firm and the certificate issued by Star TV relates to DENICOS
Cable Network Private Limited. Learned counsel for the petitioner states
that DENICOS Cable Network Private Limited is a separate company, which
covers a larger area and the petitioner is not associated with them.
Learned counsel for the respondent No. 1, however, states that the
address mentioned in the invoice or notice issued by Star T.V. is the same
and the petitioner has taken over the said company. Learned counsel for
the petitioner states that the billing raised by Star T.V. against the
petitioner is on a much lower subscriber base. The statements made by
the counsel for the petitioner on the question of the petitioner being a
different entity and on the subscriber base payments to Star T.V. are
disputed.
W.P. (C) No. 10505/2009                                                 Page 2

5.      This Court while exercising writ jurisdiction is not exercising
appellate powers.       The impugned order passed by the tribunal is an
interim order.      Learned tribunal has also directed verification of the
subscriber base by a joint survey. In view of the conflicting figures with
regard to the subscriber base, the learned tribunal has taken an in
between figure of 15,000/- for the purpose of interim order. The tribunal
has also directed that payments made by the petitioner are subject to the
outcome of the final decision. In these circumstances, I do not think it will
be appropriate for this Court to fix a different figure of subscriber base and
modify the interim order passed by the tribunal.
6.      On the question of the date from which arrears should be payable,
learned tribunal has taken into consideration the interim order passed by
them on 19th December, 2008, whereby operation of public notice dated
3rd November, 2008 was stayed. The said public notice had been issued
by respondent No. 1 for terminating signal feed to the petitioner.
Subsequently, the petition in which the interim order was passed was
disposed of by the order dated 8th May, 2009 directing parties to initiate
settlement/agreement with the condition that the signal feed will not be
disconnected till 30th June, 2009.
7.      The parties tried to negotiate a settlement/agreement but failed and
thereupon the petitioner again approached the appellate tribunal. Interim
orders dated 3rd July, 2009 and 15th July, 2009 have been passed in the
W.P. (C) No. 10505/2009                                                  Page 3

said petition. The date 19th December, 2008 fixed by the Appellate
Tribunal in the interim order has basis and is the date on which the first
interim order was passed. I do not think while exercising power of judicial
review in a writ petition this Court should interfere with the interim orders
passed by the tribunal.
8.      Learned counsel for the petitioner alleges that the survey is being
delayed by the respondent No. 1. Learned counsel for the respondent No.
1 assures this Court and states that the respondent No. 1 does not want to
delay the survey and are extending full cooperation but it is the petitioner,
who is not cooperating. It is obvious that both parties have to ensure that
the direction of the tribunal for joint survey is complied with in letter and
spirit.
9.      The writ petition is disposed of.
10.     It is clarified that observations made in this order are for the
purpose of disposal of the writ petition and this Court has not expressed
any opinion on the merits of the claim of either side.
                                                       SANJIV KHANNA, J.
        JULY 29, 2009
        VKR
W.P. (C) No. 10505/2009                                                 Page 4


