$~4.
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                   CRIMINAL APPEAL No.513/2012
                                  Date of decision: 25th September, 2012
        DANY @ RAVI                                           ..... Appellant
                           Through Mr. Hans Raj Singh & Mr. Rajendra
                           Singh, Advocates.
                    versus
        STATE                                             ..... Respondent
                           Through Mr. Sanjay Lao, APP for the State
                           along with Inspector V.N. Jha, ATO/S.
                           Rohini.
         CORAM:
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.P.GARG
SANJIV KHANNA, J. (ORAL)
        Learned Additional Public Prosecutor prays for and is granted
permission to place on record status report.
2.       As per the said status report, a detailed investigation and
verification was done and it has been ascertained that the appellant
Dany @ Ravi was educated and had studied in MCD Primary Co-
Education School, Motia Khan, Pahar Ganj, New Delhi-110055 from
1st May, 1995 till 1st April, 2002 from class Ist to class Vth. At the
CRL.A. No. 513/2012                                                 Page 1 of 7

time of admission, his date of birth as disclosed and as per the school
records is 4th April, 1990. Certificate issued by the school principal is
enclosed with the report.
3.      The appellant was earlier involved and was facing prosecution in
FIR No. 18/2007, Police Station Rohini, under Section 308/34 IPC. In
the said case, verification/inquiry was held. As per documents placed
on record, a medical board was constituted for ascertaining the age of
the appellant. The Medical Board on the basis of X ray of shoulder,
elbow, pelvis with B/L hip and right hand with wrist and other material
referred to therein had opined that the appellant herein was between
16-18 years as on 24th January, 2007. The offence subject matter of
FIR No. 18/0207 was committed on 1st May, 2007 and accordingly the
appellant was held to be less than 18 years of age at the time of
commission of offence. He was declared juvenile and was tried under
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000. The
appellant was acquitted in the said case vide order dated 27th July, 2009
passed by the Juvenile Justice Board.
4.      The appellant is also facing prosecution in FIR No. 329/2006
dated 11th April, 2006 under Section 324/34 IPC. The said prosecution
proceedings are pending before the Metropolitan Magistrate Mr.
Dharmender Singh and the next date of hearing is 12th October, 2012.
5.      In the present case, the offence in question was committed on 9th
CRL.A. No. 513/2012                                             Page 2 of 7

January, 2008. As per the date of birth recorded in the school and as
per the certificate issued by Principal of the MCD Primary Co-
Education School, Motia Khan, Pahar Ganj, New Delhi-110055, the
appellant’s date of birth is 4th April, 1990. In view of the aforesaid
position, on the date when the alleged offence was committed, the
appellant was less than 18 years of age. In terms of Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Rules, 2007, in the absence of
matriculation or equivalent certificate, the date of birth certificate from
the school other than play school, which was first attended, is
determinative in deciding whether or not the appellant was juvenile on
the date when the offence was committed.           Thus, in view of the
certificate issued by the Principal, MCD Primary Co-Education
School, Motia Khan, Pahar Ganj, New Delhi-110055, it has to be held
that the appellant Dany @ Ravi was a juvenile on the date of the
offence.
6.      The Supreme Court in Ashwani Kumar Saxena versus State of
M.P., Criminal Appeal No. 1403/2012 decided on 13th September,
2012, has examined and elucidated upon Section 7A and Rule 12 and
observed:-
                 “32. Consequently, the procedure to be followed
                 under the J.J. Act in conducting an inquiry is the
                 procedure laid down in that statute itself i.e.
                 Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules. We cannot import
                 other procedures laid down in the Code of
CRL.A. No. 513/2012                                               Page 3 of 7

                 Criminal Procedure or any other enactment while
                 making an inquiry with regard to the juvenility of a
                 person, when the claim of juvenility is raised
                 before the court exercising powers under section
                 7A of the Act. Many of the cases, we have come
                 across, it is seen that the Criminal Courts are
                 still having the hangover of the procedure of trial
                 or inquiry under the Code as if they are trying an
                 offence under the Penal laws forgetting the fact
                 that the specific procedure has been laid down in
                 section 7A read with Rule 12.
                 33. We also remind all Courts/J.J. Board and the
                 Committees functioning under the Act that a duty
                 is cast on them to seek evidence by obtaining the
                 certificate etc. mentioned in Rule 12 (3) (a) (i) to
                 (iii). The courts in such situations act as a
                 parens patriae because they have a kind of
                 guardianship over minors who from their legal
                 disability stand in need of protection.
                 34. "Age determination inquiry" contemplated
                 under section 7A of the Act r/w Rule 12 of the
                 2007 Rules enables the court to seek evidence
                 and in that process, the court can obtain the
                 matriculation or         equivalent certificates, if
                 available.     Only in the absence         of    any
                 matriculation or equivalent certificates, the court
                 need obtain the date of birth certificate from
                 the school first attended other than a play school.
                 Only in the absence of matriculation or equivalent
                 certificate or the date of birth certificate from
                 the school first attended, the court need obtain the
                 birth certificate given by a corporation or a
                 municipal authority or a panchayat (not an
                 affidavit but certificates or documents).       The
                 question of obtaining medical opinion from a duly
                 constituted Medical Board arises only if the
                 above mentioned documents are unavailable.
                 In case exact assessment of the age cannot be
                 done, then the court, for reasons to be recorded,
                 may, if considered necessary, give the benefit to
                 the child or juvenile by considering his or her age
CRL.A. No. 513/2012                                                Page 4 of 7

                 on lower side within the margin of one year.
                 35.      Once the court, following the above
                 mentioned procedures, passes an order; that
                 order shall be the conclusive proof of the age as
                 regards such child or juvenile in conflict with
                 law. It has been made clear in subsection (5)
                 or Rule 12 that no further inquiry shall be
                 conducted by the court or the Board after
                 examining and obtaining the certificate or any
                 other documentary proof after referring to sub-rule
                 (3) of the Rule 12. Further, Section 49 of the J.J.
                 Act also draws a presumption of the age of the
                 Juvenility on its determination.
                 36.     Age determination inquiry contemplated
                 under the JJ Act and Rules has nothing to do with
                 an enquiry under other legislations, like entry
                 in service, retirement, promotion etc. There may
                 be situations where the entry made in the
                 matriculation or equivalent certificates, date of
                 birth certificate from the school first attended and
                 even the birth certificate given by a Corporation
                 or a Municipal Authority or a Panchayat may not
                 be correct. But Court, J.J. Board or a Committee
                 functioning under the J.J. Act is not expected to
                 conduct such a roving enquiry and to go behind
                 those certificates to examine the correctness of
                 those documents, kept during the normal course
                 of business.       Only in cases where those
                 documents        or certificates are found to be
                 fabricated or manipulated, the Court, the J.J.
                 Board or the Committee need to go for medical
                 report for age determination.
                 37.          XXXXX
                 38.          XXXXX
                 39.          XXXXX
                 40.          XXXXX
CRL.A. No. 513/2012                                                Page 5 of 7

                 41.          XXXXX
                 42.          XXXXX
                 43.      The Court in Babloo Parsi v. State of
                 Jharkhand and Another [(2008) 13 SCC 133]
                 held, in a case where the accused had failed to
                 produce evidence/certificate in support of his
                 claim, medical evidence can be called for. The
                 court held that the medical evidence as to the age
                 of a person, though a useful guiding factor is not
                 conclusive and has to be considered along with
                 other cogent evidence. This court set aside the
                 order of the High Court and remitted the matter
                 to the Chief Judicial Magistrate heading the
                 Board to re-determine the age of the accused.
                 44. In Shah Nawaz v. State of Uttar Pradesh and
                 Another [(2011) 13 SCC 751], the Court while
                 examining the scope of Rule 12, has reiterated
                 that medical opinion from the Medical Board
                 should be sought only when matriculation
                 certificate or equivalent certificate or the date of
                 birth certificate from the school first attended or
                 any birth certificate issued by a Corporation or a
                 municipal authority or a panchayat or municipal
                 is not available. The court had held entry related
                 to date of birth entered in the mark sheet is a
                 valid evidence for determining the age of the
                 accused person so also the school leaving
                 certificate for determining the age of the
                 appellant.
                 45. We are of the view that admission register in
                 the school in which the candidate first attended is
                 a relevant piece of evidence of the date of birth.
                 The reasoning that the parents could have entered a
                 wrong date of birth in the admission register
                 hence not a correct date of birth is equal to
                 thinking that parents would do so in anticipation
                 that child would commit a crime in future and, in
                 that situation, they could successfully raise a
                 claim of juvenility.”
CRL.A. No. 513/2012                                                Page 6 of 7

7.      In view of the aforesaid position and in terms of Rule 7A of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, the
appellant being a juvenile, is forwarded to the Juvenile Justice Board
for appropriate orders. The sentence awarded to the appellant is set
aside.     The appellant will be produced before the Juvenile Justice
Board on 28th September, 2012.
8.      Along with the copy of this order, electronic paper book of the
record of the trial court as well as this Court will be forwarded to
Juvenile Justice Board. The appellant will be also produced before the
Juvenile Justice Board on the said date. Copy of this order will also be
sent to Mr. Dharmender Singh, Metropolitan Magistrate, where legal
proceedings pursuant to FIR No.329/2006 are pending.
        The present appeal will be treated as disposed of.
                                               SANJIV KHANNA, J.
                                               S.P. GARG, J.
        SEPTEMBER 25, 2012
        VKR/NA
CRL.A. No. 513/2012                                            Page 7 of 7


