                       IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                                CRLMC NO. 219 OF 2012
        An application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
        Procedure, 1973 in connection with 1.C.C. Case No.273 of 2010
        pending on the file of S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar.
                                     ------------------------
              M/s. Surveka Distributors
              Pvt. Ltd. & others                   ………                      Petitioner
                                            -Versus-
              M/s. S.R. Retail Zone
              Pvt. Ltd.                       ………                          Opposite party
                   For Petitioners:              -           Mr. Abhinash Barik
                   For Opposite Party:          -            None
                                     ------------------------
        P R E S E N T:-
                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Date of Hearing & Judgment:- 05.02.2018
        ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J. The petitioners have filed this application under
        section 482 of Cr.P.C. for quashing the impugned order
        dated 06.01.2012 passed by the learned S.D.J.M.,
        Bhubaneswar in I.C.C. No.273 of 2010 in rejecting the

                                 2
petition filed by the petitioners for sending Exts.3 to 5
and Exts.9/1 and 9/2 to the handwriting expert along
with admitted writings of the complainant and the
accused persons with a direction to make examination
of the question documents and to submit the report.
Though another petition was filed by the petitioners for
summoning I.C.C. of Keonjhar police station to produce
S.D. Entry No.148 dated 29.07.2009 and to issue
summon to the Post Master, G.P.O. to proof the
delivery of the letter dated 18.11.2009 to Nihar Ranjan
Patnaik and the said petition was also rejected but the
learned    counsel   for  the  petitioners  confined   his
challenge to the rejection of the petition relating to the
sending of the exhibits to the handwriting expert. The
factual scenario of the case indicates that the opposite
party is the complainant in I.C.C. Case No.273 of 2010
and the petitioners are the accused persons the
complaint petition was filed for prosecuting the accused

                                 3
persons under section 138 of the Negotiable Instrument
Act case.
          During   course of    trial on 23.12.2011      a
petition was filed by the petitioners to send the Exts.3
to 5 as well as Exts.9/1 and 9/2 to the handwriting
experts for examination. It is the case of the petitioners
that Exts.3 to 5 were the blank cheques which were
handed over to the complainant on good faith for use of
the same whenever required by the petitioners for the
purpose of their business at Bhubaneswar as they were
residing at Keonjhar but the cheques were misutilized
by the complainant by filling up the blank entries in the
cheque and mentioning the date and amount. It is the
case of the petitioners that the admitted signatures on
the cheque the petitioners is required to be compared
with the handwriting mentioned in the body of the
cheques    and   that  by   making    such    handwriting
examination, it can be ascertained that the cheques
had not been written by the accused-petitioners who

                                4
had signed on the same. It is also contended that
Exts.9/1 and 9/2 are the postal acknowledgements
which do not bear the handwritings of the accused
Dibyendu Pattnaik and Subendu Pattnaik and therefore,
the admitted handwriting of those two co-accused
persons with the handwriting on the receipt portion of
the AD is required to be compared. The prayer was
opposed to by the complainant, inter alia on the ground
that there was no necessity to send the above
documents to the handwriting expert for comparison
and report. The learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar after
taking note of the contentions raised by the respective
parties has been pleased to hold that whereas the
complainants claim is that the cheque in competent
form containing the signature of accused Dibyendu
Pattnaik  had   been    given  to  the  complainant  to
discharge their legally enforceable date but on perusal
of the cheques it appears that accused Dibyendu
Pattnaik has again initial signature on all the cheques

                                  5
i.e. Exts.3 to 5 and therefore, it is not possible to make
comparison of the initials with the details of handwriting
appearing on the other parts of the cheques. The
learned Magistrate further held that the chance of
writing of the cheques by somebody and thereafter
putting of the signature of the account holder cannot be
ruled out and it is the burden on the accused persons to
establish their plea regarding issuance of blank cheque
by adducing evidence. The learned Magistrate further
held that the examination of the contents of the
cheques with the initial signature of accused Dibyendu
Pattnaik   is   nowhere    has   the   Court   for   proper
adjudication of the dispute. So far as Exts.9/1 and 9/2
are concerned, those were the postal acknowledgments
cards which were received by the accused persons with
reference to the notice issued by the complainant vide
postal receives Ext.8 and 8/1. The notices had been
given in the correct address of the accused persons has
mentioned in the complaint master role Ext.1 and

                                 6
therefore,   the  examination    of  those   Ads by   the
handwriting expert will in no way held the Court for
proper adjudication of the dispute. Accordingly the
petition filed by the accused persons for sending the
EXts.3 to 5 and 9/1 and 9/2 was rejected.
           None appears on behalf of the opposite party.
           Mr.   Abhinash     Barik,    learned  counsel
appearing for the petitioners contended that when a
specific plea has been taken by the accused persons
that on good faith the blank signed cheque was kept
with the complainant which was misutilized by him and
the date and amount has been filled up by the
complainant in Exts.3 to 5 in the interest of justice the
cheques should have been sent to the handwriting
expert for comparison with the admitted handwritings
of the complainant and the accused persons and by
refusing to entertain such prayer has cost prejudice to
the petitioners. It is further contended that when it is
the case of the petitioners that the accused persons are

                                  7
not residing in the address given in the postal Ads and
some other persons have received the notice and put
the signatures in their names and the signatures
appearing on the postal Ads were not that of the
accused persons, the learned Magistrate should not
have rejected the petition for sending the Exts.9/1 and
9/2 to the handwriting expert with the admitted
signature of the accused persons for comparison.
           Considering the submissions made by the
learned counsel for the petitioners one thing is clear
that the accused persons that are not disputing that the
signatures which are appearing in Exts.3, 4 and 5 are
that   of accused     Dibyendu    Pattnaik but they are
disputing that the date and the amount which has been
reflected in Exts.3, 4 and 5 are not that of either
accused Dibyendu Pattnaik or of any other accused and
those were filled up by the complainant. In view of such
specific stand taken by the accused persons in the
interest of justice it is necessary that there should have

                                 8
been a direction for examination of the other writings
apart from the signatures which is appearing in the
cheques Exts.3, 4 and 5 with the admitted handwritings
of the accused persons as well as the complainant in
order to ascertain the truth. After obtaining the
handwriting expert opinion the learned Magistrate could
have assist the oral evidence as well as documentary
evidence in order to find out the truth whether the case
of the complainant that he was handed over signed
cheque Exts.3, 4 and 5 in a completed form is correct
or the plea taken by the accused persons that it was a
blank cheque given to the complainant on good faith
which has been misutilized by the complainant is
correct up course law is well settled that the report of
handwriting expert is not the conclusive proof it is after
all an opinion evidence and it should be supported by
reasons and the Court has to evaluate the same like
any other evidence. It is for the Court to Judge whether
the opinion has been correctly reached on the data

                                  9
available or not by not entertaining the prayer of the
accused persons in not sending the Exts.3 to 5, the
learned Magistrate has prevented the accused persons
in proving their defence plea in a better manner.
Similarly, it is contended that the signatures appearing
as recipient of the notice in the postal Ads Exts.9/1 and
9/2 are not that of the accused persons and they are
residing at Keonjhar and somebody else has put their
signatures, it was very much necessary to send
Exts.9/1 and 9/2 to the handwriting expert for its
comparison with the admitted signatures of the accused
persons. The learned Magistrate since to have not kept
the valuable purpose which is behind the filing of the
petition for sending the exhibits to the handwriting
expert. The observation that by sending the exhibits to
the handwriting expert, it is no way help to the Court
for proper adjudication of the dispute is a pre-
determination of the case and therefore, I am of the
humble     view    that  the    impugned    order   dated

                                          10
06.01.2012               passed   by    the    learned           S.D.J.M.,
Bhubaneswar is not sustainable in the eye of law.
                  Accordingly, the same is set aside and the
learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar is directed to send the
Exts.3 to 5 and 9/1 and 9/2 to the handwriting expert.
As prayed for by the accused persons along with the
admitted writings of the complainant and the accused
persons as well as the signatures of the accused
persons for making necessary examination of the
question documents and to submit the report as
expeditiously              as possible.   After   receipt           of         the
handwriting             expert  report,   the   learned          S.D.J.M.,
Bhubaneswar shall proceed with the case in accordance
with law.
                  With the aforesaid observation, the CRLMC
application is allowed.
                                                    .................................
                                                     S. K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 5th February, 2018/Sisir


