                          IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                                      CRLMC No. 911 Of 2006
        An application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
        Procedure, 1973 in connection with Criminal Revision No.19 of
        2005 disposed of by Addl. Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur.
                                         ----------------------------
               Gouranga Charan Nayak
               and another                            ……..                        Petitioners
                                                    -Versus-
               Adikanda Nayak
               and another                            ……..                        Opposite parties
                      For Petitioners:                   -    Mr. Subash Chandra Acharya
                      For Opposite Parties:              -     None
                                           ---------------------------
        P R E S E N T:
                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Date of Hearing & Judgment: 02.01.2018
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J.           Heard Mr. Subash Chandra Acharya, learned counsel
        for the petitioners.
                          None appears on behalf of the opposite party no.1
        Adikanda Nayak.
                          This is an application under section 482 of Cr.P.C.
        filed     by      the      petitioners         Gouranga          Charan         Nayak         and

                                2
Paramananda Nayak challenging the impugned judgment and
order dated 19.11.2005 passed by the learned Addl. Sessions
Judge, Jagatsinghpur in Criminal Revision No.19 of 2005 in
allowing    the   revision  and  setting  aside   the    order  dated
19.04.2005 passed in I.C.C. Case No.38 of 2004 by the learned
S.D.J.M., Jagatsinghpur and thereby directing the learned
S.D.J.M., Jagatsinghpur to take cognizance of offences under
sections    341/323     of the  Indian   Penal  Code     against  the
petitioners.
              It appears that the opposite party no.1 Adikanda
Nayak filed a complaint petition in the Court of learned S.D.J.M.,
Jagatsinghpur which was registered as I.C.C. Case No.38 of
2005 against five accused persons including the petitioners and
after institution of the complaint petition, the initial statement of
the complainant was recorded under section 200 of Cr.P.C. and
then the learned Magistrate conducted inquiry contemplated
under section 202 of Cr.P.C. in which two witnesses namely
Brambhananda Nayak and Santilata Nayak were examined and
thereafter, the learned S.D.J.M., Jagatsinghpur vide order dated
19.04.2005 has been pleased to hold that the enquiry witnesses
Santilata who is the wife of the complainant alleged about the
assault to her by accused Gouranga, her husband’s elder brother

                               3
which is nowhere alleged in the contents of the complaint
petition or in the statements of the remaining witnesses and
therefore, no prima facie case for the alleged offenses are made
out. Accordingly, the complaint petition was dismissed under
section 203 of Cr.P.C.
             The complainant challenged the aforesaid order
before the revisional Court and the learned Addl. Sessions Judge,
Jagatsinghpur has been pleased to hold that on analysis of the
entire materials available on record, prima facie case for offence
of wrongful restraint and voluntarily causing hurt to the
complainant by the accused persons like the petitioners on the
alleged date of incident is made out and it was further held that
the cognizance ought to have been taken under sections
341/323 of the Indian Penal Code against the petitioners without
dismissing the complaint petition and accordingly, the impugned
judgment was passed.
             Mr. Subash Chandra Acharya, learned counsel for the
petitioners contended that the petitioners and the complainant
are related to each other and there was civil dispute between the
parties for which a false case has been foisted against the
petitioners. Learned counsel for the petitioners further submitted
that on a plain reading of the complaint petition as well as the

                               4
initial statement of the complainant and the statements collected
during course of inquiry would reveal that there are material
discrepancies in the evidence and since the offences are minor in
nature, minor contradictions also assume much importance and
therefore, the learned S.D.J.M., Jagatsinghpur was quite justified
in dismissing the complaint petition and the learned revisional
Court should not have assessed the evidence meticulously at
that stage and come to a different conclusion particularly when
there was no perversity in the approach of the learned S.D.J.M.,
Jagatsinghpur.
             Section 203 of Cr.P.C. relates to dismissal of the
complaint petition which can be on three grounds, in the first
place, if the Magistrate upon the statements made by the
complainant and his witnesses finds no offence has been
committed, in the second place, if he distrusts the complainant
and his witnesses’ statements and in the third place, if he
conducts an inquiry or directs for an investigation under section
202 Cr.P.C. and considering the result of the inquiry or
investigation coupled with the statements of the complainant
and his witnesses, he is satisfied that there is no sufficient
ground for proceeding against the accused. ‘Sufficient ground’
used in section 203 of Cr.P.C. is not for the purpose of conviction

                                5
but it means whether a prima facie is made out against the
person sought to be summoned. To prevent utilization of the
Court for any oblique purpose, the Court has got ample power to
dismiss the complaint petition at the threshold, if it finds lack of
sufficient ground for proceeding. The discrepancies in the
evidence of the witnesses should not be meticulously judged but
when it is a case of minor offence which arises in the background
of civil dispute, there can be no illegality by doing a little bit of
shifting to come to a conclusion regarding non-availability of
prima facie case.
             After  perusal  of   the  lower   Courts   record,  the
complaint petition, the initial statement of the complainant and
the statements collected during course of inquiry, it appears that
the parties are related to each other and there was civil dispute
between the parties.
             Since after doing a little bit of shifting, the learned
Magistrate came to hold that there is no prima facie case under
the alleged offences, therefore, I am of the view that the learned
S.D.J.M., Jagatsinghpur has not committed any illegality in
dismissing the complaint petition. The revisional Court seems to
have gone beyond the scope of revisional jurisdiction and
assumed the role of a first Appellate Court in weighing and

                                    6
assessing        the      evidence on record   without        judging             the
correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed by the
learned Magistrate. Therefore, the revisional Court’s order
passed by the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur dated
19.11.2005 is not sustainable in the eye of law and the same is
hereby set aside and the order dated 19.04.2005 passed by the
learned S.D.J.M., Jagatsinghpur is restored.
                 Accordingly, CRLMC application is allowed.
                                                       .................................
                                                       S. K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 02nd January, 2018/Sukanta


