           IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                   BLAPL NO. 2002 OF 2015
An application under section 439 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973
                           ---------------------
    Afjal Baig                  …..…                      Petitioner
                              -Versus-
    State of Orissa             ………                       Opp. Party
            For Petitioner:        -      M/s. Arijeet Mishra
                                                S.K.Jena
                                                S. Biswal
                                                R. Mahato
            For Opp. party:        -       Mr. Janmejaya Katikia
                                               Addl. Govt. Advocate
                   BLAPL NO. 2024 OF 2015
    Mirja Afjal @ Afjal Baig
    @ Mallik                    …..…                      Petitioner
                              -Versus-
    State of Orissa             ………                       Opp. Party
            For Petitioner:        -      M/s. Arijeet Mishra
                                                S.K.Jena
                                                S. Biswal
                                                R. Mahato
            For Opp. party:        -       Mr. Janmejaya Katikia
                                               Addl. Govt. Advocate

                                          2
                            BLAPL NO. 3230 OF 2015
             Afzal Baig                 …..…                     Petitioner
                                      -Versus-
             State of Orissa            ………                      Opp. Party
                    For Petitioner:        -      M/s. Arijeet Mishra
                                                       S.K.Jena
                                                       S. Biswal
                                                       R. Mahato
                     For Opp. party:       -       Mr. Janmejaya Katikia
                                                       Addl. Govt. Advocate
                                 --------------------
        P R E S E N T:-
                   THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        …………………………………………………………………………………………………………
        Date of Argument: 07.08.2015             Date of order: 01.09.2015
        …………………………………………………………………………………………………………
S.K.SAHOO, J.      “The question is, are we happy to suppose that
                    our grandchildren may never be able to see
                    an elephant except in a picture book?”
                                                       -David Attenborough
                    Elephants are considered to be nature’s unique
        masterpiece. People of our country worship the elephants as a
        form of Lord Ganesha. It is really bizarre that due to destruction
        of dense tropical forests which are the lungs of our planet and
        suitable habitat of these incredible animals, they are deprived of
        their foods and water resources. Even though the elephant

                                 3
Census Report 2015 of Odisha released on 29.06.2015 indicates
that population of elephants in Odisha increased from 1930
(recorded 2012 Census) to 1954 (recorded in 2015) but still
large scale poaching of elephants in an organised manner mainly
for ivory trade is causing an alarming situation. Such activity is
no less than a violent and brutal crime.
2.           The petitioner Afjal Baig in all these three bail
applications i.e. BLAPL No.2002 of 2015, BLAPL No.2024 of 2015
and BLAPL No.3230 of 2015 has got a number of cases of
elephants poaching in his credit. It appears on record that he is
the real criminal mastermind behind all these crimes who utilises
others for this purpose and indulges himself in illegal trading of
ivory for making huge profit.
 (i)        BLAPL No.2002 of 2015 has been filed in connection
with   CID,  CB,   Odisha,  Cuttack   P.S. Case   No.   20  dated
15.10.2014 registered under sections 429, 379, 120-B read with
section 34 of Indian Penal Code and sections 25 and 27 of Arms
Act, 1959 and section 51 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972
corresponding to G.R. Case No. 2493 of 2014 pending in the
Court of learned S.D.J.M., Sambalpur.

                                 4
            The petitioner’s prayer for grant of bail was turned
down by the learned 1st Addl. Sessions Judge, Sambalpur vide
order dated 03.02.2015 in Bail Application No.64/26 of 2015.
(ii)        BLAPL No.2024 of 2015 has been filed in connection
with CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No. 3 dated 20.2.2014
registered under sections 429, 379, 120-B of Indian Penal Code
and sections 25 and 27 of Arms Act, 1959 and section 51 of the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 corresponding to G.R. Case No.
117 of 2014 pending in the Court of learned S.D.J.M., Kuchinda.
             The petitioner’s prayer for grant of bail was turned
down by the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Kuchinda vide order
dated 03.04.2015 in Bail Application No.45 of 2015.
(iii)       BLAPL No.3230 of 2015 has been filed in connection
with CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No. 4 dated 20.2.2014
registered under sections 429, 379, 120-B of Indian Penal Code
and sections 25 and 27 of Arms Act, 1959 and section 51 of the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 corresponding to G.R. Case No.
118 of 2014 pending in the Court of learned S.D.J.M., Kuchinda.
             The petitioner’s prayer for grant of bail was turned
down by the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Kuchinda vide order
dated 09.06.2015 in Bail Application No.78 of 2015.

                                  5
                    BLAPL No.2002 of 2015
3.           On 15.10.2014 one Santosh Joshi, Divisional Forest
Officer, Sambalpur Forest Division lodged a First Information
Report before the Superintendent of Police, CID, CB, Odisha,
Cuttack stating therein that an information was received on
25.07.2014 by the Range Officer, Padiabahal Forest Range and
Forester, Badasahir Section that a wild male elephant was found
dead in Kendrapat Reserve Forest near Dudkakud village of
Padiabahal Range. On verification, a wild male elephant was
found lying dead below the boundary line of Kendrapat Reserve
Forest on 25.07.2014 and both the tusks were found cut and
removed. The carcass of the elephant was seized and U.D. Case
No. 06 of 2014-15 was registered by Sri Ramesh Chandra Padhi,
Forester of Badasahir Section.
             Autopsy was conducted on the carcass on 26.7.2014
by the Block Veterinary Officer of Jujumara Block. Forensic
experts   of  State   Forensic   Science  Laboratory, Rasulgarh,
Bhubaneswar and R.F.S.L., Sambalpur arrived near the carcass
on   26.7.2014    and  collected   necessary  samples  and  also
furnished spot visit report. The carcass was buried in a dugout
pit observing all departmental procedures.

                                  6
              During inquiry, on the basis of reliable information,
three accused persons namely Jogesh Lugun, Motilal Munda and
Bipin Kishore Barua were apprehended on 30.7.2014. During
interrogation, these three accused persons confessed that they
along with accused persons namely Dhaneswar Hara, Ramesh
Sanara, Kishore Sanara, Peon Hara and Tal entered inside
Kendrapat Reserve Forest on 24.07.2014 for hunting tusker and
stealing the tusks. Jogesh Lugun was carrying a country made
muzzle loading gun with him. When the accused persons traced
two tuskers inside Kendrapat Reserve Forest, Jogesh Lugun
hunted both the tuskers one after another by firing from his gun.
Though the first elephant was killed after two gun shots but the
other elephant ran away with one gunshot wound. The accused
persons then cut and removed the tusks from the carcass of the
first killed elephant on 24.7.2014. On 25.7.2014 the accused
persons located the second elephant lying dead and they also
removed the tusks of that elephant. The accused persons further
confessed that the tusks were cut into seven pieces and after
some days accused Jogesh Lugun sold the tusks to the petitioner
at Keonjhar and received Rs.72,000/- from him. Accused Motilal
Munda had accompanied accused Jogesh Lugun to Keonjhar and

                                7
received Rs.11,000/- from accused Jogesh Lugun towards his
share.
            During course of inquiry, U.D. Case No.06 of 2014-
15 turned to Padiabahal Forest Range OR No.25 of 2014-15
under section 51 of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 and Range
Officer, Padiabahal Forest Range seized cash of Rs.61,000/- and
a country made muzzle loading gun from the house of accused
Jogesh Lugun on 30.7.2014 and also seized cash of Rs.11,000/-
from the house of accused Motilal Munda. One country made
muzzle loading gun was seized from accused Bipin Kishore Barua
on 30.7.2014.
            Accused Jogesh Lugun, Motilal Munda and Bipin
Kishore Barua were forwarded to the Court of learned S.D.J.M.,
Sambalpur in Padiabahal Forest Range OR Case No.25 of 2014-
15 which was registered as 2 (b) C.C. No.10 of 2014 in the said
Court.
            In connection with the killing of the elephant whose
carcass was detected on 01.08.2014, Padiabahal Forest Range
OR Case No.26 of 2014-15 was registered.
             Thus CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No.20
dated 15.10.2014 which refers to Padiabahal Forest Range OR
Case No.25 of 2014-15 was registered against the petitioner and

                                  8
eight other accused persons namely, Jogesh Lugun, Motilal
Munda, Bipin Kishore Barua, Dhaneswar Hara, Ramesh Sanara,
Kishore Sanara, Peon Hara and Tal.
            After completion of investigation, charge sheet was
submitted on 26.02.2015 under sections 429/379/411/120-B/34
of Indian Penal Code read with sections 25/27 of Arms Act and
section 51 of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 against all the nine
persons against whom the FIR was registered keeping the
further investigation open. The petitioner was arrested during
course of investigation on 29.12.2014 and forwarded to Court on
30.12.2014.
             The petitioner moved an application for bail before
the   learned  1st Addl.    Sessions  Judge,  Sambalpur     in Bail
Application No.64/26 of 2015 and vide order dated 3.2.2015, the
learned Court relying upon the confessional statement of accused
Jogesh Lugun, the call detail register of the mobile phone of the
petitioner as well as considering the gravity of the offence and
holding the petitioner to be an inter-State trader of trophies of
wild animals and elephant tusks and also taking note of the fact
that the investigation by the Crime Branch was under progress,
was not inclined to release the petitioner on bail and accordingly
rejected the bail application.

                                  9
                     BLAPL No.2024 of 2015
4.          On 20.2.2014 one Sri N.K.Mahunta, Inspector of
Police, CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack lodged a First Information
Report before the Superintendent of Police, CID, CB, Odisha,
Cuttack stating therein that while inquiring into the incident of
elephant poaching detected on 20.1.2014 inside Add-Kansar,
Reserve Forest Landijharan Nala in Jamankira Forest Range
under Bamara Wildlife Division, he verified the records of W.L.
Jamankira U.D. Case No.7 of 2013-14 dated 20.1.2014 and
during course of enquiry and verification, it came to light that on
20.1.2014 while Sri Ajit Kumar Rout, Forester of Jamankira
Wildlife Beat was patrolling in his beat area at about 7 a.m.
alongwith other forest officials, they found a heap of twigs near
Landijharan Nala and they also detected the carcass of one
tusker and the tusks were found removed. One accused Siman
Toppo was arrested on the very day in connection with the case
and W.L. Jamankira U.D. Case No.7 of 2013-14 turned to O.R.
Case No.203 of 2013-14. It revealed from the statement of
accused Siman Toppo recorded by the forest officials that ten
days prior to his arrest, accused Naru Lakra divulged before him
that he (Naru Lakra), Hina Badhei, Bhagi Oram and Manthu Minz
had killed one elephant inside Add-Kansar Reserve Forest by

                                  10
firing bullets at his legs and injuring the tusker. Then they
followed the injured tusker and fired it by means of local made
gun from close proximity and after death of the tusker, they cut
the forehead portion and removed the valuable tusk for gain.
Accused Naru Lakra further disclosed that the accused persons
purchased local made guns from one Bhika Luhura for Rs.2000/-
to 2500/-.
             Thus CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No. 3 dated
20.02.2014 refers to O.R. Case No.203 of 2013-14 which was
registered against accused persons namely, Naru Lakra, Hina
Badhei, Bhagi Oram, Manthu Minz and Bhika Luhura.
             During course of investigation, as per requisition of
Ranger of W. L. Range, Jamankira, Sambalpur, local V.S. of
Jamankira arrived at the spot and conducted post mortem over
the carcass of the elephant and then the carcass was buried by
the forest staff with the assistance of local police near the spot.
              Initially on 14.4.2014, charge-sheet was submitted
against four accused persons namely, Manthu Minz, Bhagi Oram,
Hina Badhei @ Hemanta Suhula and Bhika @ Bhikari Benia @
Luhura under sections 379/429/120-B of IPC, sections 25/27 of
Arms Act and section 51 of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972
keeping the investigation open under section 173(8) Cr.P.C. On

                                  11
31.12.2014 further charge sheet was submitted against accused
persons namely, Jogesh Lugun, Bipin Kishore Barua, Leha @
Dheeri Hembram under sections 379/429/120-B of IPC, section
25/27 of Arms Act and section 51 of Wild Life (Protection) Act,
1972 keeping the investigation open. On 13.3.2015 further
charge-sheet    was   submitted    against  the   petitioner under
Sections 379/429/411/413/120-B of IPC, sections 25/27 of Arms
Act and section 51 of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 keeping the
investigation open.
            The petitioner was taken on remand in this case on
15.1.2015.
            The petitioner moved an application for bail before
the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Kuchinda in Bail Application
No.45 of 2015 and vide order dated 3.4.2015, the learned Court
held that petitioner was getting his work done by poor labourers
and he is the main accused for committing the offences and if he
is released on bail, he would tamper with the prosecution
evidence brought against him as well as against the other
accused persons through whom he was killing the elephants and
extracting the tusks. The learned Court considering the facts and
circumstances of the case and also the gravity of the offences
rejected the prayer for bail.

                                  12
                        BLAPL No.3230 of 2015
5.           On 20.2.2014 one R.N. Mohanty, Inspector of Police,
CIC, CB, Cuttack lodged a First Information Report before the
Superintendent of Police, CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack stating
therein that while inquiring into the incident of elephant poaching
on 27.1.2014 inside Add-Kansar, Reserve Forest at Kadohar near
Patabandha in Jamankira Forest Range under Bamra Wildlife
Division, he verified the details of W.L. Jamankira U.D. Case
No.08    of   2013-14   dated    27.1.2014    and    other  material
documents available on record and during course of such enquiry
and verification, it came to light that on 27.1.2014 while
Kalileswar Nayak and others were performing patrolling at about
11.00 a.m., they detected carcass of a wild elephant inside Add-
Kansar. On 7.12.2014 accused Siman Toppo was arrested and
W.L. Jamankira U.D. Case No.8 of 2013-14 turned to O.R. Case
No.203 of 2013-14. The said accused stated that ten days prior
to his arrest, accused Naru Lakra divulged before him that he
(Naru Lakra), Hina Badai, Bhagi Oram and Manthu Minj had
killed the elephant inside Add-Kansar Reserve Forest and further
disclosed before him that they tracked a herd of elephants and
separated the tusker from its herd by firing bullets at legs and
injuring the tusker and then they followed the injured tusker and

                                   13
drove it towards Add-Kansar Reserve Forest where they shot the
tusker by means of local made gun from close proximity and
after death, they cut the forehead portion and removed the
valuable tusks for gain. It was further disclosed that the accused
persons purchased local made guns from one Bhika Luhura for
Rs.2000/- to Rs.2500/-.
            Thus CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No.4 dated
20.02.2014 refers to O.R. Case No.203 of 2013-14 which was
registered against accused Naru Lakra, Hina Badhei, Bhagi
Oram, Manthu Minz and Bhika Luhura.
             Initially on 11.4.2014, charge-sheet was submitted
against four accused persons namely, Manthu Minz, Bhagi Oram,
Hina Badai @ Hemanta Suhula and Bhika @ Bhikari Benia @
Luhura under sections 379/429/120-B of IPC, sections 25/27 of
Arms Act and section 51 of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972
keeping the investigation open under section 173(8) Cr.P.C. On
24.10.2014 further charge sheet was further submitted against
Jogesh    Lugun,    Bipin  Kishore   Barua  under   sections  120-
B/379/429/34 of IPC, sections 25/27 of Arms Act and section 51
of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 keeping the investigation
open. On 29.12.2014 charge sheet was submitted against Lelha
@ Dheeri Hembram under Section 120-B/379/429/34 of IPC,

                                  14
sections 25/27 of Arms Act and section 51 of Wild Life
(Protection) Act, 1972 keeping the investigation open. On
13.7.2015 further charge sheet was submitted against the
petitioner under Sections 379/429/120-B of IPC, sections 25/27
of Arms Act and section 51 of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972
keeping the investigation open.
            The petitioner was taken on remand in this case on
16.5.2015.
            The petitioner moved an application for bail before
the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Kuchinda in Bail Application
No.78 of 2015 and vide order dated 9.6.2015, the learned Court
held that the petitioner was involved in number of cases for the
offence under Section 51 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act by
cutting the tusks of the tuskers after death and he is also the
mastermind and involved along with other accused persons. The
learned Court further held that there is prima facie case made
out against the petitioner and submission of charge sheet is not
a ground to release him on bail and accordingly rejected the
prayer for bail.
6.          Since the facts of the three bail applications are
identical and the petitioner is the accused in all the three cases
and the allegations against the petitioner are also similar in

                                  15
nature, with the consent of the parties, all the three bail
applications were heard analogously and the same are disposed
of by this common order.
 7.          The learned counsel for the petitioner Mr. Arijeet
Mishra contended that the petitioner was first arrested in
connection with CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No.20 of
2014 on 29.12.2014 and forwarded to the Court on the next day
and thereafter he was taken on remand in the other two cases
i.e., CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No. 3 dated 20.02.2014
and CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No.4 dated 20.02.2014
on 15.1.2015 and 16.5.2015 respectively. The learned counsel
for the petitioner further submitted that the petitioner was also
taken on remand in CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No. 5 of
2014 with almost similar allegations and he has been released on
bail in the said case by this Court in BLAPL No. 1776 of 2015.
Similarly after his arrest, the petitioner was taken on remand in
CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No.21 of 2014 in which he
has been released on bail by the learned Sessions Judge,
Sambalpur on 02.06.2015. Mr. Mishra further contended that co-
accused Jogesh Lugun who alleged to have killed the elephants
as well as accused persons Motilal Munda and Bipin Kishore
Barua have already been released on bail. He further contended

                                 16
that no tusk has been recovered from the possession of the
petitioner and therefore the confessional statement of co-
accused Jogesh logun is not corroborated by any other evidence.
He further contended that when the co-accused persons against
whom more serious allegations like killing of the elephants and
removing their tusks are there, have been released on bail and
the petitioner has been released on bail in two similar cases in
which he was taken on remand after his arrest, keeping in view
the nature of materials available on record against the petitioner,
he should also be released on bail on the ground of parity and
equity.
             The learned counsel for the State Mr. Janmejaya
Katikia, Addl. Govt. Advocate on the other hand submitted that
the petitioner is the mastermind and kingpin behind killing of
number of elephants and the co-accused persons were just
acting under his instruction. He further submitted that after
submission of charge sheet in all these three cases, the further
investigation under section 173 (8) Cr.P.C. was kept open for
recovering the stolen tusks and also for collecting further
evidence against the culprits. The learned counsel further
submitted that in CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No.5 of
2014, charge sheet has been submitted against the petitioner

                                 17
and Jogesh Lugun. He also submitted that Barkote Range OR
Case No.261 of 2010-11, prosecution report has been submitted
against the petitioner and five others which is pending in the
Court of learned S.D.J.M., Deogarh. Learned counsel further
submitted that in CID, CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No.21 of
2014 which has been registered against the petitioner, the
investigation is under progress. The learned counsel further
submitted that confessional statement of a co-accused before a
forest official can be taken into consideration in a case of this
nature. He further submitted that when number of male
elephants have been killed and there are prima facie materials
against the petitioner to have played pivotal role in the killing of
such elephants and illegal trading of tusks and the investigation
is under progress and trading link is yet to be established, it
would not be proper to release the petitioner on bail at this stage
which would otherwise hamper the progress of investigation.
8.            On perusal of the charge sheet submitted in CID,
CB, Odisha, Cuttack P.S. Case No.20 of 2014, it reveals that the
petitioner was taken into custody on 29.12.2014 mainly basing
on the confessional statements of the co-accused persons. It
further appears that the petitioner and the other co-accused
persons hatched out criminal conspiracy to hunt tuskers and

                                    18
steal the tusks for gain and accordingly the co-accused persons
entered inside Kendrapat Reserve Forest on 24.7.2014 and
committed the offence by killing two elephants. It further reveals
that one Scorpio Vehicle which was used in the crime, two motor
cycles and one cell phone were seized from the possession of the
petitioner. The call records of the mobile phone used by the
petitioner indicates that he had made frequent calls to the
mobile phones of co-accused Jogesh Lugun and Bipin Kishore
Barua prior to and after the occurrence which prove the
conspiracy between the accused persons to commit the crime.
The charge sheet further reveals that further investigation has
been commenced to collect further evidence against the culprits.
9.           The learned counsel for the State produced the
confessional statement of the co-accused persons namely Jogesh
Lugun as well as Bipin Kishore Barua so also the call details of
the mobile phones of the petitioner as well as co-accused
persons namely Jogesh Lugun and Bipin Kumar Barua during the
relevant period. He also placed the account statements of the
petitioner to substantiate that the petitioner has earned heavy
profit due to illegal trading activity.
            To counter the argument, the learned counsel for the
petitioner Mr. Mishra contended that the confessional statement

                                  19
of co-accused persons has got no evidentiary value and therefore
cannot be acted upon. He placed reliance in the case of Rama
Chandra -v- State of Uttar Pradesh reported in AIR 1957
SC 381 wherein it is held that under section 30 of Evidence Act,
confession of a co-accused can be taken into consideration but it
is not in itself substantive evidence. However the Hon’ble Court
further   observed    that  even   excluding the  confession   as
substantive evidence, there is enough material against appellant
Ram Bharosey to find him guilty of the offence for criminal
conspiracy to commit the offences of kidnapping and extortion
along with appellant Ramachandra. The learned counsel further
placed reliance in case of Haricharan Kurmi –v- State of
Bihar reported in AIR 1964 SC 1184 wherein it is held that
section 30 of the Evidence Act provides that a confession may be
taken into consideration not only against its maker, but also
against a co-accused person. It is further held that a confession
cannot be treated as evidence which is substantive evidence
against a co-accused person and in dealing with a case against
an accused person, the Court cannot start with the confession of
co-accused person and it must begin with other evidence
adduced by the prosecution and after it has formed its opinion
with regard to guilt and effect of the said evidence, then it is

                                20
permissible to turn to the confession in order to receive
assurance to the conclusion of guilt which the judicial mind is
about to reach on the said other evidence.
              The learned counsel further placed reliance in case
of Haroom Haji Abdulla –v- State of Maharashtra reported
in AIR 1968 SC 832 wherein it is held that once the confession
is proved satisfactorily, any admission made therein must be
satisfactorily withdrawn or the making of it explained as having
proceeded from fear, duress, promise or the like from someone
in authority. A retracted confession is a weak link against the
maker and more so against a co-accused.
10.          The confessional statements of co-accused Jogesh
Lugun and Bipin Kishore Barua were recorded separately by
Managobinda Dalei, Assistant Conservator of Forest, Sambalpur
Forest Division during investigation of Padiabahal Forest Range
O.R. Case No. 25 & 26 of 2014-15 on 11.08.2014 and
12.08.2014 respectively in presence of other forest officials. Co-
accused Jogesh Lugun has put his LTI and co-accused Bipin
Kishore   Barua    has  put his  signature   on their  respective
confessional statements.
              Now the questions have cropped up whether these
confessional statements have got any evidentiary value and

                                 21
whether they can be taken into consideration at the bail stage
against the petitioner.
            Section 25 of Evidence Act, 1872 states that no
confession made to a police officer shall be proved as against a
person accused of any offence. Inadmissibility of a confessional
statement made to a police officer under section 25 of the
Evidence Act is based on the ground of public policy. In order to
avoid the danger of admitting false confessional statements
obtained by coercion, torture or ill-treatment, such a provision
has been made declaring confessions made to a police officer
inadmissible. The officer in charge of a police station and the
police officers have been empowered under Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, inter alia, not only to investigate the cognizable
cases but also the non-cognizable cases with the order of the
Magistrate. The officer in charge of a police station is also
empowered to submit the police report on completion of
investigation to the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of
the offence on such report.
             Section 50 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972
empowers any Forest Officer or any Police Officer not below the
rank of a sub-inspector, power of entry, search, arrest and
detention in order to prevent and detect the offences. Section 50

                                22
(8) of the said Act empowers any officer not below the rank of an
Asst. Director of Wild Life Preservation or an officer not below
the rank of Assistant Conservator of Forests authorized by the
State Government. in that behalf to issue search warrant, to
enforce the attendance of witnesses, to compel the discovery
and production of documents and material objects and to receive
and record evidence for the purpose of making investigation into
any offence against any provision of the Act. The evidence
recorded under clause (d) of sub-section (8) shall be admissible
in any subsequent trial before a Magistrate provided that it has
been taken in the presence of the accused person.
            There is nothing in the Wild Life (Protection) Act,
1972 conferring all the powers of an officer in charge on
Assistant Conservator of Forest much less any provision that
such officer shall be deemed to be an officer in charge of a police
station even though some of the police powers have been
conferred on him to be exercised in specified context. Powers are
conferred mainly for prevention and detection of offences.
Considering the nature of the power he exercises or the
character of the function he performs, these powers and
functions would not make an Assistant Conservator of Forest a

                                  23
‘police officer’ within the meaning of Section 25 of the Evidence
Act.
              In case of Badku Joti Savant –v- State of Mysore
reported in AIR 1966 SC 1746, it is held as follows:-
             “11. In any case unlike the provisions of
             section 78(3) of the Bihar and Orissa Excise
             Act, 1915, section 21(2) of the Act does not
             say that the Central Excise Officer shall be
             deemed to be an officer-in-charge of a police
             station and the area under his charge shall be
             deemed to be a police station. All that section
             21 does is to give him certain powers to aid
             him in his enquiry. In these circumstances, we
             are of the opinion that even though the
             Central Excise Officer may have when making
             enquiries for purposes of the Act powers which
             an officer-in-charge of a police station has
             when investigating a cognizable offence, he
             does not thereby become a police officer even
             if we give the broader meaning to these words
             in     section    25     of     the   Evidence
             Act………………………In this view of the matter,
             the statement made by the appellant to the
             Deputy Superintendent of Customs and Excise
             would not be hit by section 25 of the Evidence
             Act and would be admissible in evidence
             unless the appellant can take advantage of
             section 24 of the Evidence Act.”
             A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in case of
Ramesh Chandra Mehta –v- State of West Bengal reported
in AIR 1970 SC 940 held that Customs Officer is not a Police

                                  24
Officer for the purpose of Section 25 of the Evidence Act. Their
Lordships have stated thus:
             “5……….The      Customs     Officer   does    not
             exercise, when enquiring into a suspected
             infringement of the Sea Customs Act, powers
             of investigation which a police-officer may in
             investigating the commission of an offence.
             He is invested with the power to enquire into
             infringements of the Act primarily for the
             purpose of adjudicating forfeiture and penalty.
             He has no power to investigate an offence
             triable by a Magistrate, nor has he the power
             to submit a report under Section 173 of the
             Code of Criminal Procedure. He can only make
             a complaint in writing before a competent
             Magistrate.
             xx                     xx                     xx
             24. In certain matters, the Customs Act of
             1962 differs from the Sea Customs Act of
             1878. For instance, under the Sea Customs
             Act, search of any place could not be made by
             a Customs Officer on his own accord; he had
             to apply for and obtain a search warrant from
             a Magistrate. Under Section 105 of the
             Customs Act, 1962, it is open to the Assistant
             Collector of Customs himself to issue a search
             warrant. A proper officer is also entitled under
             that Act to stop and search conveyances; he is
             entitled to release a person on bail, and for
             that purpose has the same powers and is
             subject to the same provisions as the officer-
             in-charge of a police station is. But these
             additional powers with which the Customs
             Officer is invested under the Act of 1962 do
             not, in our judgment, make him a police

                               25
         officer within the meaning of Section 25 of the
         Evidence Act. He is, it is true, invested with
         the powers of an officer-in-charge of a police
         station for the purpose of releasing any
         person on bail or otherwise. The expression
         "or otherwise" does not confer upon him the
         power to lodge a report before a Magistrate
         under Section 173 of the Code of Criminal
         Procedure. Power to grant bail, power to
         collect evidence, and power to search
         premises or conveyances without recourse to
         a Magistrate, do not make him an officer-in-
         charge of a police station, Proceedings taken
         by him are for the purpose of holding an
         enquiry into suspected cases of smuggling.
         His orders are appealable and are subject also
         to the revisional jurisdiction of the Central
         Board of Revenue and may be carried to the
         Central Government. Powers are conferred
         upon him primarily for collection of duty and
         prevention of smuggling. He is for all purposes
         an officer of the revenue.
         25. For reasons set out in the judgment in
         Criminal Appeal No. 27 of 1967 and the
         judgment of this Court in Badku Joti Savant's
         case, AIR 1968 SC 1746, we are of the view
         that a Customs Officer is under the Act of
         1962 not a police officer within the meaning of
         Section 25 of the Evidence Act and the
         statements made before him by a person who
         is arrested or against whom an inquiry is
         made are not covered by Section 25 of the
         Indian Evidence Act.”
         The Madras High Court in case of E. C. Richard  -v-
Forest Range Officer reported in AIR 1958 Mad 31

                                   26
considered whether a Forest Range Officer under the Madras
Forest Act is a Police Officer for the purpose of Section 25 of the
Evidence Act. It was held that the Forest Officer is on a par with
the Customs Officer and hence what applies to the Customs
Officer applies to the Forest Officers also. It has been observed
by Somasundaram, J. in the said decision that "in the absence of
a specific provision in the Madras Forest Act conferring on the
Forest Officer all the powers of an Officer-in-Charge of a Police
Station, he cannot be called a 'Police Officer' and a statement
made to him will not be hit by Section 25 of the Evidence Act".
Neither the Kerala Forest Act nor the Wild Life Protection Act
conferred all the powers of Police Officers on the Forest Officers
or wild life protection force even though some of the powers
have been conferred on them to be exercised in specified
contexts. It is therefore clear that the embargo contained in
Section 25 of the Evidence Act cannot be applied to the
statements made to a Forest Officer or Range Officer etc.
             In case of Forest Range Officer -v- Aboobacker &
another reported in 1989 Criminal Law Journal 2038,
Hon'ble Justice K.T. Thomas, J. held as follows:-
            ”7. The most important item of evidence in
            this case is the confessional statement made
            by the respondents. The admissibility of the
            confession made to the Forest Range Officer is

                                   27
             not open to doubt since the embargo
             contained in Sec. 25 of the Evidence Act is not
             applicable to it. Forest officers, though they
             are invested with some of the police powers,
             are not police officers. Hence they can give
             evidence before Court regarding admissions or
             confessions made to them by accused
             persons, whether or not such persons were
             then in custody. If the Court considers such
             confession to be reliable, there is no legal bar
             in acting on such confession”.
             In case of Dr. Emerico D'Souza -Vs.- State
reported in 1995 (1) Bombay Case Reporter 266, it is held
as follows:-
             “13. The Range Forest Officer has clearly
             stated that these were the statements made
             by the respective accused persons, including
             the petitioner and hence there was prima facie
             offence established against the petitioner. It
             must also be observed that the statements
             made by the accused are not confessions
             under section 25 of the Evidence Act. The
             same can be read as the statements against
             the co-accused. It is only the confession under
             section 25 of the Indian Evidence Act which
             cannot be read against the co-accused but
             such is not the situation in this case because
             the statements before the Range Forest
             Officer are not the statements recorded under
             section 25 of the Indian Evidence Act as the
             Range Forest Officer is not a police officer. In
             that light of the matter, it will have to be
             stated that this application has to be
             dismissed.”

                                   28
             In case of Sardarkhan -Vs.- Range Forest Officer
reported in 2006 (1) Maharashtra Law Journal 606, a
Division Bench of Bombay High Court has held as follows:-
            “11. The contention that statements recorded
            before the Forest Officer would not become
            admissible ipso facto, is fallacious. First, it
            must be seen that the Authorised Officer,
            considering confiscation of a vehicle, is
            conducting a quasi-judicial enquiry and does
            not require evidence in the strict sense to be
            tendered before him. Secondly, just as
            Authorised Officer is not a Criminal Court, the
            Forest Officer tendering material in support of
            prayer for confiscation is not a Police Officer.
            The    learned     special    counsel   for  the
            respondents drew our attention to the decision
            of this Court in Dr. Emerico D'Souza v. State
            through The Deputy Conservator of Forest,
            reported in 1995 Forest Law Times 72. It was
            observed therein that a statement to a Forest
            Officer is not hit by Section 25 of the Evidence
            Act and can be read in evidence, as Forest
            Officer is not a Police Officer.
            12. A quasi-judicial authority would be
            prevented from considering any material only
            if it is shown that consideration of such
            material is barred by any specific provision of
            law. Statements recorded by the Forest
            Officer do not fall in the category of
            "confession", since a confession could be
            made only by a person, who is accused of an
            offence confessing to his crime. Statements of
            some of the persons considered by the
            Authorised Officer in this case would be at the

                                      29
             best akin to admissions or former statements
             of witnesses, which would suggest an
             inference as to a fact in issue or relevant fact,
             namely, use of the tractor and trolley in
             commission of a forest offence. Therefore,
             there was no impropriety on the part of the
             Authorised       Officer    in    considering    the
             statements recorded by the Range Forest
             Officer.”
              In an unreported decision of Bombay High Court in
case of State -v- Francis Masrenhas passed in Criminal
Revision Application No. 1 of 2015 decided on 22.06.2015,
it is held as follows:-
             “9……….It is not in dispute that the
             confessional statement in question has been
             recorded by a Deputy Range Forest Officer,
             who was the Investigating Officer in the case.
             It    is   also    not     disputed    that    under
             Section 50(8) of the Act of 1972, the
             confessional statement can only be recorded
             by an Officer not below the rank of Assistant
             Director of Wild Life Preservation or an Officer
             not below the rank of Assistant Conservator of
             Forest, authorised by the State government in
             this behalf. The question is, whether in the
             face of such provision, the State can fall back
             upon Section 25 of the Evidence Act, in order
             to contend that in as much as the Forest
             Officers     are    not     Police   Officers,   the
             confessional statement would be admissible.
             xx                        xx                      xx
             12. In Motilal v. Central Bureau of
             Investigation reported in (2002) 4 SCC 713,

                      30
the question before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court was whether the offences punishable
under the Act of 1972 can be investigated by
the C.B.I. on being empowered by the Central
Government. It was held that although
Section 50 of the Act of 1972 does not
exclude Police Officers from investigating the
offence under the Act, the special procedure
provided under the Act is contrary to the
provisions contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure and as such, the same would
prevail in view of Section 4(2) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. However, that would not
exclude the rest of the provisions of the Act of
1972.
13. It can, thus, be seen that to the extent
the Act of 1972 makes provision for a
particular aspect as a special Statute, the
same would override and prevail over the
general provisions. It is trite that what cannot
be achieved directly, cannot be allowed to be
achieved indirectly. In the present case, there
is a specific procedure laid down in the Act of
1972 for recording of evidence/confession by
an Officer not below the rank of Assistant
Director of Wild Life Preservation or an Officer
not below the rank of Assistant Conservator of
Forest, authorised by the State government in
this behalf. Thus, the said provision cannot be
allowed to be circumvented on the ground
that the Forest Officers not being Police
Officers could record the confession, as it
would not be hit by Section 25 of the Evidence
Act. Such a confession, if not hit by
Section 25 of the      Evidence Act, would
certainly be against the letter and spirit of
Section 50 (8) of the Act of 1972, which is a
special enactment and which would prevail in
the matter. In such circumstances, I do not

                                   31
             find any reason to interfere with the impugned
             judgment passed by the learned Sessions
             Judge.”
              In case of State of Maharashtra -V- Suraj Pal
reported in 2015 (1) Bombay Case Reporter (Cri) 576, it is
held as follows:-
             “14. So far as concerned the aspect of
             existence of reasonable grounds for believing
             that the accusations made against the non-
             applicant are true, as held in the case of
             Prahlad Singh Bhati vs. NCT Delhi and
             another, (2001) 4 SCC 280, I must say that
             perusal of the confessional statements of the
             applicant and his co-accused reveal that there
             is sufficient material to prima facie find that
             the allegations made against the non-
             applicant apparently constitute an offence
             punishable under Section 51 read with other
             relevant sections, such as Sections 9, 39,
             44, 49-B and 52 of the Wild Life (Protection)
             Act, 1972. Confessional statements, in
             particular, of the co-accused Sarju and the
             non-applicant himself are sufficient to indicate
             that, prima facie the offence alleged against
             the applicant is made out. They prima facie
             show that the non-applicant was not only in
             constant touch with the other co-accused
             involved in connection with wild life offences,
             but the non-applicant also gave his active
             support by making available funds and also
             ensuring that the efforts of hunters do not go
             waste in the sense that hunters were
             sufficiently rewarded by purchasing the skins,
             bones and claws of tigers. Now, it is well
             settled law that the confessional statements

                     32
made by the accused in forest or wild life
offences are not hit by Section 25 of the
Evidence Act as a forest officer is not a Police
Officer within the meaning of Section 25. This
view taken by the learned Single Judge of this
Court as early as the year 1994 in the case of
Emerico D'Souza vs. State, through the
Deputy Conservator of Forests, reported in
1995 Forest Law Times 72 has been reiterated
with approval by the Division Bench of this
Court in the year 2005 in the case of
Sardarkhan s/o. Khalilkhan Pathan vs. Range
Forest Officer, Yavatmal and others, reported
in 2006(1) Mh.L.J. 606.
15. Of course, learned counsel for the non-
applicant would question consideration of the
confessional statements of the other co-
accused on the ground that in criminal law
confessional statements of the co-accused are
irrelevant for reaching any conclusion about
involvement of the other accused persons in
the crime alleged against them. This may be
true in case of other offences wherein
confessional statements are made by the co-
accused before a Police Officer investigating
the case. But, once it is found by following a
consistent view that the Range Forest Officer
is not a Police Officer, a confession made
before the Range Forest Officer would not be a
confession under Section 25 of the Evidence
Act and would at best be akin to an admission
or former statement of a witness suggesting
an inference as to a fact in issue or relevant
fact and, therefore, it can be read as a
statement against the co-accused, as long as
it discloses a relevant fact. Thus, even the
confessional statements of the co-accused in a
crime like the present can be considered and,

                                   33
             therefore, I find no substance in the said
             argument of learned counsel for the non-
             applicant.”
              A confession of a person accused of any offence
recorded by a police officer or in the custody of the police officer
is inadmissible under Section 25 or 26 of the Evidence Act unless
it is made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate. For the
purpose of Section 27 of the Evidence Act, a part of statement
recorded by the police officer, whether it amounts to confession
or not, leading to the discovery of the fact becomes admissible in
evidence. The statement of any person recorded by a police
officer if it leads to the cause of the death of that person
becomes admissible in evidence as dying declaration under
Section 32 (1) of the Evidence Act. A bar is created for a police
officer from recording of the confessional statement rendering it
inadmissible in evidence but for any other officer, such as the
Customs Officers, Railway Officers or Forest Officers, there is no
such bar. Thus there is absolutely no bar created by law
regarding    the  admissibility  of   the  confessional  statements
recorded    by   the   Forest   Officials, during   the  course   of
investigation in a forest offence. Of course, the validity of such a
statement recorded by the forest officer is open for being tested
by the defence regarding the coming into being of the statement,

                                   34
its veracity, validity and applicability of the same to the facts and
circumstances encircling the whole case.
             In view of the ratio of the abovementioned decisions
and looking at the provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act,
1972, I am the view that Assistant Conservator of Forests who
has recorded the confessional statements of co-accused Jogesh
Lugun and Bipin Kishore Barua is not conferred with all the
powers of an officer in charge of a police station and as such he
cannot by any means be considered to be police officer and
Section 25 of the Evidence Act cannot apply to him. There is
absence of any materials at present that such confessional
statements were made due to coercion, torture or ill-treatment.
The confessional statements have been recorded in presence of
other forest officials and co-accused Jogesh Lugun and Bipin
Kishore Barua have put their LTI and signature respectively on
such statements. Accordingly, I am of the view that the
confessional statements made by those two co-accused persons
before the Assistant Conservator of Forests are admissible in
evidence and no doubt can be entertained pertaining to the
admissibility of such confessional statements at this stage and as
such there is no legal bar in acting on such confession. The merit
of such evidence can be adjudicated at the stage of trial and the

                                    35
petitioner is at liberty to take resort to section 24 of the Evidence
Act at that stage to contend that those statements are not
voluntary.
             The decisions cited by the learned counsel for the
petitioner are no way relevant to the points raised in this case.
 11.         Adverting as to whether the confessional statements
of the co-accused persons can be taken into consideration at the
stage of bail against the petitioner, the point is no more res
integra.
             In the case of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar –v-Rajesh
Ranjan @ Pappu Yadev reported in (2004) 7 Supreme
Court Cases 528, it is held as follows:-
             “19. The next argument of the learned
             counsel for the respondent is that prima facie
             the prosecution has failed to produce any
             material to implicate the respondent in the
             crime of conspiracy……..The only other
             evidence available to the prosecution to
             connect the respondent with the crime is an
             alleged confession of the co-accused which
             according to the learned counsel was
             inadmissible in evidence…….Be that as it may,
             we think that this argument is too pre-mature
             for us to accept. The admissibility or
             otherwise of the confessional statement and
             effect of the evidence already adduced by the
             prosecution and the merit of the evidence
             that may be adduced hereinafter including
             that of the witnesses sought to be recalled are

                                 36
           all matters to be considered at the stage of
           the trial”.
           In case of State of U.P. –v- Amarmani Tripathi
reported in (2005) 8 Supreme Court Cases 21, it is held as
follows:-
           “22. The contentions of the respondents that
           the     confessional    statement     of   Rohit
           Chaturvedi is inadmissible in evidence and
           that    that    should    be    excluded   from
           consideration, for the purpose of bail is
           untenable.”
           In case of Muraleedharan –v- State of Kerala
reported in AIR 2001 SC 1699, it is held as follows:-
           “4.    According to the Sessions Judge “no
           material     could   be    collected    by   the
           investigating agency to connect the petitioner
           with the crime except the confessional
           statement of the co-accused.” He also
           observed that “I do not think any prejudice
           will be caused to the prosecution in the event
           of granting him anticipatory bail especially
           when the petitioner has not so far been
           arrayed as an accused in the case.”
           xx                     xx                      xx
           7…. We express our reprobation at the
           supercilious manner in which the Sessions
           Judge decided to think that “no material could
           be collected by the investigating agency to
           connect the petitioner with the crime except
           the confessional statement of the co-accused.
           Such a wayward thinking emanating from a

                                 37
            Sessions       Judge      deserves      judicial
            condemnation. No Court can afford to presume
            that the investigating agency would fail to
            trace out more materials to prove the
            accusation against the accused. We are at a
            loss to understand what would have prompted
            the Sessions Judge to conclude, at this early
            stage, that the investigating agency would not
            be able to collect any material to connect the
            appellant with the crime. The order of the
            Sessions Judge, blessing the appellant with a
            pre-arrest bail order, would have remained as
            a bugbear of how the discretion conferred on
            Sessions Judges under section 438 of the
            Cr.P.C would have been misused.”
            In view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court, it cannot be said that the confessional statements of the
co-accused persons cannot be looked into at all by the Court
while adjudicating the bail matter.
12.         Law is well settled that while passing orders on bail
applications, detailed examination of the evidence and elaborate
documentation of the merits of the case should be avoided and
no party should have the impression that his case has been
prejudged. To be satisfied about a prima facie case is not the
same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order
itself. When the application is made at the investigation stage,
what are the considerations that should weigh with the Court are
in quite contrast with the stage when matters are more stable,

                                   38
as in the case where the charge sheet is already filed or in a case
where the trial is already in progress and those considerations
that are brought to bear at a later stage should not at any rate
be brought into focus on material which is gathered during
investigation while it is in progress. The power to grant bail
should not be exercised as if the punishment before trial was
being imposed and even where prima facie case is established,
the approach of the Court in the matter of bail should not be that
the accused should be detained by way of punishment.
13.         In case of Indian Handicrafts Emporium –v-
Union of India reported in AIR 2003 SC 3240, it is held as
follows:-
            “53. We cannot shut out eyes to the
            statements made in Article 48A of the
            Constitution of India which enjoins upon the
            State to protect and improve the environment
            and to safeguard the forests and wild life of
            the     country.   What     is   destructive   of
            environment, forest and wild life, thus, being
            contrary to the Directive Principles of the
            State Policy which is fundamental in the
            governance of the country must be given its
            full effect. Similarly, the principles of Chapter
            IVA must also be given its full effect. Clause
            (g) of Article 51A requires every citizen to
            protect and improve the natural environment
            including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life
            and to have compassion for living creatures.
            The amendments have to be carried out

                                  39
            keeping     in   view    the    abovementioned
            provisions.
            xx                    xx                     xx
            111. A trader in terms of a statute is
            prohibited from carrying on trade. He also
            cannot remain in control over the animal
            article. The logical consequence where for
            would be that he must be deprived of the
            possession thereof. The possession of the
            animal article including imported ivory must,
            therefore, be handed over to the competent
            authority. In a case of this nature where a
            statute has been enacted in public interest,
            restriction in the manner of possession of the
            property must be held to be implicit. If section
            49 (7) is not so construed, it cannot be given
            effect to.”
14.         Considering the materials available on record, taking
note of the statement of objects and reasons of Wild Life
(Protection) Act, 1972, the confessional statements of co-
accused Jogesh Lugun and Bipin Kishore Barua, the call detail
records of the petitioner and the co-accused Jogesh Lugun and
Bipin Kishore Barua indicating frequent calls among them prior to
and after the occurrence, the availability of prima facie materials
regarding criminal conspiracy between the accused persons for
poaching the male elephants and illegal trading of tusks, the
statement    of  accounts    of the   petitioner  attached   during
investigation showing huge transaction of money, the criminal

                                    40
antecedents of the petitioner particularly his involvement in
similar types of cases, when the further investigation is under
progress and stolen tusks are yet to be recovered and trading
link is yet to be established, without delving into a detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the
merits of the case, in the larger interests of the society and
State, I am not inclined to release the petitioner on bail at this
stage.
               Accordingly, all the three bail applications filed by
the petitioner stand rejected.
                                                    …………………………
                                                      S.K. Sahoo,J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 1st September,2015/Sisir


