                         IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                                        CRLA No. 55 Of 2012
        From the judgment and order dated 28.12.2011 passed by the
        Addl. Sessions Judge, Rairangpur in S.T Case No. 06 of 2011.
                                           ----------------------------
               Jagannath Behera @
               Janguru                                 ………                                Appellant
                                                    -Versus-
               State of Orissa                         ………                               Respondent
                      For Appellant:                      -          Mr. Bijaya Kumar Behera
                      For State:                          -          Mr. Chitta Ranjan Swain
                                                                     Addl. Standing Counsel
                                            ----------------------------
        P R E S E N T:
                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Date of Hearing & Judgment: 07.09.2017
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J.           A child rape is the most terrifying ordeal and nastiest
        intensifying traumatic episode that take place in the victim’s life
        which causes such a deep physical and psychological wound and
        despair that it requires a brave and courageous effort on the part
        of the victim to overcome it and fight for justice. Sometimes the
        victim receives family support following disclosure and thereby
        having less traumatic symptoms and sometimes she is blamed

                                  2
by her family members and they even hesitate to proceed
against the abuser for the sake of family prestige and social
stigma. Without lack of psychological support from family, the
victim suffers from long term anxiety, anger, depression,
suicidality, self-mutilation, sexual problems, substance abuse,
impairment of self-concept, interpersonal problems, obsessions
and compulsions, dissociation, post-traumatic stress responses,
and somatisation as well as re-victimisation.
             The appellant Jagannath Behera @ Janguru faced
trial in the Court of learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Rairangpur,
Mayurbhanj in S.T. Case No. 06 of 2011 for offence punishable
under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code on the accusation of
committing rape on the victim who was a school going twelve
years old girl on 24.04.2010 at about 1.00 p.m. at Lodam
Dunguri in village Golmunda.
             The learned Trial Court found the appellant guilty of
the offence charged and sentenced him to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for a period of ten years and to pay a fine of
Rs.5,000/- (rupees five thousand), in default, to undergo further
rigorous imprisonment for a period of six months.
2.           The prosecution case, as per the first information
report lodged by the victim on 03.11.2010 before the officer in

                                 3
charge, Rairangpur Rural police station is that she was aged
about twelve years and a student of Class VII in Banakati Nodal
U.P. School. The appellant used to pass indecent remarks against
her and was compelling her to keep physical relationship with
him. It is further stated in the F.I.R. that on 24th April 2000 at
about 1.00 p.m. while the victim was returning home, the
appellant caught hold of her hands and forcibly took her to
Lodam Dunguri and committed rape on her. When the victim
cried, the appellant threatened her to assault and asked her to
keep mum and assured her to marry. The victim out of shame
did not disclose about the incident before anybody. It is further
stated that thereafter the appellant used to meet the victim on
the way and giving false assurance of marriage, he went on
keeping physical relationship with the victim against her will for
about seven months as a result of which the victim became
pregnant for about six months. It is further stated in the first
information report that on the eve of Laxmi Puja day, the
appellant gifted a mobile phone to the victim and told her to get
ready to abort her pregnancy when information would be given
to her. The father of the victim came to know about the same
and when he confronted the victim, the victim disclosed before
him regarding the entire incident. Meetings were organized on

                                  4
three occasions for settlement on the request of the father of the
victim in which the appellant not only confessed to have raped
the victim and made her pregnant but also assured to marry the
victim on the next year after termination of the pregnancy of the
victim. Since the matter could not be settled at the village level,
the victim lodged the first information report.
             On the basis of such F.I.R. (Ext.1), Rairangpur Rural
P.S. Case No.48 of 2010 was registered on 03.11.2010 under
section 376 of the Indian Penal Code. P.W.14 Manoranjan Samal
who was the officer in charge of Rairangpur police station took
up investigation of the case. During course of investigation, he
examined the victim and other witnesses. He also seized a report
of the villagers under seizure list (Ext.4). He visited the spot and
prepared the spot map (Ext.9). He sent the victim for medical
examination to S.D. Hospital, Rairangpur where P.W.10 Dr. Smt.
Basanti Hansdah examined her and submitted her report (Ext.5).
The I.O. arrested the appellant and sent him for medical
examination to S.D. Hospital, Rairangpur where P.W.13 Dr.
Pradip Kumar Mohapatra examined him and he opined that the
appellant    was   physically   capable    of   committing    sexual
intercourse and accordingly submitted his report (Ext.8). P.W.14
seized one LG mobile phone of the appellant which was produced

                                   5
by the father of the victim under seizure list (Ext.3). He also
seized two vials containing vaginal swab and pubic hair of the
victim produced by the constable under seizure list (Ext.6) and
another vial containing pubic hair of the appellant under seizure
list (Ext.7). He received the medical examination reports of the
victim as well as appellant and after completion of investigation,
he submitted charge sheet on 06.01.2011 under section 376 of
the Indian Penal Code.
3.           After submission of charge sheet, the case was
committed to the Court of Session for trial after observing due
committal procedure where the learned Trial Court charged the
appellant under section 376 of the Indian Penal on 23.04.2011
and since the appellant refuted the charge, pleaded not guilty
and claimed to be tried, the sessions trial procedure was resorted
to prosecute him and establish his guilt.
4.            The defence plea of the appellant is one of denial and
it is further pleaded that there was previous enmity between the
family of the victim and his family for which the case has been
foisted.
5.            In order to prove its case, the prosecution examined
fifteen witnesses.

                                  6
            P.W.1 Khetramohan Behera is the paternal uncle of
the victim and he stated about the age of the victim and her
disclosure regarding the occurrence. He further stated about the
pregnancy of the victim as well as about the meeting which was
held in the village in connection with the case.
             P.W.2 Iswar Behera also stated about the disclosure
made by the victim about the occurrence and about the
resolution passed by the villagers in which he was a signatory.
             P.W.3    Amiya   Kumar    Behera    stated  about  the
disclosure of the victim in the meeting and also about the
resolution passed by the villagers.
             P.W.4 Gobinda Behera also stated about the holding
of meeting in the village.
             P.W.5 Raj Kishore Behera did not support the
prosecution case for which he was declared hostile.
             P.W.6 Mangulu Behera stated about the meeting in
the village and also about the assurance given by the appellant
to take the victim to his house.
             P.W.7 Sudam Behera is the paternal uncle of the
victim who stated about the disclosure made by the victim so
also about the meeting which was convened in connection with
the case. He is a witness to the seizure of different articles.

                                 7
             P.W.8 is the victim and she is also the informant in
the case.
             P.W.9 Jantulal Behera stated about the meeting
which was convened in the village but he was declared hostile by
the prosecution.
             P.W.10 Dr. Smt. Basanti Hansdah examined the
victim and proved her medical examination report Ext.5.
             P.W.11 Parsuram Barik and P.W.12 Sitaram Soren
did not support the prosecution case regarding seizure aspect.
             P.W.13 Dr. Pradip Kumar Mohapatra examined the
appellant and proved his report Ext.8 wherein he has opined that
the appellant was physically capable of committing sexual
intercourse.
             P.W.14 Manoranjan Samal was the officer in charge
of Rairangpur Rural Police Station who is the Investigating
Officer of the case.
             P.W.15 Chhotray Behera is the father of the victim
who stated about the meeting that was convened in the village
after the incident.
             The prosecution exhibited nine documents. Ext.1 is
the F.I.R., Ext.2 is the written resolution, Exts.3 and 4 are the

                                  8
seizure lists, Ext.5 is the medical examination report, Ext.8 is the
medical examination report and Ext.9 is the spot map.
             The seized mobile phone was marked as M.O.I.
             The appellant examined himself as D.W.1.
6.           The learned Trial Court after discussing the evidence
of the victim (P.W.8), her father (P.W.15) and the doctor
(P.W.10) held that there is nothing to disbelieve the age of the
victim to be twelve years at the time of occurrence. The learned
Trial Court further held that by no stretch of imagination, it can
be said that the victim had consented to have been sexually
enjoyed by the appellant. It is further held that absence of any
injury on P.W.8 as per the medical report (Ext.5) does not
contradict her version of forcible rape by the appellant. The
learned Trial Court further held that only because the F.I.R. does
not contain any explanation of delay, it cannot affect the truth
and veracity of the allegation narrated therein. The learned Trial
Court further held that the evidence of the victim (P.W.8) being
corroborated by the medical evidence and the other oral
evidence made by her father and other villagers, it is established
that the appellant has committed rape on P.W.8.
7.           Mr. Bijaya Kumar Behera, learned counsel appearing
for the appellant while challenging the impugned judgment and

                                   9
order of conviction passed by the learned Trial Court contended
that the first information report was lodged after seven months
of the alleged incident and no satisfactory explanation has been
offered by the prosecution regarding such inordinate delay and
therefore, the entire prosecution case should be viewed with
suspicion. It is further contended that in absence of any birth
certificate, school leaving certificate or school admission register
being proved, merely basing on the oral evidence of the victim
and his father, the learned Trial Court should not have jumped to
the conclusion that the victim was twelve years of age at the
time of occurrence. It is further contended that when the F.I.R
was lodged on 03.11.2010, the victim was pregnant and on the
date of lodging of the first information report, the appellant was
taken into custody and he was released on bail only on
02.07.2011 and therefore, the statement of the victim that the
appellant gave some medicines to her for termination of her
pregnancy and taking such medicines, her pregnancy got
terminated, cannot be accepted.
              Mr. Chitta Ranjan Swain, learned Addl. Standing
Counsel appearing on behalf of the State on the other hand
supported the impugned judgment and submitted that the
evidence of the victim is convincing and trustworthy and she

                                  10
disclosed about the occurrence before her family members at a
belated stage as the appellant gave assurance of marriage to her
after the first incident and also gave threat to her not to disclose
the incident before anybody. It is further contended that after
the father of the victim came to know about the occurrence from
the victim, village meetings were held on three occasions and
ultimately when no solution could be arrived at, a written
resolution was passed and thereafter the F.I.R was lodged and
therefore, it cannot be said that the delay in lodging of the first
information report has not been satisfactorily explained and it
affects the credibility of the prosecution case. Learned counsel
further submitted that when the evidence of the victim, her
father and the doctor relating to the age of the victim has not
been challenged by the defence and no suggestion has even
been given to any of these witnesses disputing her age, the
finding of the learned Trial Court in that respect is quite justified.
It is further submitted that the pregnancy of the victim has not
only been stated by the victim herself but also by the doctor.
Therefore, whether the appellant gave her medicine to terminate
her pregnancy or not, is not a factor which would falsify the
accusation of commission of rape and therefore, there being no

                                  11
perversity or infirmity in the impugned judgment, the appeal
should be dismissed.
8.           Coming to the first contention raised by the learned
counsel for the appellant regarding the delay in lodging the first
information report, the victim has stated in the first information
report that the first incident took place on 24.04.2010. In the
F.I.R, she has stated that after the first incident, not only the
appellant gave her threat and asked her to keep silence and not
to disclose before anybody but also gave assurance of marriage
to her and went on keeping physical relationship with her for
seven months and accordingly, she did not disclose about the
incident before anybody and when the appellant presented a
mobile phone to the victim which was detected by her father, on
being confronted, she disclosed about the entire incident. No
doubt, in the evidence, the victim has not stated that after the
first incident, the appellant went on keeping physical relationship
with her for seven months but she has not only stated about the
first occurrence of commission of rape by the appellant but also
stated that the appellant assured her to marry and warned her
not to disclose the incident before anybody for which she did not
tell anybody about the incident in her family. The father of the
victim who has been examined as P.W.15 has stated that on

                                   12
hearing a ring tone of a mobile phone inside his house, he made
a query to the victim and came to know that the mobile phone
was presented to her by the appellant. The witnesses have
stated about the holding of meeting in the village over this issue
and passing of a resolution after which the F.I.R was lodged.
             Law is well settled that in case of rape, the family
members of the victim are more concerned with the honour of
the family and give cool thought to the pros and cons of lodging
of the F.I.R.   The victim kept mum after the incident for two
reasons, as she was threatened and asked to keep silence and
also because false assurance of marriage was given to her by the
appellant but when she became pregnant and could not keep the
secret because of the detection of the mobile phone of the
appellant by her father which was presented to her, she
disclosed the entire incident before her father. The conduct of
the father in requesting the villagers for arranging the meetings
and for settlement is another factor which delayed the lodging of
the first information report. After all the attempts yielded no
result, it appears that the villagers passed a resolution which has
been exhibited as Ext.2 and thereafter, the victim lodged the
first information report. In the sequence of the events, I am of
the view that the prosecution has satisfactorily explained the

                                  13
delay in lodging the first information report and it cannot be said
that the mere delay, if any, renders the prosecution version
brittle. Therefore, the first contention of the learned counsel for
the appellant regarding delay in lodging the F.I.R. as a ground to
discard the prosecution case, cannot be accepted.
             So far as the age aspect is concerned, there is no
dispute that neither the school admission register nor the school
leaving certificate nor the birth certificate of the victim has been
proved in this case by the prosecution even though according to
the victim she was a student of Class-VII at the time of
occurrence but it cannot be lost sight of fact that the victim has
stated her age to be twelve years. The father of the victim being
examined as P.W.15 has also stated that the age of the victim to
be twelve years at the time of occurrence. The paternal uncle of
the victim who was examined as P.W.1 has stated the age of the
victim to be twelve years. The doctor (P.W.10) who examined
the victim on 03.11.2012 on police requisition stated that from
the denture, permanent eruption of the second molar and space
for third molar, pregnancy of the victim for which ossification
test was not suggested, he came to the opinion that the age of
the victim was within twelve to fourteen years. The evidence of
none of these witnesses has been challenged by the defence on

                                 14
the age aspect of the victim. Nothing has been brought out in
the cross-examination to discard the evidence relating to the age
of the victim. The learned Trial Court after analysing the
evidence on record has come to hold that there is nothing to
disbelieve the age of the victim to be twelve years at the time
occurrence. In view of the ocular as well as medical evidence
adduced by the prosecution which has remained unchallenged, I
am of the view that the finding of the learned Trial Court
regarding the age of the victim suffers from no infirmity and
therefore, the second contention raised of the learned counsel
for the appellant that the prosecution has failed to prove the age
of the victim to be minor cannot be accepted.
             The   learned   counsel   for  the   appellant   while
challenging the pregnancy aspect and its termination contended
that when the appellant was in custody since 03.11.2010 and he
was released on bail only on 02.07.2011, therefore, the evidence
of the victim that the appellant gave her some medicines for
which her pregnancy got terminated is not acceptable. The
materials available on record clearly indicate that the victim was
pregnant for seven months. The doctor (P.W.10) in her report
(Ext.5) has categorically mentioned that the height of the uterus
was four fingers above the umbilicus and probable duration of

                                 15
the pregnancy was twenty eight weeks. She has also mentioned
that the foetal heart sound was audible. This report dated
03.11.2010 clearly indicates that the victim was pregnant for
about seven months. Whether the appellant terminated her
pregnancy or not is not the criteria to discard the evidence of the
victim regarding commission of rape. Similarly, even if the victim
has not stated about keeping up of physical relationship by the
appellant with her for seven months after the first incident in her
evidence but that would again not falsify the first incident which
has been vividly narrated by the victim and she has stated that
while going to attend the marriage ceremony, on the way near
Lodam Dunguri, the appellant forcibly dragged her and removed
her wearing apparels and raped her for which she was weeping
and the appellant assured her to marry and warned her not to
disclose  the  incident  before   her   parents.  Thus   the   third
contention raised of the learned counsel for the appellant to
discard the prosecution case due to non-acceptability of the
version of the victim that the medicine given by the appellant
terminated her pregnancy, cannot be accepted.
9.          Therefore, all the contentions raised by the learned
counsel for the appellant having failed, in view of the available
materials on record, I am of the view that not only the

                                 16
prosecution has established that the victim was a minor at the
time of occurrence and was aged about 12 years but it has also
established that due to rape committed by the appellant on
24.04.2010, the victim became pregnant. The oral as well as
documentary evidence adduced by the prosecution clearly
establish the accusation of rape against the appellant and
therefore, the impugned judgment and order of conviction of the
appellant under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code suffers
from no infirmity and cannot be interfered with.
            So far as sentence aspect is concerned, the learned
Trial Court has taken into account the heinousness of the offence
and also the fact that the victim was a minor girl at the time of
occurrence. The minimum sentence prescribed for the offence at
the time of occurrence was seven years which may be for life or
for a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable
to fine. Though it has been prescribed under section 376 of the
Indian Penal Code that the Court may for adequate and special
reasons to be mentioned in the judgment can impose a sentence
of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years but in the
factual scenario, when a school going girl of class-VII has been
forcibly raped and then threatened not to disclose the incident
before anybody and assurance was given for marriage for which

                                  17
she became pregnant, I am not inclined to reduce the sentence
which has been imposed by the learned Trial Court. Therefore,
the sentence cannot be interfered with.
10.          In view of the enactment of the Odisha Victim
Compensation Scheme, 2012, keeping in view the age of the
victim at the time of occurrence and the nature and gravity of
the offence committed and the family background, I feel it
necessary to recommend the case of the victim to District Legal
Services Authority, Mayurbhanj, Baripada to examine the case of
the victim after conducting the necessary enquiry in accordance
with law for grant of compensation under the Orissa Victim
Compensation Scheme, 2012.
             Let a copy of the order be sent to the District Legal
Services Authority, Rairangpur for compliance.
11.         In view of the aforesaid premised reasons, I am of
the considered view that the impugned judgment and order of
conviction and the sentence passed there under by the learned
Trial Court does not suffer from any infirmity and therefore, I am
not inclined to interfere with the same.
            Lower Court's record with a copy of this judgment be
communicated      to   the   learned  Trial Court   forthwith   for
information and necessary action.

                                       18
12.              Resultantly, the criminal appeal, being devoid of
merit, stands dismissed.
                                               ……………………………
                                                  S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 7th September, 2017/Pravakar/Sisir


