                    IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                              BLAPL No. 142 of 2016
        Application under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
        1973.
                                 ---------------------
             Jaya Majhi                  ……..                     Petitioner
                                      - Versus-
             State of Orissa            ……..                      Opp. Party
                              BLAPL No. 187 of 2016
             Thisu @ Jadumani Majhi ……..                          Petitioner
                                      - Versus-
             State of Orissa            ……..                      Opp. Party
                     For Petitioners:     -      Mr. Satyabrata Panda
                     For Opp. Party:      -      Mr. Prem Kumar Pattnaik
                                                      (A.G.A)
                                 --------------------
        P R E S E N T:-
                  THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S. K. SAHOO
        ……………………………………………………………………………………….
        Date of Argument- 04.04.2016              Date of order- 18.04.2016
        ……………………………………………………………………………………….
S. K. SAHOO, J.      The petitioners are the accused in Manmunda P.S.
        Case No. 203 of 2015 which corresponds to C.T. Case No.595 of

                                  2
2015 pending in the Court of learned Special Judge, Boudh for
offences punishable under section 20(a)(i) of the Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (hereafter ‘N.D.P.S. Act’)
and section 27(1) of the Orissa Forest Act, 1972 and they have
filed applications under section 439 Cr.P.C. for bail as their prayer
for grant of bail was turned down by the learned Special Judge,
Boudh vide orders dated 23.12.2015.
2.           The First Information Report was lodged by Inspector
in Charge, Manmunda Police Station who drew up the plain paper
F.I.R. at the spot on his own information.
             The informant received information on 2.12.2015 at
about 5.30 p.m. at police station that some of the villagers of
Majhipada have illegally cultivated cannabis plants in large scale
on the embankment of Bahani Nala under revenue village
Majhipada. Getting such information, the informant made the
Station Diary Entry and sent written intimation to S.D.P.O. and
S.P., Boudh. On 3.12.2015 early morning, the informant along
with other police officials and local independent witnesses
proceeded to the spot and arrived there at about 7.15 a.m. and
found illegal cultivation of cannabis plants in the Majhipada
Gramya Jungle near village Majhipada. From the professional
experience and smell of plants, the informant came to the
conclusion that the plants are cannabis. He found the cannabis

                                 3
plants were cultivated in a systematic and planned manner and in
a linear fashion with a standard gap of about 2-3 feet between
each plant and the plants were found to be 3 feet to 6 feet in
height. He further found that the plants were properly watered
and treated with cow dung, chemicals and fertilizers for better
growth and fruiting. The informant rounded up the place and
found four to five persons inside the cannabis plants who were
uprooting grass from the field and putting earth on the roots of
the cannabis plants. Seeing the police party, all those persons
started running away towards the jungle but the petitioners were
apprehended and they disclosed their names however they did
not disclose the names of the other absconded persons. The R.I,
Manmunda      demarcated     the   land  under   illegal  cannabis
cultivation. The informant along with his police station staffs
counted the cultivated cannabis plants and it came to 72,317 in
numbers. The labourers, police staffs and forest staffs cut those
cannabis plants and deposited those in a heap. Two sample
plants consisting of stem, green leaves and flowering and fruiting
tops were collected by the informant and wrapped in paper
cartoon and were kept inside the white cloth bags separately and
sealed. After obtaining the order from G.O. Sri A. Kujur, OPS, the
informant destroyed the rest of the cannabis plants by pouring
kerosene and setting fire in order to prevent any further

                                 4
regeneration or extraction of Ganja. A destruction certificate was
prepared at the spot in presence of the witnesses, G.O. and
others. A seizure list was prepared at the spot by the informant.
            The informant being satisfied that the petitioners and
others had cultivated cannabis plants in the Government land
violating the provisions under section 8(b) of the N.D.P.S. Act
with destruction of forest land, arrested the petitioners for
commission of offences under section 20(a)(i) of N.D.P.S. Act and
27(1) of the Orissa Forest Act, 1972.
            On arrival at the Police Station with the seized
exhibits, the informant registered Manamunda P.S. Case No.203
dated 03.12.2015 under section 20(a)(i) of N.D.P.S. Act and
section 27(1) of Orissa Forest Act, 1972 and directed S.I. of
police, Manamunda Police Station namely, Pritimanjari Garnaik to
take up investigation of the case.
            During course of investigation, the I.O. visited the
spot, prepared the spot map, examined the informant and other
witnesses and recorded their statements. The petitioners were
forwarded to Court on 04.12.2015. The sample cannabis plant
marked    as   Ext.   A1  was   sent  to  the   Director,  S.F.S.L.,
Bhubaneswar for examination and opinion. The examination
report indicated that as a result of physical, chemical and
microscopic examination, the exhibit A1 was found to contain

                                  5
stem, leaves, fruiting and flowering tops of cannabis plant. After
conclusion   of  investigation,  chargesheet   was   submitted  on
01.02.2016 under section 20(a)(i) of N.D.P.S. Act and section
27(1) of Orissa Forest Act, 1972.
3.          The bail applications preferred by the petitioners
before the Special Judge, Boudh were rejected on 23.12.2015
mainly on the ground that investigation of the case was under
progress and illegal cultivation of cannabis plants was rampant in
that area and some other offenders involved in the case had not
been apprehended.
4.          The learned counsel for the petitioners Mr. Satyabrata
Panda contended that the petitioners are the labourers having no
criminal antecedents and they belong to BPL category and they
are permanent residents of their village and there is no chance of
their absconding. The learned counsel further contended that the
rigour of section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act is not applicable for an
offence under section 20(a)(i) of N.D.P.S. Act and in the
meantime charge sheet has already been submitted and therefore
the bail applications of the petitioners may be favourably
considered.
            Mr. Prem Kumar Pattnaik, Additional Government
Advocate appearing for the State on the other hand vehemently
opposed the prayer for bail and submitted that prima facie case is

                                  6
clearly made out against the petitioners. He further contended
that the manner in which the accused persons were indulged in
the cultivation of huge numbers of cannabis plants and taking
into account the punishment prescribed for such offence which is
upto ten years and also fine upto Rs.1,00,000/- (rupees one lakh)
and the nature and gravity of the offences, the petitioners should
not be enlarged on bail.
5.           Section 20(a)(i) of the N.D.P.S. Act deals with
punishment in relation to the cultivation of cannabis plants in
contravention of any provision of the Act or any Rule or order
made or condition of any licence granted there under.
             Section 8(b) of the N.D.P.S. Act prescribes prohibition
for cultivation of the cannabis plants except for medical or
scientific purposes and in the manner and to the extent as
provided by the provisions of the N.D.P.S. Act or rules or orders
made there under or in accordance with the terms and conditions
of any licence, permit or authorization.
             The expression “cultivate” having not been defined
under the N.D.P.S. Act, if the literal dictionary meaning of such
expression is adopted, it means to prepare the land and use of
soil by way of loosening or breaking up for growing up of the
crops by ploughing, watering, fertilizing, fostering growth of
plants and taking its care so as to get better crops. It includes

                                  7
tilling or raising crops by fanning or gardening etc. Cultivation
means     conscious   cultivation and   not  unwanted   self-grown
cannabis plants.
             The learned counsel for the petitioner placed a
decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Alakh Ram
-Vrs.- State of U.P. reported in (2004) 27 Orissa Criminal
Reports (SC) 663 wherein it is held that in order to prove the
guilt under section 20 of the N.D.P.S. Act, it must be proved that
the accused had cultivated the prohibited plants and there must
be supporting evidence to prove such aspect and it is not enough
that few plants were found in the property of the accused as it is
quite reasonable to assume that sometimes the plants may
sprout up, if seeds happen to be embedded in earth due to
natural process. If plants are sprouted by natural growth, it
cannot be said that it amounts to cultivation. It was further held
that the appellant in that case, his father and brothers owned 70
bighas of land and the witnesses who were examined in support
of the prosecution have not given any evidence to show that the
property belonged to appellant Alekh Ram and there was no
satisfactory evidence either oral or documentary to show that
appellant had a right over the property from which the Ganja
plants were recovered. There was no evidence that the appellants
cultivated those seventeen Ganja plants. The Hon’ble Supreme

                                  8
Court further held that having regard to the extent of the
property and the number of plants recovered from that property,
it cannot be said that those plants had been the result of
cultivation and those plants might have been sprouted there by
natural process and the appellant or anybody who is the owner of
the property must not have been diligent in destroying the plants.
Accordingly, the judgment and order of conviction of the
appellant under section 20 of the N.D.P.S. Act was set aside.
              The facts of the case cited by the learned counsel for
the petitioners is no way applicable to the present case inasmuch
as in the case on hand, the materials available on record indicate
72,317     numbers    of  cannabis  plants   were   cultivated in  a
systematic and planned manner and in a linear fashion with a
standard gap of about 2 to 3 ft. between each plant and those
were properly watered and treated with cow dung, chemicals and
fertilizers for better growth and fruiting and those were found to
be 3 ft. to 6 ft. in height and the petitioners were found to be
cultivating possession of those plants inasmuch as they were
found cleaning grasses from the field and putting earth on the
roots of the cannabis plants. Thus, there are prima facie materials
on record to indicate that the cannabis plants detected were the
result of well-planned cultivation and those were not sprouted

                                  9
there by natural process and the place selected for such
cultivation works is a well-thought-out one to avoid detection.
             The learned counsel for the petitioners further placed
reliance on an unreported decision of Delhi High Court in case of
Kashmir Singh -Vrs.- Narcotics Control Bureau decided on
18.08.2006 and contended that the independent witnesses are
the stock witnesses    of the prosecution and therefore basing on
their testimony, the bail should not be refused. No doubt out of
the eighteen chargesheet witnesses, most of the witnesses are
official witnesses who accompanied the informant on the date of
occurrence to the spot and were present when the illegal
cultivation of cannabis plants was detected and those were
uprooted and sample cannabis plants were seized and other
cannabis plants were destroyed. Some independent witnesses also
accompanied     the   party.   Merely   because     the    independent
witnesses were alleged to be the witnesses for the prosecution in
other cases, their evidence cannot be discarded on that score at
this stage of consideration of bail application. It is to be proved by
the defence at the stage of trial whether those independent
witnesses are stock witnesses of the prosecution or not and then
it would depend upon the learned Trial Court as to what
evidentiary value is to be attached to the testimonies of those
witnesses. At this stage, when other official witnesses have also

                                 10
stated about the involvement of the petitioners in the large scale
cultivation of cannabis plants, even if for the sake of argument it
is accepted that those independent witnesses are stock witnesses
but that would in no way hamper the prosecution case in any
manner and that also cannot be a ground to grant bail to be
petitioners.
             Stock witnesses are always at the beck and call of the
police and helped them in various raids and searches carried out
by them. Stock witnesses are put up by the prosecution to speak
to    the   facts  and   circumstances     which   they   did   not
actually witness and they are merely the persons who would be
made to depose whatever the police wanted to be put on record.
The Court should have a cautious approach in relying upon the
testimony of a stock witness.
             The learned counsel for the petitioners further relied
upon the case of Rupadhar Patel -Vrs.- State of Orissa
reported in 2002 (Vol. I) Orissa Law Reviews 392 and
contended that for the offence alleged to be committed under
section 20(a) of the N.D.P.S. Act, section 37 (b) of the said Act
shall not operate as a bar and the Court can grant bail depending
on facts of each case without adhering to the provision contained
in section 37 (b)(ii) of the Act. In the said case, the petitioner
was found to be aged about 85 years and only three cannabis

                                     11
plants were seized from the bari of the petitioner and therefore
bail was granted.
                  Even though after amendment made in section 37 of
the N.D.P.S. Act w.e.f. 2nd October, 2001, the limitation or
restriction imposed by sub-section (1)(b)(ii) of section 37 applies
only in respect of offences under sections 19, 24 and 27-A and
also for offences involving commercial quantity and so far as
other      offences        under the Act  are   concerned,    the  said
restriction/limitation is not applicable but coming to the case on
hand, the manner in which the petitioners who are all young
adults aged about 28 years are indulged in large scale cultivation
of cannabis plants, their conduct in trying to escape from the spot
on the arrival of police party, taking into account the availability
of prima facie case, the nature and gravity of the offence and the
stringent punishment prescribed for such offence, I am not
inclined to grant bail to the petitioners.
                  Accordingly,   the bail applications  filed   by  the
petitioners sans merit and stand dismissed.
                                                       …………………………
                                                        S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 18th April, 2016/ Sukanta


