            IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
               Criminal Revision No. 41 of 2001
From the judgment and order dated 24.04.1996 passed by the
J.M.F.C., Talcher in G.R. Case No.403 of 1988 (Trl. No.248 of
1990) and the judgment and order dated 14.11.2000 passed by
the Addl. Sessions Judge, Talcher in Criminal Appeal No.29/79 of
1996/2000.
                         ---------------------
     Keshab Bhutia & Ors.       ………                       Petitioners
                               -Versus-
     State of Orissa             ………                      Opp. party
          For Petitioners:         -         None
          For Opp. party:          -         Mr. Deepak Kumar Pani
                                             Addl. Standing Counsel
               Criminal Revision No. 681 of 2000
     Sripati Bhutia             ………                       Petitioner
                               -Versus-
     State of Orissa             ………                      Opp. Party
         For Petitioners:          -         None
         For Opp. party:           -         Mr. Deepak Kumar Pani
                                             Addl. Standing Counsel
                         ---------------------

                                            2
         P R E S E N T:
                      THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
         ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Date of Hearing and Judgment: 10.03.2017
         ------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. Sahoo, J.       The petitioner in Criminal Revision No.681 of 2000
         namely Sripati Bhutia @ Pati Bhutia and petitioners in Criminal
         Revision No.41 of 2001 namely Keshab Bhutia, Ratnakar @ Ratha
         Bhutia and Anukula Naik faced trial in the Court of learned
         J.M.F.C., Talcher in G.R. Case No.403 of 1988 (Trl. No.248 of
         1990) for offences punishable under sections 341/323/326 read
         with section 34 of the Indian Penal Code on the accusation that
         on 04.02.1988 at about 4.00 p.m. at Deulapasi Chhaka, they in
         furtherance    of   their  common      intention    voluntarily   caused
         grievous hurt to the informant Bhagaban Naik (P.W.1) after
         wrongfully restraining him.
                      The learned Trial Court vide impugned judgment and
         order dated 24.04.1996 found the petitioners guilty of the
         offences charged and sentenced each of them to undergo S.I. for
         a period of one month for the offence under section 341 of Indian
         Penal Code, R.I. for a period of six months for the offence under
         section 323 of the Indian Penal Code and R.I. for a period of two
         years for the offence under section 326 of the Indian Penal Code
         and the sentences were directed to run concurrently.

                               3
            The petitioners preferred an appeal in the Court of
Session which was heard by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Talcher in Criminal Appeal No.29/79 of 1996/2000 and the
learned Appellate Court vide impugned judgment and order dated
14.11.2000 has been pleased to upheld the impugned judgment
and order passed by the learned Trial Court and dismissed the
criminal appeal, hence the revision.
2.          The prosecution case as per the first information
report dated 22.09.1988 lodged by Bhagaban Naik (P.W.1)
before the Officer in charge, Talcher Police Station is that on
04.02.1988 at about 4.00 p.m. while he was returning home
from South Balanda, at Deulapasi Chhaka, the petitioners and
others wrongfully restrained him and assaulted him as a result of
which he lost both his eyes. It is stated that some of the
witnesses who saw the occurrence intimated at the house of the
informant and accordingly, the wife of P.W.1 came to the spot
and took him to the house and thereafter, the matter was
reported at the Police Station but the police officers did not take
any action.
            On the basis of the first information report, Talcher
P.S.  Case   No.95   of  1988   was   registered   under   sections

                                 4
341/326/34 of the Indian Penal Code against the petitioners and
others.
             During course of investigation, the      investigating
officer examined the witnesses, visited the spot, consulted the
Medical Officer and after completion of investigation submitted
charge sheet on 25.11.1988 under sections 341/323/326/34 of
the Indian Penal Code.
3.           During course of trial, in order to establish its case,
the prosecution examined fourteen witnesses.
             P.W.1 Bhagaban Naik is the informant in the case
and he is also the injured.
             P.W.2 Smt. Manjari Naik is the wife of the informant
and she is a post occurrence witness who carried the informant
to the Sub-divisional Hospital, Talcher and then to District
Headquarter Hospital, Dhenkanal where the informant was
treated for about a month.
             P.W.3 Sudei Naik stated to have seen the informant
lying at the spot in an injured condition.
             P.W.4 Smt. Nisa Dei is a post occurrence witness
who stated to have been noticed injuries on the eyes and legs of
the informant and the informant disclosed the names of his
assailants before him.

                                5
            P.W.5 Baikuntha Naik is also a post occurrence
witness who stated to have noticed injuries on the eyes and legs
of the informant and the informant disclosed the names of his
assailants before him.
            P.W.6 Kubera Naik is a post occurrence witness who
stated to have noticed injures on the eyes and legs of the
informant who was lying at the spot and the informant disclosed
the names of his assailants before him.
            P.W.7    Babaji   Naik   and   P.W.8    Mahendranath
Satapathy did not support the prosecution case.
            P.Ws. 9, 10, 11 and 13 have not stated anything
about the case.
            P.W.12   Dr.   Sivananda   Mohanty    was  the   Asst.
Surgeon,    Sub-Divisional   Hospital, Talcher   who   on   police
requisition examined the informant on 04.02.1988 and proved
his report Ext.1.
            P.W.14 Dr. Dayasagar Behera was the Eye Specialist
attached to District Headquarter Hospital, Dhenkanal who on
06.02.1988 examined the informant and proved his report
(Ext.2) and stated that the injuries made the informant blind.

                                6
             The prosecution exhibited three documents. Ext.1 is
the Injury Report, Ext.2 is the bed head ticket and Ext.3 is the
opinion of P.W.14 on the eye injuries of P.W.1.
4.          The defence plea of the accused persons was that
due to fall from the date palm (khajuri) plant, the informant
(P.W.1) sustained injuries but due to previous enmity, he has
foisted the case.
5.           The learned Trial Court on analysis of the evidence
on record came to hold that the evidence of the witnesses lend
support to the prosecution case that they found injuries on the
informant in his eyes and leg and found the accused persons
running away from the spot and thus the complicity of the
accused persons in the offences has been established by the
witnesses. The learned Trial Court further held that the fact that
P.W.1 had sustained injuries on his leg and eyes, found support
from the evidence of P.W.14, the doctor.
             The learned Trial Court further held that the evidence
of P.W.1 and others coupled with the evidence of P.W.12 and
P.W.14, the doctors clearly shows that P.W.1 was assaulted by
the accused persons and sustained injuries which caused
damage to his eyes and that the prosecution has established its

                                 7
case by clear and cogent evidence that the accused persons are
the authors of the offences.
             The learned Appellate Court also held that the
medical evidence substantiated the prosecution story that the
injuries to the eyes were man made and not by any accidental
fall over any pointed substance like a pin or nail. It was further
held that taking into consideration the corroborative evidence of
P.Ws.1 to 6 and the genuine injury reports, showing the
treatment of the injured taken up immediately after the
occurrence, unerringly go to establish that the accused persons
in furtherance of their common intention had assaulted the
injured and damaged his eyes by inserting Khajuri leave.
Learned Appellate Court further held that on the sole ground of
delay in lodging the F.I.R., a criminal case which is otherwise
proved on merit, cannot end in acquittal and delay can be taken
note of where the prosecution case is found to be not proved.
6.           None appears on behalf of the petitioners to argue
the matter. A criminal revision petition, once admitted, cannot
be dismissed for default but has to be adjudicated on merits. The
Code of Criminal Procedure does not contemplate of making an
order of dismissal of revision for default. Once the records of the
Courts below are called for, the High Court can exercise its

                                8
powers under section 401 read with section 397 of Cr.P.C. to
examine the correctness, legality or propriety of the order,
recorded or passed irrespective of the fact whether the counsel
for the petitioner is present or not at the time of call of the
matter for final hearing. Therefore, with the assistance of the
learned counsel for the State, I went through the records, the
evidence led in the case, the impugned judgments and the
grounds taken in the revision petition to decide the case on
merit.
7.           On perusal of the grounds taken in the revision
petition, it is found that one ground has been taken that the
Station Diary Entry No.43 dated 04.02.1988, on the basis of
which the injury requisition was issued by the police officer for
the medical examination of P.W.1 to Talcher Sub-divisional
Hospital has not been proved in the case. Another ground has
been taken that the incident took place on 04.02.1998 and the
F.I.R. was lodged on 13.09.1988 and the delay in filing the F.I.R.
has not been explained by the prosecution and therefore, the
learned Courts below ought to have viewed the prosecution case
with suspicion. Further grounds have been taken that two of the
Investigating Officers i.e. S.I. Udhav Behera and S.I. Akhaya
Kumar Naik as mentioned in the charge sheet have not been

                                9
examined by the prosecution and for that reason, material
contradictions in the evidence of P.W.1 and P.W.6 could not be
proved and the defence has been seriously prejudiced for such
non-examination. Another ground has been taken that the
solitary evidence of the injured P.W.1 cannot be said to be of
unimpeachable character as he was involved in seven to eight
cases and therefore, the Courts below should not have relied
upon his evidence to convict the petitioners.
8.            Mr. Deepak Kumar Pani, learned Additional Standing
Counsel while placing the impugned judgments as well as the
evidence on record, contended that since there is no perversity
or illegality in the impugned judgments and the evidence of the
injured    eye   witness gets  corroboration   from  the medical
evidence, in exercise of the revisional jurisdiction, this Court
should not disturb the concurrent findings of facts.
9.            Coming to the evidence of the star witness of the
prosecution i.e. P.W.1 Bhagaban Naik, it appears that he has
stated that the petitioners and others stopped him holding the
handle of his cycle while he was returning from Jagannath
Colliery and all of them pressed him on the ground and accused
Droupadi Naik assaulted him on the right leg by means of tangia
on its blunt side causing fracture injury and thereafter, Baga

                                10
Bhutia, Banamali Bhutia and Ratana Bhutia (petitioner) pressed
Khajuri leave on its pointed side in both of his eyes causing
damage to both the eyes and then accused Anukula Naik
(petitioner) assaulted him on the left forehead over the left eye
with the blunt side of an axe causing injury for which he lost his
sense. P.W.1 has been cross-examined at length but his
evidence has remained unshaken. Though a suggestion has been
given to P.W.1 that due to fall from the date palm (khajuri)
plant, he sustained injury on his knee and due to pressing of the
khajuri leaves on his eyes, he sustained injuries on both his eyes
but the doctors have not been put with any such questions by
the defence regarding possibilities of injuries on P.W.1 in that
manner.
             No  doubt   P.W.  1   has  stated   that before   the
occurrence, he was involved in seven to eight cases which the
police initiated against him but that cannot be a ground to
discard his entire testimony rather his evidence has to be
scrutinised with care and caution.
             P.W.12 Dr. Sibananda Mohanty who examined P.W.1
on the date of occurrence i.e. on 04.02.1988 at Sub-divisional
Hospital, Talcher noticed contusion on the knee and multiple
abrasions on the right leg and abrasion on the cornea of both the

                                 11
eyes and he reserved the opinion regarding the nature of eye
injuries and referred P.W.1 to the eye specialist. P.W.14 is the
eye specialist who on examination of both the eyes of P.W.1
stated that he examined the injured on 06.02.1988 and the
injured was admitted as an indoor patient on 07.02.1988 and he
was discharged on 01.03.1988 and the injuries made him blind.
Therefore, the ocular testimony of P.W.1 that some of the
accused persons including petitioners Ratnakar Bhutia and
Anukula Naik assaulted him finds corroboration from the medical
evidence.
            P.W.1 has specifically stated that he reported the
matter before Thana Babu on 05.02.1988 i.e. on the next day of
the occurrence but the police did not take any action due to
previous warrant and different cases against him and he further
stated that he could not say the contents of the F.I.R. written by
another accused in Talcher jail as per his direction, as he was
already blind by that time and the F.I.R. was forwarded to
S.D.P.O. by the Jail Superintendent.
            Considering the facts situation of the case as well as
the evidence of P.W.1 coupled with the medical evidence, I am of
the view that since the initial report given by P.W.1 before police
on the next day of the occurrence was not acted upon due to

                               12
previous criminal background of P.W.1, the registration of the
first information report at a belated stage on the basis of a
subsequent written report from jail cannot be a ground to throw
away the entire prosecution case. It seems that in connection
with the occurrence, on the very day of occurrence, station diary
entry no.43 dated 04.02.1988 was made and P.W.1 was sent for
medical examination to Sub-Divisional Hospital, Talcher on police
requisition where he was examined by P.W.12.
10.         Now coming to the complicity of the petitioners, as
has already been discussed, there is consistent evidence against
the petitioners Ratnakar @ Ratha Bhutia and Anukula Naik that
they wrongfully restrained the informant while he was coming on
his cycle and assaulted him on his eyes as a result of which the
informant became blind and therefore, the judgment and order
of conviction of these two petitioners by the learned Trial Court
for the offences under sections 341 and 326 of the Indian Penal
Code which was confirmed by the learned Appellate Court cannot
be interfered with. However, for causing the self same injuries to
P.W.1 which are grievous in nature, the two petitioners cannot
be convicted also under section 323 of the Indian Penal Code in
addition to section 326 of the Indian Penal Code and therefore,

                                13
the order of conviction under section 323 of the Indian Penal
Code is set aside.
            So far as petitioners Keshab Bhutia and Sripati @
Pati Bhutia are concerned, the evidence of P.W.1 is omnibus in
nature and no specific overtact has been attributed against any
of them and therefore, it is very much risky to convict those
petitioners of the offences charged and accordingly, I am inclined
to give benefit of doubt to the petitioners Keshab Bhutia and
Sripati @ Pati Bhutia and they are acquitted of all the charges.
11.         Accordingly, the Criminal Revision No.681 of 2000 is
allowed. The impugned judgment and order of conviction of the
petitioner Sripati @ Pati Bhutia under sections 326/323/341 of
the Indian Penal Code is set aside and he is acquitted of all the
charges.
            So far as Criminal Revision No.41 of 2001 is
concerned, the impugned judgment and order of conviction of
the petitioner Keshab Bhutia under sections 326/323/341 of the
Indian Penal Code is set aside and he is acquitted of all the
charges. So far as petitioners Ratnakar @ Ratha Bhutia and
Anukula Naik are concerned, the revision petition is partly
allowed. They are acquitted of the charge under section 323 of
the Indian Penal Code but their order of conviction under

                                    14
sections 326 and 341 of the Indian Penal Code and the sentence
passed thereunder stands confirmed.
                 It appears that the petitioners Ratnakar @ Ratha
Bhutia and Anukula Naik are on bail by virtue of the order of this
Court dated 16.02.2001 passed in Misc. Case No.50 of 2001.
They are directed to surrender before the learned Trial Court
within a period of two weeks from today to serve the sentence
imposed on them failing which the learned Trial Court is at
liberty to take appropriate steps for their arrest.
                 In the result, Criminal Revision No.681 of 2000 is
allowed and Criminal Revision No.41 of 2001 is allowed in part.
                                                    …………………………
                                                    S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 10th March, 2017/Sukanta/Sisir


