                          IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                              Criminal Revision NO. 681 of 2016
         From the judgment and order dated 16.08.2016 passed by
         J.M.F.C. (Rural), Cuttack in Crl. Misc. Case No.106 of 2016
                                             ---------------------
                Sri Bijoy Kumar Sahoo                  ………                                  Petitioner
                                                     -Versus-
                State of Orissa                        ………                                  Opp. party
                      For Petitioner:                      -             Mr. R. R. Bhattacharya
                                                                         Mr. R.K. Behera
                       For State of Orissa:                -             Mr. Deepak Kumar
                                                                        Addl. Standing Counsel
                                             ---------------------
         P R E S E N T:
                           THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Date of Hearing and Order: 20.01.2017
         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. Sahoo, J.            This revision has been filed by the petitioner Bijoy
         Kumar Sahoo challenging the impugned order dated 16.08.2016
         passed by the learned J.M.F.C. (Rural), Cuttack in Criminal Misc.
         Case No. 106 of 2016 in rejecting the petition under section 457
         Cr.P.C. filed by the petitioner for release of Truck bearing
         registration no. OR-05-AQ-6099, Engine no. JAP102510, Chassis

                                 2
no. MB1CTDYC6BPAA4985 which was seized by the opposite
party Mining Officer, Cuttack Circle, Cuttack.
             It is the case of the petitioner that on 12.01.2016 at
about 4.45 a.m., on a surprise checking of the Mining Officer,
Cuttack Circle, Cuttack, it was found that the vehicle in question
was parking near Tangi under Tangi police station being loaded
with Coal (Minerals). On the demand of the Mining Officer, since
the driver of the vehicle could not produce any valid document in
support of the loaded coal in the Truck, the vehicle was seized
and it was kept in the custody of the Mining Officer. It is the
further case of the petitioner that the petitioner is the registered
owner of the vehicle and he was not aware about the
transportation of coal in his vehicle without valid document.
             The petition filed by the petitioner for release of the
truck was rejected by the learned Magistrate on the ground that
no report has been filed before him in connection with the
seizure of the vehicle and more over, the confiscation proceeding
has already been started and therefore, he lacks jurisdiction to
entertain the said application.
             The learned counsel for the petitioner challenging the
impugned order contended that the observation of the learned
Magistrate that he has no jurisdiction to entertain an application

                                3
under section 457 Cr.P.C. is erroneous and suffers from non-
application of mind. He further submitted that even though no
report regarding the seizure of the vehicle has been reported to
the Court, nonetheless since there is no dispute about the
seizure of the vehicle and the petitioner has brought the factum
of seizure to the knowledge of the Court, the Court should have
verified the same from the concerned authority and should not
have rejected the petition in a mechanical manner.
            Learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance in
the case of    Tafzil Sarwar -Vrs.- The Dy. Director, Mines
Joda Circle reported in Vol. 120 (2015) Cuttack Law
Ttimes 974 wherein this Court held as follows:-
            “9.   Placing reliance on the law laid down in
            the case of Baijnath -Vrs.- State of Bihar :
            A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 1436 so also this Court in the
            case of M/s. Jai Durga Iron Pvt. Ltd.            -
            Vrs.- Superintendent of Police, Sundergarh
            and another : (2006) 34 Orissa Criminal
            Reports 655 & M/s. T.R. Chemicals : A.I.R.
            2008 Orissa 126, this Court is of the view that
            when     the   superior   legislation specifically
            empowers a Court, for disposal of the property
            seized under Section 21(4) of the MMDR Act, the
            Rule made by the State Government for disposal
            of such property authorizing another authority

                                   4
             besides the Court competent, is           inoperative
             inasmuch as       the same is contrary to the
             statutory provisions under the MMDR Act and
             the State Government in its rule making power
             under Section 23-C of the MMDR Act could not
             have     authorized    any   other     authority   for
             confiscation of the same. Therefore, since the
             competent authority has no power to confiscate
             the property as aforesaid, the impugned order of
             confiscation was without jurisdiction and an
             appeal against such order of confiscation under
             Rule-12(7) of the Orissa Minerals Rules, 2007
             does not lie to the District Judge. Hence, this
             writ petition stands allowed and the impugned
             order of confiscation at Annexure-2 stands set-
             aside. The petitioner is at liberty to seek release
             of   his  vehicle   in  question     seized  by   the
             competent     authority   before   the    appropriate
             forum, i.e., the Court which is empowered to
             dispose of the property seized in this case by
             the competent authority.”
             Learned counsel for the petitioner further placed
reliance in the case of Smt. Sudha Kesarwani -Vrs.- State of
U.P. reported in 2011(2) Allahabad Criminal Rulings 1946
wherein it is held as follows:-
             “6.     Section 21(4-A) is specific on the point
             that   a   competent    Court   i.e.   Magistrate   is

                      5
competent to confiscate the vehicle and is also
competent to dispose it of in accordance with
directions given by it. The District Magistrate or
the Collector or any authority has not been
given power to confiscate the vehicle either
under the Act, or in the Rules. This power is
reserved for the Court, which is a competent to
try the case after a complaint in respect of
which same has been filed by the District
Magistrate.
7.       In this view of the matter, it cannot be
said that the Magistrate has no jurisdiction to
release the vehicle pending trial or even before
the trial as the complaint has not yet been filed
by    the    competent    authority.  The   District
Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate cannot compel
the petitioner to compound the case against her
will. If the Petitioner is not ready to compound
the case, she cannot be compelled to do so.
Since the complaint has not yet been filed even
after a period of nine months from the incident,
a vehicle lying at the police station is likely to
become junk, and it was desirable for the
Magistrate to pass an order for release in favour
of   its   registered   owner  subject  to  certain
conditions, which he might impose.
8.      Even under Section 457 Code of Criminal
Procedure,       learned   Magistrate    had    the
jurisdiction to release the truck in favour of its

                     6
registered    owner    since   there  is  no   other
provisions in either the Act or the Rules for
release of the vehicle.
9.     In view of the aforesaid, the order passed
by   the   learned Magistrate      is void-ab-initio.
Learned Magistrate has failed to exercise the
jurisdiction vested in it.
10.   Under    normal    circumstances,   a  proper
remedy for the petitioner was to file a revision
but in the instant case, revision was not filed
and the same has become time barred and also
since the impugned order is void-ab-initio, and
since the impugned order is patently erroneous
and illegal, there are sufficient grounds to
interfere in the writ jurisdiction.
11.    Learned Magistrate has ample authority to
release the vehicle under Section 21(4-A) of the
Act as well as Section 457 Code of Criminal
Procedure.
12.    The writ petition is allowed. Impugned
order dated 15.2.2010 is quashed. Learned
Magistrate is directed to decide the release
application afresh within a period of one week
from the date on which a certified copy of this
order is produced before him.”

                                   7
             Learned counsel for the State on the other hand
while not accepting the observation made by the learned
Magistrate that he has got no jurisdiction to entertain an
application under section 457 Cr.P.C. placed the decision of this
Court in the case of Jamini Krishna Pattnaik -Vrs.- State of
Orissa reported in (2012) 52 Orissa Criminal Reports 650
wherein it is held as follows:-
             “On     a   conjoint   reading  of  the  aforesaid
             provision, it appears that if the offender does
             not    agree    to  compound    the  offence,   the
             competent authority shall report the matter to
             the Court competent to take cognizance of the
             offence and the Court will try the offence on
             account of which the seizure has been made. On
             receipt of the report, the Court shall take such
             measures, as may be necessary, for arrest and
             trial of the offender and disposal of the property
             according to law.
                      Since in the present case, the petitioners
             do not want to compound the offence, the
             competent authority reported the case to the
             Court of learned J.M.F.C., Barbil. The Court is in
             seisin of the matter. Therefore, the learned
             J.M.F.C. is competent to consider the application
             under Section 457 Cr.P.C. Rule 13 of the Rules,
             2007 rather puts condition that in case the
             competent authority has reported the matter to

                                8
            the Court, he has to take written consent of the
            Court for release of the property so seized.
            Therefore, in either case, the Court is competent
            to take a decision in the matter of release or
            confiscation of the seized property in accordance
            with law.”
            It is stated by the learned counsel for the State that
the report regarding seizure of the vehicle with coal has not been
made to the Court of learned J.M.F.C. (Rural), Cuttack till date.
It is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the
petitioner does not agree to get the offence compounded. Sub-
rule (2) of Rule 12 of the Orissa Mineral (Prevention of Theft,
Smuggling & Illegal Mining and Regulation of Possession,
Storage, Trading and Transportation) Rules, 2007 provides that
after seizure of any property under sub-rule (1), if the offender
does not agree in writing to get the offence compounded, the
report of such seizure has to be made to the Court competent to
take cognizance of the offence or it has to be produced before
the Competent Authority having jurisdiction. Since confiscation
of any property seized under sub-section (4) of section 21 of the
Mines   &   Minerals   (Development    &  Regulation)   Act,  1957
(hereafter ‘1957 Act’) has to be made by an order of the Court
competent to take cognizance of offence as per sub-section 4-A

                                 9
of the said section 21 of 1957 Act and such Court is also
empowered to take a decision in the matter of release of the
seized property in accordance with law, there was no justification
on the part of the opposite party in not reporting the seizure of
property till date even though seizure was made on 12.01.2016.
             Therefore, it is directed that the opp. party i.e.
Mining Officer, Cuttack Circle, Cuttack shall submit a report
relating to the seizure of the vehicle with coal to the learned
J.M.F.C. (Rural), Cuttack within a period of one week from today.
If after the receipt of such report by the Magistrate, the
petitioner files any application under section 457 Cr.P.C. afresh,
the same shall be adjudicated by the learned Magistrate in
accordance with law without being influenced by the earlier
rejection order as he has power to entertain such application.
The application filed by the petitioner under section 457 Cr.P.C.
shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible preferably within
a period of two weeks from the date of filing of such application.
However it is made clear that the opinion expressed in this order
on the question of law would not be taken to have been
expressed anything on the merits of the petition under section
457 Cr.P.C. which is sought to be filed by the petitioner and the

                                   10
same is to be decided strictly in accordance with law adverting to
the contentions raised by the respective parties.
                 With the aforesaid observations and directions, the
Criminal Revision petition is disposed of.
                 A free copy of the order be handed over to the
learned counsel for the State for compliance.
                 A copy of the order shall also be communicated to
the concerned Court.
                                                    …………………………
                                                     S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 20th January, 2017/Kabita


