                          IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                                        RPFAM NO. 75 of 2015
         From the order dated 15.04.2015 of the learned Judge, Family
         Court, Jajpur in Criminal Proceeding No.591 of 2011.
                                            ----------------------------
                Ramakanta Nayak                         ………                                 Petitioner
                                                     -Versus-
                Itishree Mohapatra                     ………                                  Opp. party
                      For Petitioner:                      -               Mr. Balaram Nayak
                                                                           B. R. Swain
                                                                           D. J. Mishra
                       For Opp. party:                     -               Mrs. Sangita Mohanty
                                                                           B. B. Mohapatra
                                                                           M. Mohanty
                                             ----------------------------
         P R E S E N T:
                           THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Date of Argument and Order- 24.03.2017
         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. Sahoo, J.            Heard Mr. Balaram Nayak, learned counsel for the
         petitioner and Mrs. Sangita Mohanty, learned counsel for the
         opposite party.
                           The     petitioner        Ramakanta Nayak has filed this
         revision petition challenging the impugned judgment and order
         dated 15.04.2015 passed by the learned Judge, Family Court,
         Jajpur in Criminal Proceeding No.591 of 2011 in directing the

                                   2
petitioner     to   pay  maintenance   to   the   opposite party  @
Rs.1,000/-(rupees one thousand) per month from the date of
application i.e. 18.10.2011 till the order and to pay maintenance
@ Rs. 1,500/-(rupees one thousand five hundred) from the date
of order i.e. 15.04.2015. It was further directed that the arrear
maintenance should be paid within three months and the current
maintenance        should  be   paid  within  first week   of  every
succeeding month.
               The opposite party filed an application under section
125 of Cr.P.C. indicating therein that she is the legally married
wife of the petitioner and their marriage was solemnized on
23.05.2010 as per the Hindu rites and customs and during
marriage, cash, gold ornaments and other household articles
were given and after marriage, they resided peacefully for about
five months. During her stay in her in-laws house, the opposite
party found that the younger sister of the elder sister in-
law(Bhauja) of the petitioner was visiting the house frequently
and mixing with the petitioner very freely and the petitioner had
illicit relationship with her.
               It is the further case of the opposite party that on
7.11.2010 the petitioner and his family members demanded
Rs.50,000/- (rupees fifty thousand) more and since such
demand could not be fulfilled, the petitioner threatened the opp.

                               3
party to murder her by pouring kerosene on her body and out of
fear and to save her life, the opposite party fled away from the
house and reported      the matter to the police. The petitioner
declared to marry again the younger sister of his sister in-law
(Bhauja). The opp. party lodged another report before the police
and a criminal case was instituted. It is further stated in the
maintenance petition that the opp. party had no source of
income and she had come from a lower middle class family and
her father depended on agriculture and the petitioner was
earning of Rs.12,000/- per month being engaged in a private
firm at Bhubaneswar and his family had 8 acres of landed
property from which they were earning Rs.50,000/- per annum.
She prayed for an amount of Rs. 6,000/- to be paid to her
towards maintenance.
            The petitioner appeared in the said case on being
noticed and filed his show cause denying the case of the opposite
party but admitted the marriage. It is the case of the petitioner
that the opp. party was suffering from mental disease and soon
after marriage, when it was detected, she was taken to S.C.B.
Medical College & Hospital, Cuttack on 09.06.2010 for treatment
and she was under treatment in that Hospital. It is further stated
in the show cause that the petitioner had no income and he
belonged to B.P.L. Family.

                               4
            During course of the proceeding before the learned
Judge, Family Court, three witnesses were examined on behalf of
the opposite party and four witnesses were examined on behalf
of the petitioner. The opposite party examined herself as P.W.1
and the petitioner examined himself as O.P.W.1. The petitioner
exhibited certain documents i.e. Ext. A to Ext. E.
            Considering the evidence adduced by both the sides
and the documents proved by the petitioner, the learned Judge,
Family Court has been pleased to hold that the plea of the
petitioner that the opposite party was living in adultery is not
believable. It was further held that from the case record, it
shows that the opposite party has sufficient reason to reside
separately from the petitioner and she has no sufficient income
and she was unable to maintain herself. It was further held that
the income of the petitioner can be guessed to be not less than
8,000/- (rupees eight thousand) and accordingly, the impugned
judgment and order of maintenance was passed.
            Challenging the impugned judgment and order of
learned Judge, Family Court, Mr. Balaram Nayak, learned
counsel   for  the  petitioner  contended    that  the impugned
judgment and order suffers from non-application of mind and the
material documents which have been proved by the petitioner
were not considered by the learned Judge, Family Court in its

                               5
proper perspective. The learned counsel drew my attention to
annexures to the revision petition particularly to the home visit
report prepared by the Principal Counsellor to show that       the
opposite party was living with another person namely Umakanta
Senapati in a rented house. It is contended that since the
opposite party was living in adultery, she is not entitled to get
any maintenance.
           Mrs. Sangita    Mohanty,   learned   counsel  for   the
opposite party on the other hand supported the impugned
judgment and contended that the revision petition should be
dismissed.
           On perusal of the home visit report, it appears that
such a document was not proved before the Family Court.
Moreover such report indicates that the Principal Counsellor got
information from three persons i.e. Bikram Keshari Mohapatra,
Santilata Mohanty and Sradhanjali Sahoo that the opposite party
lived with one Umakanta Senapati as his wife. None of these
three witnesses has been examined before the learned Judge,
Family Court, Jajpur to depose in that respect.      The Principal
Counsellor has got no personal knowledge about such aspect.
Therefore, I am not inclined to accept the home visit report to
hold that the opposite party was living with any Umakanta
Senapati as his wife.

                                 6
         Learned counsel for the petitioner further contended
that there is a Notary Certificate dated 18.01.2013 which has
been marked as Ext. D which also indicates that the opposite
party had married to Umakanta Senapati. In case of Rohit
Kumar Behera -Vrs.- State of Orissa reported in 2012 (2)
ILR- Cuttack 395, it is held as follows:-
           “6.   As some     Notaries    had adopted a self
           innovated     format    by   issuing   authenticated
           certificate  of   Marriage    purported   to  be   in
           pursuance of Rules 11(1) and 16 of the Rules,
           1956, the Law Department on 18.03.2009 had
           issued a letter vide Letter No. III-1-7/07 3921/L
           directing all the Notaries across the State not to
           issue Marriage Certificate which is not a function
           of the Notary under Section 8(1) of the Act,
           1952. In this context, a Division Bench of this
           Court on 21.04.2009 while disposing of a writ
           petition bearing W.P.(C) No. 19719 of 2008 had
           observed     that   a    Notary    does   not   have
           competence under the statute to issue marriage
           certificate but on the basis of the declaration
           made by the parties declaring themselves as
           husband and wife, the verification subsequently
           made by the Notary is very well within the
           jurisdiction and competence of the Notary as the
           verification made is in accordance with law.
           X          X       X           X         X        X

                     7
17. The functions and transactions of business
by Notary as envisaged in Section 8 of the Act,
1952 and Rules, 1956 respectively cannot be
done in a routine manner without application of
mind; otherwise the very purpose of enacting
Section 8 of the Act, 1952 and Rule 11(8) of the
Rules,    1956    would   be   frustrated   because
sanctity is attached to the certificate of the
Notary. Thus, Section 8 of the Act, 1952 and
Rule 11(8) of the Rules, 1956 cast an obligation
on Notary to apply his mind while discharging
his   notarial   functions   and   transactions   of
business.
18. Notaries are appointed for authentication of
certificates/documents.        Documents        duly
notarized by the Notaries are accepted to be
genuine documents in absence of any other
material. Certificates duly authenticated by the
Notaries     are    presented     before   different
authorities for various purposes. It is very much
necessary     that   before    authenticating    any
document by putting his signature and Notarial
seal,   the   Notary    should   ensure   that   the
document is a genuine one. Sometimes, it is
found that power given to a Notary is misused.
Therefore, it is necessary to regulate the work of
the Notaries.”

                                   8
                 Therefore, I am not inclined to place any reliance on
such notarial marriage certificate and it cannot be a valid proof
of marriage between the opposite party and Umakanta Senapati.
                On perusal of the evidence adduced by both the sides
and the impugned judgment, I find that the learned Judge,
Family Court has discussed the evidence threadbare and rightly
came to hold that since the marriage is not disputed between the
parties and there is no material that the opp. party was living in
adultery and there was justifiable reason for her to live
separately from the petitioner and opp. party has no sufficient
means to maintain herself, therefore, she is liable to get
maintenance from the petitioner.
                The quantum of maintenance which has been fixed by
the learned Judge, Family Court cannot be said to be on the
higher side on any stretch of imagination. Therefore, in absence
of any illegality or infirmity in the impugned judgment, I am not
inclined to interfere with the same.
                 Accordingly, the revision petition being devoid of
merits stands dismissed.
                                                      …………………………
                                                      S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 24th March, 2017/Kabita


