                           IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                     CRLMC NO. 2803 OF 2010
         An application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
         Procedure, 1973 in connection with I.C.C. Case No.3042 of 2009
         pending on the file of S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar.
                                            --------------------
                A.S. Ganesan & Ors.                    ………                             Petitioners
                                                    -Versus-
                Sri Gangadhar Sahu                      ………                            Opposite Party
                       For Petitioners:                   -             Mr. Asok Mohanty
                                                                        (Senior Advocate)
                                                                        Pratap Ch. Mohapatra
                                                                        P.K. Muduli
                                                                        R.C. Patnaik
                                                                        B.D. Sahoo
                       For Opposite Party:                  -           Mr. B.K. Mishra
                                                                        R.K. Naik
                                                                        T.K. Mohanty
                                                                        G.S. Samal
                                            --------------------
         P R E S E N T:-
                           THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Date of hearing and Judgment- 21.11.2016
         ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J.            This application under section 482 of Cr.P.C. has
         been filed by the petitioners challenging the order dated
         04.12.2009 passed by the learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar in
         I.C.C. Case No. 3042 of 2009 in taking cognizance of the offence

                                    2
under section 420 of the Indian Penal Code and issuing process
against them.
             The sole contention raised by Mr. Asok Mohanty,
learned Senior Advocate while challenging the impugned order of
taking cognizance and issuance of process is that since it is a
complaint case and the accused petitioners are residing at a
place   beyond     the  area  in  which  the  learned    S.D.J.M.,
Bhubaneswar exercises his jurisdiction, in view of the mandate
under section 202(1) of the Cr.P.C., the learned Magistrate
should not have issued process without resorting to inquiry as
contemplated under section 202 of Cr.P.C. and therefore, the
impugned order is not sustainable in the eye of law.
             On perusal of the impugned order, it is apparent that
the learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar on perusal of the complaint
petition, initial statement and documents available on record
came to hold that the prima facie evidence for offence under
section 420 of Cr.P.C. is made out and accordingly, cognizance
was taken and summons was issued against the petitioners for
their appearance. Thus there is no dispute that the inquiry as
contemplated under section 202 of Cr.P.C. has not been
conducted in this case.

                                     3
            Section 202 of the Cr.P.C. was amended by the Code
of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005 (section 19) and
the following words were inserted
                  “and   shall, in  a   case   where   the
            accused is residing at a place beyond the
            area in which he exercises jurisdiction.”
                  The notes on clauses for the above
            mentioned amendment read as follows:
                  “False complaints are filed against
            persons residing at far off places simply to
            harass them. In order to see that the
            innocent   persons   are   not  harassed    by
            unscrupulous persons, this clause seeks to
            amend sub-section (1) of section 202 to
            make it obligatory upon the Magistrate that
            before summoning the accused residing
            beyond his jurisdiction, he shall enquire into
            the case himself or direct investigation to be
            made by a police officer or by such other
            person as he thinks fit, for finding out
            whether or not there was sufficient ground
            for proceeding against the accused.”
            The    amendment     has    come    into  force w.e.f.
23.06.2006 vide Notification No. S.O.923 (E) dated 21.06.2006.
            By virtue of this amendment, the mandate has been
provided for the Magistrate to conduct an inquiry or direct an
investigation as provided under section 202(1) of the Code, in a

                                      4
complaint case where the accused is residing at a place beyond
the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction for the purpose of
deciding whether or not there is sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused.
             The use of word “shall” in the amended provision
signifies the sense of “must” and raises a presumption that the
particular provision is imperative and imposes an obligation. It is
pertinent to note that the word “may” is used for postponing the
issue of process in all complaint cases where the accused resides
within the jurisdiction of the Magistrate whereas the word “shall”
is used for postponing the issue of process in all complaint cases
where the accused resides at a place beyond the area of
jurisdiction of the Magistrate. When the legislature has used
“shall” and “may” in the same section, they cannot be loosely
construed so as to carry the same meaning. Therefore, in view of
the abode of the petitioners i.e. Salem, Tamilnadu which is
outside the Jurisdiction of the Magistrate, no option has been left
at than to postpone the issue of process and conduct an inquiry
himself or pass direction for investigation.
             In case of Lilasons -Vrs.- Sujata Manjari Pati
reported in (2009) 43 Orissa Criminal Reports 5, where the
accused in a complaint case was residing beyond the jurisdiction
of the learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar and the learned Magistrate

                                    5
after receipt of the complaint petition recorded the initial
statement of the complainant and posted the case for enquiry to
several dates but since the complainant declined to adduce any
evidence in the enquiry, the learned Court took cognizance of
offences and issued process, this Court found that there is basis
for alleging non-compliance of amended provision under section
202(1) of Cr.P.C.
             In case   of  National    Bank   of   Oman    -Vrs.-
Barakara Abdul Aziz reported in (2013) 54 Orissa Criminal
Reports (SC) 861 , the C.J.M., Ahmednagar upon perusal of
the complaint petition and the documents attached thereto held
that there are sufficient materials against the accused and
accordingly, issued process for offences under section 418 and
420 of I.P.C. The C.J.M. failed to carry out any enquiry or
ordered investigation as contemplated under the amended
section 202 of the Cr.P.C. since the accused was residing outside
the jurisdiction of the C.J.M., Ahmednagar. Though the High
Court quashed the complaint on that ground, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held that the High Court instead of quashing the
complaint, should have     directed the Magistrate to pass fresh
orders following the provisions of section 202 of the Cr.P.C. and
accordingly remitted the matter to the C.J.M., Ahmednagar for
passing fresh orders after complying with the procedure laid

                                     6
down in section 202 Cr.P.C. without being influenced by the
observation of the High Court that no prima facie case for
issuance of process under section 418 or 420 of the I.P.C. is
made out against the accused.
             In view of the above discussion, I am of the view
that the impugned order dated 04.12.2009 passed by the
learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar in I.C.C. Case No. 3042 of 2009
is not sustainable in the eye of law and accordingly, the order of
taking cognizance under section 420 of the Indian Penal Code
stands quashed. The matter is remitted back to the learned
S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar for conducting inquiry as contemplated
under section 202 of the Cr.P.C. Thereafter, if the Magistrate
finds that there is sufficient ground for proceeding then he can
take recourse to section 204 of the Cr.P.C. and it finds that there
is no sufficient ground for proceeding then he can recourse to
section 203 of the Cr.P.C. This Court has not expressed any
opinion on the merits of the case and the learned S.D.J.M.,
Bhubaneswar is free to pass fresh order in exercising his
jurisdiction in accordance with law.
             Since the case relates to the year 2009, the learned
Magistrate shall take expeditious steps for disposal of the case in
accordance with law.

                                       7
                 With the aforesaid observations, the Criminal Misc.
Case is disposed of.
                                                     ….……………………
                                                      S. K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 21th November, 2016/Sukanta
(2016) 65 OCR-1149


