                    IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                              JCRLA NO. 120 Of 2004
        From the judgment and order dated 27.07.2004 passed by the
        learned Additional Sessions Judge, Boudh in Sessions Trial No.
        14 of 2008 (S.T. No. 45 of 2003-D.C).
                                  ---------------------
             Gagan Jani                   ……..                     Appellant
                                        -Versus-
             State of Orissa              ……..                     Respondent
                  For Appellant:             -       Shri Arunendra Mohanty
                  For Respondent:            -        Mr. Prem Kumar Patnaik
                                                      Addl. Govt. Advocate
                                  ---------------------
        P R E S E N T:-
                       THE HONOURABLE KUMARI JUSTICE SANJU PANDA
                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        ------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Date of Hearing- 27.05.2016            Date of Judgment- 20.06.2016
        ------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J.      The appellant Gagan Jani faced trial in the Court of
        learned Additional Sessions Judge, Boudh in Sessions Trial No.
        14 of 2008 (S.T. No.45 of 2003-D.C.) for offences punishable
        under sections 452 and 302 of the Indian Penal Code for

                                 2
committing house trespass by entering into the house of
Prahallad Behera (hereafter ‘the deceased’) on 28/29th day of
November 2002 in the night at about 3.00 a.m. situated in
village Badala under Purunakatak Police Station in the district of
Boudh having made preparation for causing hurt to the deceased
and also committed murder of the deceased. The wife of the
appellant namely, Ambika Jani and their daughter namely,
Pratima Jani also faced trial along with the appellant under
sections 452/302/109 of the Indian Penal Code for abetting the
commission of crime by appellant Gagan Jani.
            The learned Trial Court vide impugned judgment and
order dated 27.07.2004 found the co-accused persons Ambika
Jani and Pratima Jani not guilty of the charges leveled against
them and accordingly acquitted them of all the charges.
However, the appellant Gagan Jani was found guilty under
sections 452 and 302 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years for
the offence under section 452 of the Indian Penal Code and to
undergo imprisonment for life for the offence under section 302
of the Indian Penal Code.
2.          The prosecution case, as unraveled from the First
Information Report lodged by Prasant Kumar Sahoo (P.W.2), the

                                    3
brother-in-law (wife’s brother) of the deceased is that both the
informant and the deceased were residing in nearby houses in
village Badala with their respective families. The informant was
maintaining his family from out of the earnings of his tiffin shop
situated near Badla Chhak. On 28/29.11.2002 in the night at
about 3.00 a.m., the son of the deceased namely, Muna @
Nirakar Behera came to the house of the informant and told him
that the appellant was creating disturbance in their house and
shouting to kill. The informant along with others rushed to the
house of the deceased and tried to convince the appellant not to
create disturbance but the appellant challenged them and told
that his son had died and if they would not be able to give life to
his son then he would kill all of them.
            It is the further prosecution case that the son of the
appellant was suffering from jaundice and his wife had taken him
to the hospital at Phulbani for treatment but during treatment,
the son of the appellant died. When the appellant challenged the
informant and others, out of fear they came back in order to give
message to the village Sarpanch, ward member and others and
accordingly they were informed and when all of them came near
the house of the deceased, they were told that the appellant
after severing the head of the deceased had fled away

                                  4
somewhere with the severed head. The informant marked the
trunk of the body of the deceased was lying and he further
ascertained from his sister (wife of the deceased) that the
appellant was suspecting the deceased to have practised
witchcraft on his son and was responsible for the death of his son
and basing on such suspicion, the appellant entered inside the
house of the deceased on the fateful night and killed him and
fled away holding the severed head.
3.          P.W.9    Promod    Kumar   Dehury,    Assistant    Sub
Inspector of Police attached to Adenigarh Police outpost reduced
the oral information presented on 29.11.2002 by P.W.2 Prasant
Kumar Sahoo at the outpost into writing which was treated as
First Information Report and it was sent to Purunakatak Police
Station by P.W.10 Ram Chandra Swain, the Officer in Charge of
Purunakatak    Police  Station  through   a   grama   rakshi    for
registration and accordingly Purunakatak P.S. Case No.62 of
2002 was registered under sections 452 and 302 of the Indian
Penal Code on the very day against the appellant.
            P.W.10 took up investigation of the case, examined
the informant (P.W.2) and the scribe of the First Information
Report. On 29.11.2002 at about 8.10 a.m., the appellant arrived
at Adenigarh Police outpost holding the severed head and a

                                  5
tangia. The I.O. examined the appellant and seized the tangia,
blood stained lungi and baniyan of the appellant in presence of
the witnesses and prepared seizure list Ext.2 and conducted
inquest over the severed head in presence of the witnesses and
prepared inquest report Ext.1. The appellant was arrested and
was sent to the Medical Officer, Adenigarh PHC for collection of
nail clippings. On 29.11.2002 at about 2.30 p.m., the I.O. visited
the spot and prepared spot map Ext.16 and at the spot, he
conducted inquest over the trunk of the dead body of the
deceased and prepared inquest report Ext.4. Then the I.O. joined
the severed head with the trunk of the deceased and prepared
another inquest report Ext.5. He also seized the blood stained
earth and sample earth from the spot under seizure list Ext.6
and sent the dead body along with the cut head for post mortem
examination to District Headquarters Hospital, Boudh where
P.W.5 Dr. Susanta Kumar Garnaik conducted post mortem
examination and opined that the cause of death was due to
massive hemorrhage and shock as a result of decapitation of
head with transection of spinal cord and cut of internal and
external carotid arteries.
             The Investigating Officer sent requisition to the
medical officer (P.W.5) along with the seized tangia making a

                                   6
query if the cutting of the head from the trunk of the deceased
was possible by the weapon of offence. P.W.5 opined that the
injury detected on the neck of the dead body of the deceased
would be possible by the weapon of offence produced before him
and    accordingly  submitted    his   opinion  vide   Ext.8. The
Investigating Officer received information that the appellant who
was in Adenigarh Police outpost lock up cleverly escaped. On
30.11.2002, the I.O. seized wearing apparels of the deceased,
command certificate and prepared seizure list Ext.12. The I.O.
also seized the nail clippings of the appellant which were
collected by the medical officer under seizure list Ext.18. He
received the post mortem report. The appellant was arrested on
31.12.2002 and forwarded to Court on 01.01.2003. The two
female    co-accused    persons   were    also  arrested   by  the
Investigating Officer and forwarded to Court on 17.01.2003. The
I.O. sent the seized incriminating articles to SFSL, Rasulgarh,
Bhubaneswar     on  20.01.2003     through   S.D.J.M.,  Boudh   for
chemical analysis and also received the chemical examination
report Ext.20.
            After completion of investigation, the Investigating
Officer submitted charge sheet on 4.2.2003 under sections 452
and 302 of Indian Penal Code against the appellant and 302/109

                                   7
of the Indian Penal Code against the co-accused persons Ambika
Jani and Pratima Jani.
4.           After observing due committal formalities, the case
of the appellant was committed to the Court of Session for trial
along with the co-accused persons where the learned Addl.
Sessions Judge, Boudh framed charges against the appellant
under sections 452/302 of the Indian Penal Code and under
section 452, 302 read with section 109 of the Indian Penal Code
against the co-accused persons Ambika Jani and Pratima Jani on
21.01.2004 and since the appellant and the co-accused persons
denied the charge, pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried,
the sessions trial procedure was resorted to prosecute them and
to establish their guilt.
5.           In order to prove its case, the prosecution examined
ten witnesses.
            P.W.1 Madhaba Chandra Behera is a witness to the
inquest over the severed head of the deceased under inquest
report Ext.1 at Adenigarh Police outpost. He is also a witness to
the seizure of blood stained tangia and blood stained wearing
apparels of the appellant under seizure list Ext.2.
            P.W.2 Prasanat Kumar Sahoo is the informant in the
case who was the brother-in-law of the deceased and he

                                    8
supported    the  prosecution    case  as  narrated   in  the First
Information Report. He is also a witness to the inquest over the
trunk of the body of the deceased as well as severed head joined
with the trunk and proved the inquest reports Exts. 4 and 5.
             P.W.3 Satyabhama Behera is the widow of the
deceased and she is an eye witness to the occurrence. She is
also an inquest witness.
             P.W.4 Abani Kumar Majhi stated to have proceeded
to the spot being called by the informant along with others and
found the trunk of the dead body was lying in a pool of blood. He
is also a witness to the seizure of blood stained earth and sample
earth under seizure list Ext.6.
             P.W.5 Dr. Susanta Kumar Garnaik was the Pediatric
Specialist attached to District Headquarters Hospital, Boudh who
conducted post mortem examination over the dead body of the
deceased as well as severed head and proved his report Ext.7.
He also answered to query made by the Investigating Officer
regarding possibility of the injury on the neck of the deceased by
the weapon of offence and proved his query report Ext.8.
             P.W.6 Harihar Pradhan stated to have seen the
appellant proceeding to Adenigarh Police outpost holding a

                                    9
tangia in his right hand and some object in a covered condition
holding it in his left hand.
             P.W.7     Kishore  Chandra    Patnaik   was    the   Asst.
Surgeon at Adenigarh PHC and he collected the nail clippings of
the appellant on police requisition and proved his report Ext.9.
              P.W.8 Narayan Pradhan was the constable attached
to Adenigarh Police outpost who carried the dead body for post
mortem examination. He is also a witness to the seizure of the
wearing apparels of the deceased and a command certificate
under seizure list Ext.12.
              P.W.9 Promod Kumar Dehury was the ASI of Police
attached to Adenigarh Police outpost who was the scribe of the
First Information Report.
              P.W.10 Rama Chandra Swain was the officer in
charge of the Purunakatak Police Station who is the Investigating
Officer in this case.
           The    Prosecution   exhibited    as  many      as   twenty
documents. Exts.1, 4 and 5 are the inquest reports, Ext.2 is the
seizure list, Ext.3 is the FIR, Ext.6 is the seizure list, Ext.7 is the
post-mortem report, Ext.8 is the opinion given by P.W.5, Ext.9 is
the report of P.W.7, Ext.10 is the command certificate, Ext.11 is
the dead body challan, Ext.12 is the seizure list, Exts. 13 to 13/5

                                    10
are the negatives of the photographs, Exts.14 to 14/5 are the
positives of the photographs, Ext.15 is the requisition for
collection of the nail clippings, Ext.16 is the spot map, Ext.17 is
the requisition, Ext.18 is the seizure list, Ext.19 is the office copy
of the forwarding reports and Ext.20 is the chemical examination
report.
             The prosecution also proved five materials objects.
M.O.I is the blood stained tangia, M.O.II is the blood stained
check lungi, M.O.III is the blood stained baniyan, M.O.IV is the
sweater and M.O.V is the lungi.
6.           The defence plea of the appellant was one of denial
and it was pleaded that the son of the appellant died and due to
deep sorrow, the appellant was staying inside the house and he
has been falsely implicated in the case out of suspicion.
             One witness, namely Prabina Kumar Pradhan was
examined as D.W.1 and he simply stated that no such incident
had taken place in the village.
             No document was exhibited on behalf of the defence.
7.           The learned Trial Court in the impugned judgment
has been pleased to disbelieve the abetment part played by the
female co-accused persons and observed that there was no
clear, cogent and definite evidence against them. So far as the

                                  11
appellant is concerned, the learned Trial Court held that the oral
testimony of eye witness P.W.3 gets adequate support from
P.W.4 and P.W.6. The learned Trial Court also accepted the
medical evidence and taking note of the findings of the chemical
analysis report found the appellant guilty under sections 452 and
302 of the Indian Penal Code.
8.          Mr. Arunendra Mohanty, learned counsel for the
appellant   contended    that the  petitioner   has  been   falsely
implicated in the case basing on suspicion and the evidence of
the solitary eye witness to the occurrence who is none else than
the wife of the deceased is not at all convincing and everything
has been stage managed to falsely implicate the appellant in the
case and therefore, benefit of doubt should be extended in
favour of the appellant.
             Mr.  Prem     Kumar   Patnaik,   learned   Additional
Government Advocate on the other hand contended that apart
from ocular testimony of the eye witness, the medical evidence,
the conduct of the appellant prior to the occurrence as well as
after the occurrence, the recovery of the severed head and
tangia from the possession of the appellant, the seizure of blood
stained wearing apparels of the appellant and above all strong

                                  12
motive behind the commission of the crime clearly establishes
the charges and therefore, the appeal should be dismissed.
9.          Adverting over the nature and the cause of death of
the deceased, we find that apart from the three inquest reports
Exts. 1, 4 and 5, the prosecution has also relied upon the
evidence of P.W.5 Dr. Susant Kumar Garnaik who conducted the
post mortem examination over the cadaver of the deceased on
30.11.2002 and found that there was decapitation of head from
the trunk. The sharp cutting injury on the neck was opined to be
ante mortem in nature. Another sharp cutting incised looking
wound of size 2.5 c.m. x 0.5 c.m. x 0.3 c.m. was detected on the
left forearm which was also opined to be ante mortem in nature.
There was surrounding bruise to the injury on the left forearm.
The cause of death of the deceased was opined to be massive
hemorrhage and shock as a result of decapitation of head with
transection of spinal cord and cut of internal and external carotid
arteries and all the injuries were opined to be ante mortem in
nature. The doctor proved the post mortem report as Ext.7.
            The learned Trial Court has accepted the medical
evidence. The learned counsel for the appellant did not challenge
the findings of the post mortem report.

                                   13
            After perusing the evidence on record, the post
mortem examination report Ext.7 and the evidence of the doctor
(P.W.5) who conducted post mortem examination, we are of the
view that there was no dispute regarding the cause of death of
the deceased due to massive hemorrhage and shock as a result
of decapitation of head with transection of spinal cord and cut of
internal and external carotid arteries.
10.         The star witness of the prosecution is none else than
P.W.3 Satyabhama Behera, widow of the deceased who deposed
as an eye witness to the occurrence.
            She stated that the son of the appellant who was
suffering from jaundice expired due to lack of appropriate
treatment but during the night of occurrence at about 2.00 a.m.,
the appellant brought the dead body of his son to the courtyard
of the deceased and challenged the deceased that it was due to
practice of black magic by the deceased that his son died. He
also asked the deceased to give life to his son or else he would
kill the deceased. The appellant along with co-accused persons
tried to set fire to the house of the deceased but P.W.3
extinguished the fire by pouring water. She further stated that
the appellant shot an arrow at the deceased which came in
contact with the left arm of the deceased. She further stated that

                                    14
even though her brother (P.W.2) and others tried to pacify the
matter but the appellant threatened them with dire consequence.
She further stated that when the deceased was inside the house
and she was standing at the front door blocking the way, the
appellant pushed her and entered inside the house and cut the
head of the deceased brutally by means of a tangia and
thereafter, left the spot with the severed head of the deceased.
             P.W.3 identified the weapon of offence in Court as
well as the wearing apparels of the deceased. She has further
stated that a lantern was burning inside the house.
             The evidence of P.W.3 was not at all shaken during
cross-examination to dispel doubt about her presence during the
course of commission of the crime. The contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the appellant that P.W.3 being closely related
to the deceased is a highly interested witness and therefore, her
evidence should be discarded, cannot be accepted.
             Close relationship of a witness with the deceased is
not a ground for disbelieving his testimony and he cannot be
branded as a highly interested witness. Ordinarily, a close
relative does not screen/spare the real offender. If on an overall
careful examination of the statement of the witness, it is found
that his testimony is trustworthy, it can be relied upon and the

                                    15
Court   should    not   unnecessarily  doubt   the   credibility and
worthiness of such witness.
             In the case of Dalip Singh and Ors. –Vrs.- The
State of Punjab       reported in (1954) 1 SCR 145, it has been
held as follows:-
             “A witness is normally to be considered
             independent unless he or she springs from
             sources which are likely to be tainted and that
             usually means unless the witness has cause,
             such as enmity against the accused, to wish to
             implicate him falsely. Ordinarily, a close relation
             would be the last to screen the real culprit and
             falsely implicate an innocent person. It is true,
             when feelings run high and there is personal
             cause for enmity, that there is a tendency to
             drag in an innocent person against whom a
             witness has a grudge along with the guilty, but
             foundation must be laid for such a criticism and
             the mere fact of relationship far from being a
             foundation is often a sure guarantee of truth.
             However, we are not attempting any sweeping
             generalization. Each case must be judged on its
             own facts. Our observations are only made to
             combat what is so often put forward in cases
             before us as a general rule of prudence. There is
             no such general rule. Each case must be limited
             to and be governed by its own facts.”
             The evidence of P.W.3 gets ample corroboration from
the medical evidence. P.W.2 has not only stated about the
presence of the appellant at the spot and his conduct in
challenging them being armed with weapons but also stated that

                                   16
P.W.3 narrated the incident to him and accordingly, he lodged
the First Information Report. The immediate conduct of P.W.3 in
disclosing about the incident before P.W.2 and naming the
appellant to be the assailant of the deceased is admissible as res
gestae under section 6 of the Evidence Act.       The rationale of
making certain statements or facts admissible under Section 6 of
the Evidence Act was on account of spontaneity and immediacy
of such statement or fact, in relation to the "fact in issue" and
thereafter, such facts or statements are treated as a part of the
same transaction. The evidence of P.W.3 that the appellant
carried the severed head of the deceased and left the spot with
tangia is also corroborated by the recovery of the same from the
possession of the appellant at Adenigarh Police outpost which
has been stated by the Investigating Officer. P.W.6 also stated
to have seen the appellant proceeding towards Adenigarh Police
outpost holding a tangia in his right hand and some object in a
concealed condition in his left hand from where blood was
coming out. The tangia which was seized from the possession of
the appellant was sent for chemical analysis and found to have
contained human blood of group ‘B’. Similarly the check lungi
and baniyan of the appellant were also found to have contained
human blood of group ‘B’. The same human blood group was

                                  17
detected in the wearing apparels of the deceased. This is a very
weighty   circumstance   against   the  appellant  and  there   is
absolutely no explanation offered by the appellant of this highly
incriminating circumstance. All these factors lend support to the
testimony of P.W.3.
            Thus we are of the view that the evidence of P.W.3 is
clear, cogent, trustworthy and above board and therefore, we
have no hesitation at all to place implicit reliance on such
evidence.
11.          The prosecution has also proved a strong motive on
the part of the appellant to commit the crime. Even though the
son of the appellant died on account of jaundice, the appellant
was suspecting that the deceased had practised black magic
which led to the death of his son. Proof of motive recedes into
the background in cases where the prosecution relies upon an
eyewitness account of the occurrence. If the Court upon a proper
appraisal of the deposition of the eyewitness comes to the
conclusion that the version given by him is credible, absence of
evidence to prove the motive is rendered inconsequential.
Conversely, even if the prosecution succeeds in establishing a
strong motive for the commission of the offence, but the
evidence of the eyewitness is found unreliable or unworthy of

                                    18
credit, existence of a motive does not by itself provide a safe
basis for convicting the accused. Proof of motive in a case which
rests on an eyewitness account lends strength to the prosecution
case and fortifies the Court in its ultimate conclusion.
12.          The manner in which under the grasp of patent
misconception, the appellant thought that the deceased had
practised black magic on his son which brought his untimely
tragic end, challenged the deceased and did not pay any
attention to the advices of others to pacify the matter and during
midnight, in spite of the protest of the wife of the deceased,
entered inside the house of the deceased and mercilessly
assaulted the deceased by tangia and severed his head and left
the spot with the severed head and tangia clearly proves the
intention of the appellant to commit the murder of the deceased.
Even though the murder appears to have been the result of an
extreme emotional and psychological disturbance but it does not
mollify the felonious propensity of offence and squarely brings
the act within the purview of section 302 of the Indian Penal
Code.
13.          Thus on critical examination of record, the irresistible
conclusion surfaces is that the prosecution has established the
guilt of the appellant to the hilt beyond all reasonable doubt and

                                                19
       therefore, we are of the view that the impugned judgment and
       order of conviction which has been imposed by the learned Trial
       Court and the sentence passed there under does not suffer from
       any infirmity to warrant interference and therefore, the Jail
       Criminal Appeal being devoid of merits, stands dismissed.
                         Accordingly, the Jail Criminal Appeal is dismissed.
                                                                …………………………
                                                                 S. K. Sahoo, J.
Kumari Sanju Panda, J.            I agree.
                                                               .……………………….
                                                                Sanju Panda, J.
       Orissa High Court, Cuttack
       The 20 th June, 2016/Sisir


