                          IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                                      CRLMC No. 956 Of 2009
        An application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
        Procedure, 1973 in connection with G.R. Case No.1939 of 2008
        pending on the file of S.D.J.M., Jharsuguda.
                                           ----------------------------
               Mukesh Kumar Wadhwa ………                                               Petitioner
                                                   -Versus-
               State of Orissa                        ………                            Opposite party
                      For Petitioner:                    -             Mr. Bijaya Kumar Ragada
                      For State:                         -             Mr. Priyabrata Tripathy
                                                                       Addl. Standing Counsel
                                           ----------------------------
        P R E S E N T:
                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Date of Hearing & Judgment: 23.04.2018
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J.           The petitioner Mukesh Kumar Wadhwa has filed this
        application under section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code
        challenging the impugned order dated 09.03.2009 of the learned
        S.D.J.M., Jharsuguda passed in G.R. No.1939 of 2008 in taking
        cognizance of offence under sections 506/34 of the Indian Penal
        Code and section 6 of the Indecent Representation of Women

                                2
(Prohibition) Act, 1986 (hereafter ‘1986 Act’) and issuance of
process against him. The said case arises out of Jharsuguda P.S.
Case No.724 of 2008.
              Mr. Bijaya Kumar Ragada, learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that as per the first information report
lodged by the victim on 31.12.2008 before the Inspector in
charge,    Jharsuguda    police station,   though   the  case   was
registered under sections 376(2)(g)/506 and section 6 of the
1986 Act against the petitioner and others but during course of
investigation,   it  was  found   that   there  are   materials  for
commission of offences under sections 376/506 against co-
accused Brundaban Naik. So far as the petitioner and other co-
accused persons are concerned, they were charge sheeted under
section 506 of the Indian Penal Code and section 6 of the 1986
Act. It is further submitted that the victim was serving in the
shop of the petitioner where the co-accused Brundaban Naik was
also serving and when the petitioner came to know about the
illicit relationship between the victim and the co-accused
Brundaban Naik, he asked the victim to leave the service for
which a false case has been foisted against the petitioner. It is
further contended that the ingredients of offence under section 6
of 1986 Act are not attracted and though it is alleged in the 161

                                 3
Cr.P.C. statement of the victim that the petitioner and others
took her nude photographs in the camera and mobile phone but
nothing was seized during course of investigation to substantiate
such aspect and therefore, it is a fit case where this Court should
invoke its inherent power under section 482 of Cr.P.C. to quash
the impugned order of cognizance. Learned counsel for the
petitioner placed the 161 Cr.P.C. statement of the victim as well
as charge sheet.
            Mr.  Priyabrata    Tripathy,  learned  Addl.  Standing
Counsel on the other hand supported the impugned order and
contended that there is no such palpable error in the order so as
to be interfered with invoking inherent power under section 482
of Cr.P.C.
            In the first information report lodged by the victim, it
is mentioned that the petitioner and co-accused Brundaban Naik
and others committed gang rape on her. However, in the 161
Cr.P.C. statement, the victim alleged that it is only co-accused
Brundaban Naik who committed rape on her. So far as the
petitioner and other co-accused persons are concerned, it is
alleged   that  while    the  co-accused    Brundaban    Naik  was
committing rape on her, the petitioner and others took nude
photographs in the camera and mobile phone and when the

                                 4
victim    prevented  them,    they    threatened   her   with  dire
consequence asking her not to inform the matter before
anybody.
             During course of investigation, the Investigating
Officer found the materials under sections 376/506 of the Indian
Penal Code against co-accused Brundaban Naik only. So far as
the petitioner and other co-accused persons are concerned, the
Investigating Officer found materials under sections 506/34 of
the Indian Penal Code and section 6 of 1986 Act and accordingly,
submitted charge sheet.
             Section 6 of 1986 Act deals with punishment for
contravention the provisions under sections 3 or 4 of 1986 Act.
Section 3 of 1986 Act prohibits advertisement or publication
containing indecent representation of women in any form.
Section 4 of 1986 Act prohibits of publication or sending by post
of   books,   pamphlets  etc,   selling,  hiring, distributing and
circulating any material that contains indecent representation of
women in any form.
             During course of investigation, neither any mobile
phone nor any camera nor any nude photographs of the victim
were seized to substantiate the accusation leveled by the victim
against the petitioner. There is no material on record regarding

                                 5
any publication or any exhibition or any advertisement relating
to the alleged nude photographs of the victim. Similarly, there
are also no materials which would attract the provision under
section 4 of 1986 Act.
             Law is well settled that when a prosecution at the
initial stage is asked to be quashed, the test to be applied by the
Court is as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as made
prima facie establish the offence. The Court can take into
consideration any special features which appear in a particular
case to consider whether it is expedient and in the interest of
justice to permit a prosecution to continue. The Court cannot be
utilized for any oblique purpose and where in the opinion of the
Court, chances of ultimate conviction are bleak and no useful
purpose is likely to be served by allowing a criminal prosecution
to continue, the Court may while taking into consideration the
special facts of a case can quash the proceedings even though it
may be at a preliminary stage. The Inherent Jurisdiction under
section 482 of Cr.P.C. though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
carefully and with caution.
             Since there is no material that the petitioner has
contravened either the provisions of section 3 or section 4 of
1986 Act and nothing incriminating material was found from the

                                     6
possession of the petitioner and except the statement of the
victim, there is no material that any nude photographs were
taken either by the petitioner or by any of the co-accused
persons, I am of the view that the ingredients of offence under
section 6 of 1986 Act is not attracted.
                 So far as the offence under section 506 of the Indian
Penal Code is concerned, the victim has stated about the threat
given by the petitioner and others at the time of occurrence and
the accused persons telling her not to report the matter before
police or else she would face dire consequence. Therefore, prima
facie case for taking cognizance of the offence under section 506
of the Indian Penal Code is made out.
                 In view of the forgoing discussions, I am inclined to
quash the impugned order of taking cognizance under section 6
of the 1986 Act so far as the petitioner is concerned. This order
will not be a bar to proceed against the other co-accused persons
for the offences as per the impugned order so also against the
petitioner for the offence under section 506 of the Indian Penal
Code.
                 Accordingly, the CRLMC application is disposed of.
                                                   ..……………………….
                                                     S. K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 23rd April 2018/Pravakar


