                     IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                               CRREV NO. 491 of 2000
         From the judgment and order dated 27.09.1993 passed by the
         learned Chief Judicial Magistrate -cum- Asst. Sessions Judge,
         Mayurbhaj, Baripada in Sessions Trial Case No.29/133 of 1992
         and the judgment and order dated 26.08.2000 passed by the
         Sessions Judge, Mayurbhanj, Baripada in Criminal Appeal No.153
         of 1993.
                                   ---------------------
              Radhakrushna Behera          ………                        Petitioner
                                         -Versus-
              State of Orissa               ………                       Opp. party
                   For Petitioner:            -        Hemanta Kumar Behera
                    For Opp. party:           -         Mr. Dillip Kumar Mishra
                                                        Addl. Govt. Advocate
                                    ---------------------
         P R E S E N T:
                      THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
         ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                      Date of Hearing and Judgment- 22.09.2016
         ------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. Sahoo, J.        The petitioner Radhakrushna Behera faced trial in the
         Court of learned Chief Judicial Magistrate -cum- Asst. Sessions
         Judge, Mayurbhaj, Baripada in Sessions Trial Case No.29/133 of
         1992 for offences punishable under sections 366 and 376 of the
         Indian Penal Code for kidnapping the victim “AB” on 06.12.1991

                                 2
at about 8.00 a.m. with intention that she may be compelled to
marry against her will and also committed rape on her.
            The learned Trial Court found the appellant guilty
under both the offences and sentenced him to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for a term of seven years on each count and to pay
a fine of Rs.1000/- on each count, in default, to undergo R.I. for
a term of three months on each count and the substantial
sentences were directed to run concurrently. The petitioner
carried an appeal to the Court of Session which was heard by
learned Sessions Judge, Mayurbhanj, Baripada in Criminal Appeal
No.153 of 1993. The learned Appellate Court acquitted the
appellant under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code but uphold
the conviction and sentence passed by the learned Trial Court
under section 366 of the Indian Penal Code.
2.          The prosecution case, in short, as per the First
Information Report (Ext.1) lodged by Bipin Behera (P.W.1), the
father of the victim is that the victim was aged about 14 years at
the time of occurrence which took place on 06.12.1991 at about
8 a.m. She had been to a homeopathy doctor along with one
Smt. Jayanti Behera @ Dukhini Behera (P.W.2). At about 10.00
a.m. the P.W.2 came and informed the informant that while she
and the victim were returning after purchasing medicine, the

                                3
petitioner obstructed them on the way and asked the victim to
accompany him. When the victim did not agree, the petitioner
threatened him with dire consequences and forcibly took her.
After getting such message from P.W.2, the informant and his
son immediately went in search of the victim but could not locate
her and accordingly returned home. On 09.12.1991 the informant
got the message that the petitioner had kept the victim in the
house of his brother-in-law Chitaranjan Behera. Immediately the
informant went there and reached at the house of Chitaranjan
Behera. At that point of time, Chitaranjan Behera was not in the
house but his wife is present and she told that the petitioner had
come with the victim in the afternoon on 06.12.1991 and after
taking tiffin, they had left. Accordingly, the informant returned
back home where he came to know from the villagers that the
petitioner had already returned to his house with the victim and
had confined the victim.
             Accordingly, the FIR was lodged before the Officer in
Charge of Jharpokharia Police Station, on the basis of which
Jharpokharia P.S. Case No. 62 of 1991 was registered under
section 366 of the Indian Penal Code against the appellant.
3.           P.W.6 Basant Kumar Patra who was the A.S.I. of
Police   attached   to   Jharpokharia  Police   Station  took   up

                                4
investigation of the case and during course of investigation, he
examined the informant, visited the spot, examined other
witnesses and rescued the victim girl from the house of the
petitioner. The petitioner and victim were sent for medical
examination to the District Headquarters Hospital, Baripada and
the petitioner was arrested and forwarded to the Court. P.W.6
examined some more witnesses, seized the In and Out Register
of Kalika Lodging of Baripada and released the same in the zima
of the owner of the lodge under Zimanama Ext.3. He also seized
the school leaving certificate of the victim on 04.01.1992 under
seizure list Ext.4 and after completion of investigation, charge
sheet was submitted against the petitioner under section 366 of
the Indian Penal Code on 17.01.1992..
4.           After submission of charge sheet, the case was
committed to the Court of Session for trial after observing due
committal procedure and it was transferred to the Court of
Assistant Sessions Judge, Mayurbhanj, Baripada for trial where
the learned Trial Court charged the petitioner under sections 366
and 376 of the Indian Penal Code on 14.09.1993 and since the
petitioner refuted the charge, pleaded not guilty and claimed to
be tried, the Sessions trial procedure was resorted to prosecute
him and establish his guilt.

                                 5
5.           During course of trial, in order to prove its case, the
prosecution examined nine witnesses.
             P.W.1 Bipin Behera is the informant in the case and
father of the victim. He stated about the information received
from P.W.2 regarding kidnapping of the victim by the petitioner.
             P.W.2 Dukhini Behera stated to have accompanied
the victim to bring homeopathy medicine on the date of
occurrence and she stated about the overt act committed by the
appellant with the victim which she disclosed before the mother
of the victim.
             P.W.3 Dayal Guru Mahanta and P.W.4 Bulu Babu
Mahata did not support the prosecution case.
             P.W.5 is the victim.
             P.W.6 Basanta Kumar Patra was the A.S.I. attached
to Jharpokharia Police Station who is also the Investigating
Officer.
             P.W.7 Dr. Minati Majhi was attached to the District
Headquarters Hospital, Baripada who examined the victim on
11.12.1991 and proved her medical report vide Ext.6
             P.W.8 Dr. Shankarlal Thakkar was the Radiologist
attached    to  District  Headquarters    Hospital,  Baripada   who
conducted ossification test of the victim to determine her age and

                                 6
he opined that the age of the victim was fifteen to sixteen and
half years and accordingly proved the report Ext.7.
             P.W.9 Manoranjan Mahanta was the Manager of
Kalika Lodge at Baripada and he stated about the seizure of the
guest register of the lodge by the police under seizure list Ext.2.
             The prosecution exhibited eight documents. Ext.1 is
the written report, Ext.2 is the seizure list, Ext.3 is the
zimanama, Ext.4 is the seizure list, Ext.5 is the school leaving
certificate, Ext.6 is the report of P.W.7, Ext.7 is the report of
P.W.8 and Ext.8 is the report of Dr. P.C. Praharaj.
             The prosecution proved one joint photograph as the
material object which was marked as M.O.I.
6.           The defence plea of the petitioner is one of denial.
7.           The learned Trial Court on analysis of the evidence on
record came to hold that at best the age of the victim girl can
never be more than seventeen years. It was further held that the
evidence of P.W.5, the victim is believable. Accordingly, the
learned Trial Court held that on careful scrutiny of the evidence
brought    on  record,   the  irresistible conclusion  is  that   the
prosecution has been able to bring home the charge under
sections 366 and 376 of the Indian Penal Code against the
petitioner beyond all reasonable doubt.

                               7
            The learned Appellate Court discussed in paragraph-6
of the judgment about the age of the victim and has been
pleased to observe that the victim had crossed 18 years and she
was major at the time of occurrence. Learned Appellate Court
further held that the facts and circumstances of the case go a
long way to show that the petitioner had abducted the victim with
intent to compel her to marry him against her will and it was not
a voluntary move on her part. The learned Appellate Court mainly
relying on the evidence of the doctor which indicates that there
was no sign of recent sexual intercourse has been pleased to
acquit the petitioner of the charge under section 376 of the
Indian Penal Code while upholding the conviction under section
366 of the Indian Penal Code.
8.          Learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Hemanta
Kumar Behera contended that when the learned Appellate Court
has held the victim to be major at the time of occurrence and the
statement of the victim indicates that she had moved from place
to place with the petitioner without raising any hullah or
complaining against the petitioner at any point of time though
she had ample scope and opportunity, it cannot be said that
there was any abduction. The learned counsel further submitted
that the victim was a consenting party and she has stayed with

                                 8
the petitioner not only in the relation’s house of the petitioner but
also in the Lodge and in the house of the petitioner when she was
rescued and therefore, the ingredients of the offence under
section 366 of the Indian Penal Code are not attracted.
             Mr.    Dillip Kumar      Mishra,    learned   Additional
Government Advocate on the other hand contended that if the
evidence of the victim at the threshold should be taken into
consideration, it is apparent that she was kidnapped by force and
the learned Appellate Court was not justified in holding that the
victim was aged about eighteen years when from the statement
her mother, school leaving certificate, it appears that she was
fourteen to fifteen years at the time of occurrence.
9.           Section 366 of the Indian Penal Code deals with
kidnapping, abducting or inducing woman to compel her for
marriage to any person against her will or that she may be
forced or seduced to illicit intercourse or knowing it to be likely
that she will be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse.
             For kidnapping from the lawful guardianship, section
361 of the Indian Penal Code is relevant which indicates that not
only the female victim should be under the age of eighteen years
but there must be material that she had been taken away or
enticed by the accused out of the keeping of the lawful

                                  9
guardianship. The word “take” means to cause to go, to escort or
to get into possession. The word “entice” involves an idea of
inducement of exciting hope or desire in the other.
              ‘Abduction’ has been defined under section 362 of
the Indian Penal Code which indicates that there must be
compulsion by force or any deceitful means for inducing any
person to go from any place. Where no force or deceitful means
is practised on the person stated to have been abducted, no
conviction for abduction shall stand. In other words, if there is
consent of the person moved, that to freely and voluntarily then
the ingredients of abduction will not be attracted.
              Kidnapping from lawful guardianship is committed
only in respect of a minor or person of unsound mind whereas
abduction is in respect of any person. If the girl is eighteen or
over and if the boy is sixteen or over, she or he could only be
abducted and not kidnapped. If she was under the age of
eighteen or the boy was under the age of sixteen, she or he
could be kidnapped as well as abducted if the taking was by
force or if the inducement was by any deceitful means.
10.           In this case, the evidence of the victim who has been
examined as P.W.5 is very relevant. In the chief examination,
she has stated that while she was returning with P.W.2 after

                                10
bringing some homeopathy medicine at about 10.00 a.m., the
petitioner came from the opposite direction and directed them
not to move further and directed P.W.2 to go away so that he
can take her. The victim has further stated that she along with
P.W.2 and her minor daughter entered into the house of a man
and since the petitioner threatened to stab the house owner, he
drove her out of his house and then the petitioner forcibly
dragged her and dealt a slap on her cheek and threatened P.W.2
with a knife and then took her to different places.
             However, in the cross-examination, the victim has
stated that there are houses of other persons at Manabhanja
near the house inside which she entered with P.W.2. She has
further stated that though there were some villagers at that
place while she was running to the house of a man but she did
not tell anything to those persons. The victim further stated that
the petitioner was holding her hand at Manabhanja Crossing. She
further stated that she along with the petitioner went to Bombay
Chhak in a truck by sitting in the cabin where the driver, cleaner
and one labourer were present. The victim has further stated
that at Bombay Chhak, there were number of shops and they
stayed there for about five minutes and then in a car both of
them went to Rairangpur and at Rairangpur, the petitioner left

                                11
her at Nisamani Lodging and went to bring tiffin and there were
some more person in that hotel at that time. The victim further
stated that she had taken a photograph with the petitioner in a
photo studio and she stayed in the sister’s house of the
petitioner at Rairangpur for about half an hour and then she
came from Rairangpur to Baripada with the petitioner in a bus
where she has sitting in the ladies’ seat of the bus along with
other ladies and after getting down at Baripada Bus Stand, both
of them went to Kalika Lodge. She further stated that while they
were staying at Kalika Lodge, the petitioner was going out to
bring tiffin and meal for her and at that time she was staying in
that Lodge and the Manager and servants of that Lodge were
then present in the Lodge. The victim has further stated that at
Baripada, the petitioner gave her another saree and she was
using vermillion during her stay with the petitioner and that the
parents and other family members of the petitioner were present
while he took her to his house. It has been confronted to the
victim and proved through the Investigating Officer that she has
not stated before police that at the time of returning, out of fear
she along with P.W.2 returned back to village Manabhanja and
entered inside the house of a man but due to threatening made
by the petitioner, the said house owner drove them out. The

                                12
victim has also not stated before the Investigating Officer that
the petitioner threatened P.W.2 with a knife due to which P.W.2
fled away and also threatened her to murder in case she does
not follow him. The victim has also not stated before police that
at Nisamani Lodge of Rairangpur, the petitioner forced her to
sleep with him and committed sexual intercourse with her. She
has also not stated before police that as per the instruction of
the petitioner, she did not disclose the fact to anybody either at
Bombay Chhak or in the house of the sister of the petitioner at
Rairangpur.
             Thus the evidence on record clearly indicates that the
victim had got ample opportunity at different places either while
moving on the road or in the bus or in the car or staying at the
Lodging to complain against the petitioner or to protest against
the activities of the petitioner but nowhere she had made any
complain or protest. She not only accompanied the petitioner
from place to place freely without any hitch but took vermilion on
her forehead and went to the photo studio for taking joint
photograph with the petitioner. All these circumstances indicate
that the victim had not only attended the age of discretion but
she was acting freely and there was no compulsion or force on
her to move from one place to another. There is also absence of

                                  13
any material on record that any deceitful means or any
inducement was given to the victim for moving from one place to
the other, which is one of the ingredients of the offence of
abduction.
             In case of State of Karnataka -Vrs.- Sureshbabu
Puk Raj Porral reported in AIR 1994 Supreme Court 966, it
is held as follows:-
             “7. Now coming to the evidence of PW 7, she
             deposed that she went along with the sister of
             the accused to the bus stand and got into the
             bus and went to several places and stayed with
             the accused in lodges and that the accused had
             intercourse with her. She, however, added that
             the accused was having intercourse against her
             will. She was cross-examined at length and we
             find several omissions in her previous statement.
             In the cross-examination the defence tried to
             elicit from her as to what exactly the accused did
             to her in those places during night. She went on
             saying that the accused did something to her
             which he ought not to have done. She admitted
             that her statement was the same before the
             police also. The learned Single Judge of the High
             Court especially pointed out this aspect and
             observed that it is very difficult to infer that the
             accused had intercourse with her. Therefore in
             the absence of some other evidence to support

                                 14
             the prosecution case that the accused had
             intercourse with her, in our view, the High Court
             was not wrong in holding that the offence
             under Section 376 I.P.C. is not made out. Now,
             coming to the offence of kidnapping punishable
             under Section   366 I.P.C.,   again  her  age    is
             doubtful. That apart, PW 7's evidence shows that
             she went with the accused voluntarily. When the
             age is in doubt, then the question of taking her
             away from lawful guardianship does not arise.
             However, the second requirement that taking or
             enticing away a minor out of the keeping of the
             lawful guardian is an essential ingredient of the
             offence of kidnapping. In the instant case, we
             are not concerned with enticement. But what we
             have to find out is whether the part played by
             the accused amounts to taking out of the
             keeping   of  the   lawful  guardian.  From   the
             evidence of PW 7, it is clear that she was also
             anxious to go with the accused to see places. In
             such a case, it is difficult to hold that the
             accused had taken her away from the keeping of
             her lawful guardian and something more has to
             be   shown   in   a   case  of  this  nature  like
             inducement.”
             In case of Shyam –Vrs.- State of Maharashtra
reported in AIR 1995 Supreme Court 2169 while dealing
with a case under section 366 of the Indian Penal Code, it was
held as follows:-

                      15
“3. In her statement in Court, the prosecutrix
has put blame on the appellants. She has
deposed that she was threatened right from the
beginning when being kidnapped and she was
kept under threat till the police ultimately
recovered her. Normally, her statement in that
regard would be difficult to dislodge, but having
regard to her conduct, as also the manner of the
so-called "taking", it does not seem that the
prosecutrix was truthful in that regard. In the
first place, it is too much of a coincidence that
the prosecutrix on her visit to a common tap,
catering to many, would be found alone, or that
her whereabouts would be under check by both
the appellants/accused and that they would
emerge at the scene abruptly to commit the
offence of kidnapping by "taking" her out of the
lawful guardianship of her mother. Secondly, it
is difficult to believe that to the strata of society
to which the parties belong, they would have
gone unnoticed while proceeding to the house of
that other. The prosecutrix cannot be said to
have been tied to the bicycle as if a load while
sitting on the carrier thereof. She could have
easily jumped off. She was a fully grown up girl
may be one who had yet not touched 18 years of
age, but, still she was in the age of discretion,
sensible and aware of the intention of the
accused Shyam, That he was taking her away
for a purpose. It was not unknown to her with

                              16
          whom she was going in view of his earlier
          proposal. It was expected of her then to jump
          down from the bicycle, or put up a struggle and,
          in any case, raise an alarm to protect herself. No
          such steps were taken by her. It seems she was
          a willing party to go with Shyam- the appellant
          on her own and in that sense there was no
          "taking" out of the guardianship of her mother.
          The culpability of neither Shyam, A-1 nor that of
          Suresh, A-2, in these circumstances, appears to
          us    established.   The   charge    against   the
          appellants/accused     under Section   366, I.P.C.
          would thus fail. Accordingly, the appellants
          deserve acquittal.”
          In case of S. Varadarajan –Vrs.- State of Madras
reported in AIR 1965 Supreme Court 942 it is held as
follows:-
          “Taking or enticing away a minor out of the
          keeping of a lawful guardian is an essential
          ingredient of the offence of kidnapping.
          xxx            xxx             xxx             xxx
          But when the girl (who though a minor had
          attained the age of discretion and is on the
          verge of attaining majority and is a senior
          college student) from the house of the relative of
          the father where she is kept, herself telephones
          the accused to meet her at a certain place, and
          goes there to meet him and finding him waiting

                     17
with his car gets into that car of her own accord,
and the accused takes her to various places and
ultimately to the Sub-Register’s Office where
they get an agreement to marry registered, and
there is no suggestion that this was done by
force or blandishment or anything like that on
the part of the accused but it is clear from the
evidence that the insistence of marriage came
from her side, the accused by complying with
her wishes can by no stretch of imagination be
said to have “taken” her out of the keeping of
her lawful guardianship, that is, the father.
       The fact of her accompanying the accused
all along is quite consistent with her own desire
to be the wife of the accused in which the desire
of accompanying him wherever he went is of
course implicit. Under these circumstances no
inference can be drawn that the accused is guilty
of taking away the girl out of the keeping of her
father. She has willingly accompanied him and
the law does not cast upon him the duty of
taking her back to her father’s house or even of
telling her not to accompany him.
       There is a distinction between “taking” and
allowing a minor to accompany a person. The
two expressions are not synonymous though it
cannot be laid down that in no conceivable
circumstances can the two be regarded as
meaning the same thing for the purposes of
S.361. Where the minor leaves her father’s

                    18
protection knowing and having capacity to know
the full import of what she is doing, voluntarily
joins the accused person, the accused cannot be
said to have taken her away from the keeping of
her lawful guardian. Something more has to be
shown in a case of this kind and that is some
kind of inducement held out by the accused
person or an active participation by him in the
formation of the intention of the minor to leave
the house of the guardian.
       It would, however, be sufficient if the
prosecution establishes that though immediately
prior    to  the   minor   leaving   the   father’s
protection, no active part was played by the
accused, he had at some earlier stage solicited
or persuaded the minor to do so. If evidence to
establish one of those things is lacking it would
not be legitimate to infer that the accused is
guilty of taking the minor out of the keeping of
the lawful guardian merely because after she
has actually left her guardian’s house or a house
where her guardian had kept her, joined the
accused and the accused helped her in her
design not to return to her guardian’s house by
taking her along with him from place to place.
No doubt, the part played by the accused could
be regarded as facilitating the fulfillment of the
intention of the girl. But that part falls short of
an inducement to the minor to slip out of the

                                19
             keeping of her lawful guardian and is, therefore,
             not tantamount to “taking”.”
11.          Coming to the age of the victim (P.W.5), the doctor
conducting ossification test has stated that her age would be
fifteen to sixteen and half years. The school leaving certificate
vide Ext.5 indicates her age to be 06.05.1977. The father of the
victim has stated her age to be fourteen years.
             The victim on the other hand has stated in her cross-
examination that her elder brother was aged about twenty four
to twenty five years and she was the third issue of her parents
and the second issue was a son who was two years younger to
the eldest issue and that she was three years younger to the
second issue. If this evidence of the victim is taken into
consideration then the age of the victim can be said to be about
nineteen years. No doubt in view of the school admission
register, the age of the victim was less than eighteen years but
when the birth certificate has not been proved and P.W.1 who
was the most competent witness to state about the age of the
victim has not stated the exact date of birth of the victim and
when the statement of the victim indicates that she was nineteen
years, no fault can be found with the findings of the learned

                                 20
Appellate Court that the victim was more than eighteen years at
the time of occurrence.
            The finding of the learned Appellate Court that the
move of the victim (P.W.5) was not voluntary is negatived by
what has been elicited in her cross-examination. When the
prosecution has failed to bring any material on record that there
was any force or compulsion or inducement to the victim or any
deceitful means was adopted on her by the petitioner to move
from    one  place   to  another    and    when   the   surrounding
circumstances indicate that the victim had attended the age of
discretion and being sensible and aware of the intention of the
petitioner moved with him on her freewill and no where raised
any complain or objection against the petitioner, since all these
aspects have not been duly considered by the learned Trial Court
as well as Appellate Court, I am of the view that accepting the
concurrent findings of fact will lead to miscarriage of justice and
perversity   and    therefore,    as    special  and     exceptional
circumstances and in the interest of justice, I am inclined to hold
that   the  prosecution   has   utterly   failed to   establish  the
ingredients of the offence under section 366 of the Indian Penal
Code against the petitioner beyond all reasonable doubt.

                                       21
                 In the result, the Criminal Revision petition is allowed
and the impugned judgments and order of conviction and
sentence passed there under is hereby set aside and the
petitioner is acquitted of the charge under section 366 of the
Indian Penal Code. The petitioner is on bail by virtue of the order
of this Court. He is discharged from liability of his bail bond. The
personal bond and the surety bond stand cancelled.
                                                        ……………………
                                                       S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 22nd September, 2016/Sukanta/Sisir


