               IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                        CRLMC No. 1695 Of 2004
An application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 in connection with I.C.C. Case No. 03 of 2004
pending on the file of S.D.J.M., Champua.
                            -----------------------------
      Biswa Bhanu Patnaik               ………                        Petitioner
                                      -Versus-
      Pagal @ Bugula
      @ Bibhuti Nayak                    ………                       Opposite party
                        CRLMC No. 2755 Of 2004
      Rajesh Kumar Satpathy
      @ Rajesh & Another                 ………                       Petitioners
                                       -Versus-
      Pagal @ Bugula
      @ Bibhuti Nayak                    ………                       Opposite party
           For Petitioners:                 -            Mr. Yeeshan Mohanty
                                                          (Senior Advocate)
           For Opp. Party:                 -              Mr. B. S. Dasparida
                             -----------------------------
P R E S E N T:
                THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Hearing: 28.08.2017                   Date of Judgment: 26.09.2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                           2
S. K. SAHOO, J.       The petitioner Biswa Bhanu Patnaik in CRLMC No.
         1695 of 2004 was Superintendent, Sub Jail, Champua and
         petitioners Rajesh Kumar Satpathy @ Rajesh and Kalandi Nayak
         in CRLMC No. 2755 of 2004 were the Warders, Sub Jail,
         Champua and they have filed applications under section 482 of
         the Criminal Procedure Code challenging the impugned order
         dated 12.03.2004 passed by the learned Sub-divisional Judicial
         Magistrate, Champua in I.C.C. Case No. 03 of 2004 in taking
         cognizance of offences under sections 294/326/34 of the Indian
         Penal Code and section 3(1)(x) of the Scheduled Castes and
         Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereafter
         ‘1989 Act’) and issuance of process against them.
                      Since both the CRLMC applications arise out of one
         case in which the common order is under challenge, with the
         consent of the respective parties, both the applications were
         heard analogously and disposed of by this common judgment.
                      A complaint petition was filed by the opp. Party Pagal
         @ Bugula @ Bibhuti Nayak on 19.01.2004 before the learned
         Sub-divisional   Judicial  Magistrate,    Champua     against   the
         petitioners, on the basis of which the I.C.C. Case No. 03 of 2004
         was registered. It is the case of the complainant-opposite party
         that the complainant was in custody in Sub Jail, Champua on
         08.12.2003 and while the complainant was returning after taking

                                3
his day meal, the Warders Rajesh Kumar Satpathy @ Rajesh and
Kalandi Nayak obstructed the complainant and abused him in
filthy language and when the complainant asked for the reason
of such abuse, both the Warders assaulted him and intimated the
facts to the petitioner Biswa Bhanu Patnaik who directed the
Warders to apply third degree method on the complainant in
such a manner that one of his limb would be inactive and
accordingly, the Warders with the knowledge and consent of the
Superintendent mercilessly assaulted the complainant for which
the complainant sustained severe bleeding injuries on his body
portion and on his right hand. The petitioners also abused the
complainant in the name of his caste. The complainant was
medically checked up and the doctor of Champua Sub-divisional
Hospital plastered his right hand. It is further alleged that the
petitioners tried to patch up the matter and did not allow
anybody to meet the complainant and when the complainant’s
counsel came to know about the same, he filed a memo before
the learned C.J.M.-cum- Assistant Sessions Judge, Keonjhar
where the complainant was facing trial in S.T. Case No.45/185 of
2003, for taking necessary action but no action was taken for
which the complaint petition was filed.
            The learned S.D.J.M., Champua on receipt of the
complaint   petition, recorded   the    initial statement of  the

                                 4
complainant under section 200 Cr.P.C. and conducted inquiry
under section 202 of Cr.P.C., during course of which, witnesses
Padmalochan Giri and Dr. Narayan Pradhan were examined. On
perusal of the complaint petition, initial statement of the
complainant, statements of the witnesses, medical documents
like O.P.D. register, x-ray plate, the learned Magistrate on
12.03.2004 came to hold that x-ray plate of the complainant
indicates that there was hairline fracture on the middle 1/3rd of
right radius of the complainant caused to him by the petitioners
beyond the authority of them and in view of such injury of the
complainant and the allegation of intentional insult to humiliate
him for his being a member of Scheduled Tribe in public view,
which was intermingled with the occurrence of assault, he found
prima facie case under sections 294/326/34 of the Indian Penal
Code and section 3(1)(x) of the 1989 Act and accordingly, the
learned S.D.J.M., Champua took cognizance of such offences and
issued process against the petitioners.
             Mr.  Yeeshan  Mohanty,     learned Senior  Advocate
appearing for the petitioners contended that even though the
incident alleged to have taken place on 08.12.2003 but for the
first time on 22.12.2003, a memo was filed before the Court of
learned C.J.M.-cum- Assistant Sessions Judge, Keonjhar that the
complainant was tortured and physically assaulted by Jail Warder

                                5
Kalandi Satpathy of Champua Sub Jail. The learned S.D.J.M.,
Champua issued a letter on 03.01.2004 to the petitioner Biswa
Bhanu Patnaik, Superintendent of Sub Jail, Champua to conduct
an inquiry and submit a report on the veracity of the accusation
made by the complainant. The petitioner Biswa Bhanu Pattnaik
conducted an inquiry and submitted his inquiry report before the
learned S.D.J.M., Champua on 14.01.2004 stating therein that
the injury sustained by the complainant was not because of the
assault by petitioner Kalandi Satpathy rather it was on account
of the complainant falling down in a drain while he was roaming
around the ‘D’ wall of the jail for which there was verbal spat
between the Jail Warder and the complainant on 08.12.2003.
The learned counsel further submitted that on 14.01.2004, the
complainant submitted an application in G.R. Case No.186 of
2002 before the learned S.D.J.M., Champua alleging therein that
he was physically assaulted by the Warders petitioners on
08.12.2004 for which he sustained fracture injury in his right
hand. The application was forwarded to Champua police station,
on the basis of which Champua P.S. Case No.12 of 2004 was
registered under sections 325/34 of the Indian Penal Code. It is
further contended that on 17.01.2004 the advocate for the
complainant consulted the complainant in the jail and obtained
his signatures in six numbers of Vakalatnama but the learned

                                 6
Advocate on the very day complained before the learned
S.D.J.M., Champua that the jail officials did not allow him to get
the signatures of the complainant on the complaint petition. The
learned    S.D.J.M.   issued  a   letter to   the  petitioner  Jail
Superintendent on such accusation and in reply the petitioner
mentioned that the allegations are false and baseless and only
Vakalatnama was produced in the Jail wherein the complainant
was allowed to put his signatures. It is further contended that
while the investigation in Champua P.S. Case No.12 of 2004 was
under progress, relating to the self-same occurrence, the
complaint petition was filed and accordingly the impugned order
was passed. It is contended that the learned S.D.J.M., Champua
did not take recourse to the provision under section 210 of
Cr.P.C. in staying the complaint case proceeding and calling for a
report from the police officer conducting the investigation. It is
further contended that since the petitioners are the public
servants and they were discharging their official duties at the
relevant point of time, without the necessary sanction as
provided under section 197 of Cr.P.C., the impugned order of
taking cognizance which suffers from non-application of mind is
vitiated in the eye of law.
             Mr. B.S. Dasparida, learned counsel appearing for the
opposite party on the other hand contended that prima facie

                                 7
case of the offences under which cognizance has been taken is
clearly made out and there is no nexus between the act
committed by the petitioners with the official duty and since the
statement of the complainant gets corroboration from the
medical evidence, the learned Magistrate was justified in passing
the impugned order.
            Considering the submissions made by the learned
counsels for the respective parties and looking at the materials
available on record and the documents filed by the learned
counsel for the petitioners, it appears that the petitioners were
discharging their official duties on the date of occurrence. In
connection with this case, when for the first time after the
occurrence, the complainant was produced before the learned
C.J.M. -cum- Assistant Sessions Judge, Keonjhar in S.T. Case
No.45/185 of 2003 on 22.12.2003, he complained before the
learned Court that he was ill-treated by the Jail Warder Kalandi
Satpathy and then he filed a memo on the very day indicating
therein that during custody, the jail authority of Sub Jail,
Champua assaulted him without rhyme or reason for which he
sustained fracture injury on his right hand and bleeding injuries
on his body. When the learned S.D.J.M. directed the petitioner
Superintendent, Sub Jail, Champua to hold an inquiry and submit
a report, after inquiry, a report was submitted indicating therein

                                 8
that the complainant did not sustain any injury due to assault by
Jail Warders petitioners rather due to his own reason. It is
indicated in the report that the complainant was a notorious
criminal and on 08.12.2003, he was found absent at the time of
counting just before lock up and he did not respond in spite of
calls and subsequently he was found near ‘D’ wall which is the
most sensitive part of the jail building and a restrictive zone for
the inmates. When the complainant was confronted by the
warder petitioner Rajesh Satpathy, the complainant started
argument with him and when he was dragged by the said
petitioner, the complainant offered resistance and in that process
he fell down in a drain and sustained hairline fracture. It appears
that the allegation made by complainant developed from time to
time inasmuch as at the first instance, he complained before the
learned C.J.M. -cum- Assistant Sessions Judge, Keonjhar only
against one Kalandi Satpathy on 22.12.2003 and then he
submitted a report on 14.01.2004 before the learned S.D.J.M.,
Champua against petitioners Kalandi Nayak and Rajesh Satpathy
and then in the complaint petition, he implicated the petitioner
Biswa Bhanu Pattnaik for the first time in his assault. While the
investigation in Champua P.S. Case No.12 of 2004 was under
progress relating to the self same occurrence, the complaint
petition was filed before the learned S.D.J.M., Champua who has

                                  9
not followed the procedure laid down in section 210 of Cr.P.C. It
is pertinent to note that after completion of investigation, final
report was submitted in Champua P.S. Case No.12 of 2004
indicating therein that the allegations are false and baseless.
             Section 210(1) of Cr.P.C. indicates that when it
appears to the Magistrate that police investigation in relation to
the offence is under progress either during inquiry or trial of a
complaint case which is the subject matter of the complaint
petition then the Magistrate shall stay the complaint case
proceeding and has to call for a report in the matter from the
police officer conducting the investigation. In the complaint
petition, in column no. 6, it is mentioned that information was
submitted    in   the  Court   of  S.D.J.M.,  Champua    on   dated
14.01.2004. The learned S.D.J.M., Champua after receipt of the
report from the complainant on 14.01.2004 has forwarded it to
the Officer in Charge of Champua Police Station, on the basis of
which Champua P.S. Case No.12 of 2004 was registered under
sections 325/34 of the Indian Penal Code. Therefore, as on the
date of filing of the complaint petition on 19.01.2004 and during
course of inquiry of the complaint case proceeding, there was
material before the Magistrate that the investigation by the
police is under progress in relation to the same offence.
Therefore, compliance of section 210(1) of Cr.P.C. by the

                                 10
Magistrate in staying the complaint case proceeding and calling
for a report from the police officer was necessary which has not
been done in the case.       The contention raised by the learned
counsel by the petitioner that for non-compliance of provision
210(1) of Cr.P.C., the impugned order of taking cognizance
suffers from illegality has substantial force.
             In the case of Dilawar Singh -Vrs.- State of Delhi
reported in A.I.R. 2007 Supreme Court 3234, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held that the principle has been statutorily
recognized in section 210 of the Cr.P.C. which enjoins upon the
Magistrate that when it is made to appear before him either
during the inquiry or the trial of a complaint, that a complaint
before the police is pending investigation in the same matter, he
is to stop the proceeding in the complaint case and is to call for a
report from the police. After the report is received from the
police, he is to take up the matter together and if cognizance has
been taken on the police report, he is to try the complaint case
along with the G.R. Case as if both the cases are instituted upon
police report. The aim of the provision is to safeguard the
interest of the accused from unnecessary harassment. The
provisions of Section 210 Cr.P.C. are mandatory in nature. It
may be true that non-compliance of the provisions of section 210
Cr.P.C. is not ipso facto fatal to the prosecution because of the

                                  11
provision of Section 465 Cr.P.C., unless error, omission or
irregularity has also caused the failure of justice and in
determining the fact whether there is a failure of justice, the
Court shall have regard to the fact whether there is a failure of
justice and whether the objection could and should have been
raised at an earlier stage in the proceedings.
             Protection of sanction as envisaged under section
197 of Cr.P.C. serves a very salutary purpose, viz., it protects
the honest and sincere officer in the performance of their official
duty and prevents demoralization of such officer against threat
of frivolous and malicious prosecution leading to harassment.
"Official duty" implies that the act or omission should have been
done in discharge of the duty. Once any act or omission has
been found to have been committed by a public servant in
discharge of his duty then it must be given liberal and wide
construction. Existence of reasonable connection between the act
complained     of    and   the   discharge   of  official duty   is
necessary. Law     is  well  settled  that  the  protection  given
under section 197 of Cr.P.C. is not a cloak for doing the
objectionable act. The excesses committed by the public servant
during the performance of official duty are also protected
under section 197 of Cr.P.C. It is the duty of the Court to find
out whether the act done by the public servant and the official

                                12
duty are so inter-connected/inter-related that one can postulate
reasonably that it was done by the accused in performance of
the official duty, though possibly in excess of the needs and
requirements of the situation. (Ref:- Sudarsan Dash -Vrs.-
Smt. Sarojini Mohapatra reported in (2017) 66 Orissa
Criminal Reports 635).
             In this case, there was ample material before the
learned S.D.J.M., Champua that at the relevant time, the
petitioners   were   performing  their  official duties  and  the
complainant was found in a restricted zone of the Jail which is
prohibited for the inmates for which there was exchange of
words between the Warder and the complainant and also push
and pull. Dr. Narayan Pradhan who was examined as a witness
during inquiry under section 202 Cr.P.C. has stated that he
treated the complainant on 11.12.2003 and as per his advice on
13.12.2003, X-ray of the right hand of the complainant was
taken from which hairline fracture was detected. Therefore, there
was no complain even in the Jail Hospital on 08.12.2003
regarding any injury sustained by the complainant.
             On the available materials on record, I am satisfied
that the petitioners were performing their official duties on the
relevant day and the act complained of due to which the offence
is stated to have been committed appears to have been

                                           13
committed while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of
their        official        duties. Even though the  allegations  are  of
commission of excesses by the petitioners, in my humble view,
the petitioners cannot be prosecuted without sanction from the
competent authority. Sanction for prosecution under section 197
Cr.P.C. by the appropriate authority was necessary pre-requisite
in the case before taking cognizance of the offence.
                       Resultantly, the impugned order suffers from non-
application of mind and is hereby set aside. Accordingly, both the
CRLMC applications are allowed.
                                                   ..……………………….....
                                                        S. K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 26th September, 2017/Sisir


