           IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                  Misc. Case No.1523 of 2016
            (Arising out of CRLA No. 544 Of 2016)
From the judgment and order dated 27.08.2016 passed by the
Addl. Sessions Judge -cum- Special Judge, Phulbani in G.R. Case
No. 42 of 2014.
                       ----------------------------
    Madhyam Behera                ………                Appellant/petitioner
                                -Versus-
    State of Orissa               ………               Respondent/Opp. party
         For Appellant:               -          Mr. Soura Ch. Mohapatra
         For State:                   -          Mr. Priyabrata Tripathy
                                                 Addl. Standing Counsel
                  Misc. Case No.1810 of 2016
            (Arising out of CRLA No.648 of 2016)
                        ----------------------------
    Ananda Nayak, Arun Sahani
    &
    Kalia @ Somonath Sahani………                       Appellants/petitioners
                                -Versus-
    State of Orissa               ………                Respondent/Opp. Party
        For Appellant No.1:           -          Mr. Deba Prasad Das
        For Appellants
        Nos.2 & 3:                    -          Mr. Amulya Ratna Panda

                                                         2
                      For State:                          -         Mr. Priyabrata Tripathy
                                                                     Addl. Standing Counsel
                                           ----------------------------
        P R E S E N T:
                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
        Date of Argument: 09.01.2018                              Date of Order: 24.01.2018
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J.           The appellants Madhyam Behera, Ananda Nayak,
        Arun Sahani and Kalia @ Somonath Sahani Swain have filed the
        above misc. cases under section 389 of Cr.P.C. seeking for bail
        pending disposal of the appeals.
                          The appellants faced trial in the Court of learned
        Addl. Sessions Judge -cum- Special Judge, Phulbani in G.R. Case
        No.42 of 2014 for offence punishable under section 20(b)(ii)(C)
        of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act (hereafter
        ‘N.D.P.S. Act’) for transporting 41 kg. 440 grams of ganja in an
        ambassador car on 31.07.2014 at about 5.30 a.m. at Gadiapada
        ghat. The learned trial Court vide impugned judgment and order
        dated 27.08.2016 found the appellants guilty of the offence
        charged and sentenced each of them to undergo rigorous
        imprisonment for ten years and to pay a fine of Rs.1 lakh each,
        in default, to undergo R.I. for one year each.

                                  3
2.          The prosecution case, in short, is that on 31.07.2014
at about 4.15 a.m. the Inspector in Charge of Kajuriapada police
station received reliable information that four persons who were
in possession of huge quantity of ganja were likely to transport
the same in one ambassador car bearing registration No.OR-12-
4811 being escorted by one motorcycle. The I.I.C. immediately
organized a raiding party comprising of himself and other police
staff and after entering the information in the station diary entry
and sending intimation to S.D.P.O., Sadar, Phulbani and S.P.,
Kandhamal proceeded immediately towards Gadiapada ghat. He
could not obtain the search warrant due to paucity of time. At
about 5.30 a.m., the raiding team noticed the ambassador car
coming from Phulbani side being escorted by one motorcycle and
all on a sudden on seeing the presence of the police team, the
motorcycle rider left the spot leaving the motorcycle. However,
the team could manage to intercept the car and four persons
including the driver were found in the car and they disclosed
their names and addresses and they were the appellants in the
two criminal appeals and they admitted to have been in their
possession huge quantity of ganja inside the dickey of the car in
two bags. The appellants failed to produce any authority or
licence for possession or transportation of ganja. The personal

                                  4
search of the appellants were taken and thereafter the car was
searched in presence of the Magistrate and two plastic bags were
recovered from the dickey and on weighment, the ganja was
found to be 41 kg. 440 grams. Three samples each weighing 50
grams were collected from the contents of each bag and the bulk
quantity ganja, sample ganja were labeled, sealed and seized.
After lodging of the F.I.R., the seized samples were sent to
S.F.S.L., Bhubaneswar and a detail report under section 57 of
the N.D.P.S. Act was submitted. The ownership of the seized car
and motorcycle was verified from R.T.O., Kandhamal and after
completion of investigation, charge sheet was submitted on
26.11.2014 under sections 20(b)(ii)(C)/27-A/29 of the N.D.P.S.
Act against the appellants. The appellants were specifically
charge sheeted under section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the N.D.P.S. Act
whereas the      co-accused   Biku @ Bikram Behera was charge
sheeted under sections 27-A/29 of the N.D.P.S. Act showing him
as an absconder.
3.           The learned trial Court after assessing the evidence
on record has been pleased to hold that the evidence of the
police officials cannot be discarded merely on the ground that
they belonged to the police force and are either interested in the
investigating or the prosecuting agency, however, as far as

                                 5
possible,  the   corroboration  of  their  evidence   on  material
particulars should be sought. The learned trial Court further held
that   the  car  in  question  was   seized   in connection   with
transportation of ganja and the official witnesses to the seizure
supported the case of the prosecution. The Scientific Officer
P.W.17 stated that on 19.8.2014 he conducted chemical and
microscopic examination of the sample forwarded by S.D.J.M.,
Phulbani and found the same to be flowering and fruiting tops of
cannabis plants. After discussing the compliance of provisions of
sections 42/43 of the N.D.P.S. Act, it was held that whenever the
alleged offence was dictated during day time, legally there was
no reason to record the grounds of beliefs and the police is
authorized to proceed with search and seizure after intimating his
officer superior. It was further held that the prosecution case
cannot be faulted and that there was full compliance of the
provision of section 42 of the N.D.P.S. Act. Discussing the
compliance of section 50 of the N.D.P.S. Act, it was held that
there has been sufficient averment in the notices that the
appellants were informed about their right for search in presence
of Magistrate or Gazetted Officer. It was further held that the
appellants during their statements recorded under section 313 of
Cr.P.C. have simply stated that a false case has been foisted

                                  6
against them. They are silent about the circumstances under
which such a huge quantity of ganja was recovered from the car
in which they were travelling. Taking recourse to section 35 of
the N.D.P.S. Act and absence of any explanation by the
appellants under section 106 of the N.D.P.S. Act to the contrary,
it was held that the appellants were in conscious possession of
contraband articles and transporting the same in the car without
any authority. While discussing the compliance of provisions
under sections 55/57 of the N.D.P.S. Act, the learned trial Court
has been pleased to hold that there is nothing to show that there
has been some mischief with the seized sample during the
intervening night of 31.07.2014/01.08.2014. It is further held
that the Investigating Officer promptly submitted the sample to
the   Court  and   arranged    its  submission   before  S.F.S.L.,
Bhubneswar to exclude any theory of mischief, therefore, it was
held that there has been full compliance of the provisions of
section 57 of the N.D.P.S. Act. The learned trial Court further
held that the prosecution has successfully proved that on the
relevant day, the appellants were in exclusive and conscious
possession of 41 kg. 440 grams of ganja without any authority
and were transporting the same in the Ambassador car bearing
No.OD-12-4811 near Gadiapada ghat.

                                  7
4.             The learned counsels appearing for the appellants
contended that the appellants are in custody since 31.07.2014
and there is no chance of early hearing of the appeal in the near
future and balance of convenience is in their favour and
therefore, they should be enlarged on bail. The learned counsel
for the State on the other hand contended that since it is a case
of seizure of commercial quantity of ganja from the exclusive and
conscious possession of the appellants, unless the appellants
overcome the bar under section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act, they are
not entitled to be released on bail during pendency of the appeal.
               (i) Learned counsels for the appellants challenging
the    illegality   in the  impugned   judgment    contended   that
possession of the car with the petitioners on the date of
occurrence is shrouded in mystery. To buttress such contention,
it is contended that the registered owner of the car is P.W.8 who
has stated that one Tukuna was the driver of the car and the key
of the car was with P.W.7 who is the wife of P.W.8 and P.W.7 has
also stated that the car normally remains with driver Tukuna. It
is contended that since Tukuna is neither an accused nor a
witness in the case, the possession of the car with the appellants
on the date of occurrence is doubtful. It is further contended that
in view of the self contradictory statements of P.W.3, P.W.6,

                                  8
P.w.11, P.W.12 and P.W.15, the presence of the appellants in the
car is also a doubtful feature.
             The learned counsel for the State on the other hand
contended     that   though  there  are   little variations  in  the
statements of the witnesses relating to the presence of the
petitioners in the car but their versions are not parrot like rather
it appears to be very natural and the discrepancies, if any, do not
go to the root of the matter to negate the presence of the
appellants in the car. He further contended that it is not
necessary for the prosecution to prove as to how the car in
question came in possession of the appellants on the date of
occurrence which may be within the special knowledge of the
appellants and since except taking a denial plea, nothing more
has been brought out in the cross-examination to disbelieve the
prosecution case that the car in question was not in the
possession of the appellants, the prosecution case has been
rightly accepted by the learned trial Court.
             (ii) The learned counsel for the appellants contended
that the independent seizure witnesses P.W.1 and P.W.2 so also
the weighman (P.W.5) have not supported the prosecution case.
             Learned counsel for the State on the other hand
contended that in a case of this nature when the version of the

                                  9
official witnesses like P.W.3, P.W.6, P.W.11 and P.W.12 coupled
with the statement of the informant (P.W.15) clearly establishes
the factum of search and seizure, the non-supporting of the
prosecution case by the independent witnesses do not affect the
credibility of the prosecution version.
             (iii) The learned counsel for the appellants contended
that the recovery of ganja bags and taking of samples is not
consistent in the evidence of the raiding party members as well
as Executive Magistrate and only one sample packet was
produced and the brass seal was not produced before the learned
Special Judge for verification.
             Learned counsel for the State on the other hand
placed the evidence of the official witnesses, relevant entries of
the malkhana register marked as Ext.30, order sheet of the
Court and forwarding report of the sample packets for chemical
analysis and contended that there was no chance of tampering
with the evidence and the order sheet indicates that material
objects vide Exts. A, A/1, A/2, A/3, A/4, B, B/1, B/2, B/3 and B/4
were produced in sealed condition and Ext.A/1 and B/1 were sent
by the Court to the Director, S.F.S.L., Bhubaneswar for chemical
examination whereas the other exhibits i.e. Ext.A, A/2, A/3, A/4,
B, B/2, B/3 and B/4 which were all produced in sealed condition

                                   10
were directed in kept in the Court malkhana. He further
contended that even though brass seal was not produced but the
specimen seal impression of the personal brass seal of IIC,
Khajuriapada was produced before the Court along with material
objects and the Court found that not only the sample packets
were in sealed condition but also each of the exhibits was
containing the signatures of the Executive Magistrate and other
witnesses and therefore, mere non-production of the brass seal
in Court is not a factor to discard the prosecution case.
             (iv) Though the learned counsel for the appelalnts
contended regarding non-compliance of the provision under
section 42 of the N.D.P.S. Act, the learned counsel for the State
placed paragraph 11 of the judgment in which the learned trial
Court has dealt with such aspect and has been pleased to hold
that there has been full compliance to the provision of section 42
of the N.D.P.S. Act. It is contended by the learned counsel for
the State that there is no illegality or perversity in such finding.
5.            Section 389 of the Cr.P.C. empowers an Appellate
Court to suspend the sentence pending the appeal and release
the appellants on bail. Section 32-A of the N.D.P.S. Act in so far
as it completely debars the Appellate Court from the power to
suspend the sentence awarded to a convict under the Act was

                                  11
held to be unconstitutional in case of Dadu @ Tulsidas -Vrs.-
State    of   Maharashtra     reported   in  (2001)     20   Orissa
Criminal Reports (SC) 52 and it was further held that a
sentence awarded under the Act can be suspended by the
Appellate Court only and strictly subject to the conditions spelt
out in section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act. In case of State of
Uttaranchal -Vrs.- Rajesh Kumar Gupta reported in (2007)
36 Orissa Criminal Reports 92 (para 27), it is held that
section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act must be construed in a pragmatic
manner. It cannot be construed in such a way so as to negate
the right of party to obtain bail which is otherwise a valuable
right for all practical purposes.
              While   dealing  with  an  application  for   bail   in
connection with prosecution/conviction of offence(s) under a
special statute, specific provisions contained in that statute for
dealing with bail matters cannot be ignored. In this case, the
appellants have been convicted and sentenced for commission of
offence under section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the N.D.P.S. Act, therefore,
while dealing with their applications for grant of bail, in addition
to the broad principles regarding limitations under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or any other law for the

                                   12
time being in force, on granting of bail, the relevant provision
under section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act has to be kept in view.
              In case of Union of India -Vrs.- Rattan Mallik @
Habul reported in (2009) 42 Orissa Criminal Reports 697,
it is held as follows:-
             “13. It is plain from a bare reading of the non-
             obstante clause in the Section 37 of the N.D.P.S.
             Act and sub-section (2) thereof that the power
             to grant bail to a person accused of having
             committed offence under the N.D.P.S. Act is not
             only subject to the limitations imposed under
             Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
             1973, it is also subject to the restrictions placed
             by clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 37 of
             the N.D.P.S. Act. Apart from giving an
             opportunity to the Public Prosecutor to oppose
             the application for such release, the other twin
             conditions viz; (i) the satisfaction of the Court
             that there are reasonable grounds for believing
             that the accused is not guilty of the alleged
             offence; and (ii) that he is not likely to commit
             any offence while on bail, have to be satisfied. It
             is manifest that the conditions are cumulative
             and     not     alternative.   The      satisfaction
             contemplated regarding the accused being not
             guilty, has to be based on "reasonable grounds.
             The expression “reasonable grounds” has not
             been defined in the said Act but means
             something more than prima facie grounds. It
             connotes substantial probable causes for
             believing that the accused is not guilty of the
             offence he is charged with. The reasonable belief
             contemplated in turn, points to existence of such
             facts and circumstances as are sufficient in
             themselves to justify satisfaction that the

                                  13
            accused is not guilty of the alleged offence.
            (Vide Union of India -Vrs.- Shiv Shanker
            Kesari : (2007) 7 Supreme Court Cases
            798). Thus, recording of satisfaction on both the
            aspects, noted above, is sine qua non for
            granting of bail under the N.D.P.S. Act.
            14. We may, however, hasten to add that while
            considering an application for bail with reference
            to Section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act, the Court is
            not called upon to record a finding of “not
            guilty”. At this stage, it is neither necessary nor
            desirable to weigh the evidence meticulously to
            arrive at a positive finding as to whether or not
            the accused has committed offence under the
            N.D.P.S. Act. What is to be seen is whether
            there is reasonable ground for believing that the
            accused is not guilty of the offence(s) he is
            charged with and further that he is not likely to
            commit an offence under the said Act while on
            bail. The satisfaction of the Court about the
            existence of the said twin conditions is for a
            limited purpose and is confined to the question
            of releasing the accused on bail.”
            In the case of Rattan Mallick (supra), Allahabad
High Court granted bail to the appellant convicted under sections
27-A and 29 of the N.D.P.S. Act and sentenced to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for ten years on each count and to pay a
fine of rupees one lakh on each count with default stipulation, on
the ground of his incarceration for three years and further
holding that there was no chance of his appeal being heard
within a period of seven years. The Hon’ble Supreme Court held

                                  14
that those circumstances may be relevant for grant of bail in the
matters arising out of conviction under the Penal Code, 1860,
etc. but are not sufficient to satisfy the mandatory requirements
as stipulated in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 37 of the
N.D.P.S. Act. The Hon’ble Supreme Court further held that the
provisions of the N.D.P.S. Act and more particularly section 37 of
the N.D.P.S. Act were not brought to the notice of the learned
Judge and therefore, the impugned order having been passed
ignoring the mandatory requirements of section 37 of the
N.D.P.S. Act was held to be not sustainable.
            In Case of Ratan Kumar Vishwas -Vrs.- State of
Uttar Pradesh reported in (2009) 1 Supreme Court Cases
482, where the judgment of Allhabad High Court dismissing the
application filed by the appellant for suspension of sentence and
grant of bail was challenged, it is held as follows:-
            “18. To deal with the menace of dangerous
            drugs flooding the market, Parliament has
            provided that a person accused of offence under
            the Act should not be released on bail during
            trial unless the mandatory conditions provided
            under section 37 that there are reasonable
            grounds for holding that the accused is not
            guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to
            commit any offence while on bail are satisfied.
            So far as the first condition is concerned,
            apparently the accused has been found guilty
            and has been convicted.

                                  15
             x         x        x         x         x        x
             20. The High Court has dealt with the factual
             position in great detail to conclude that the
             parameters of section 37 are not fulfilled to
             warrant grant of bail by suspension of sentence.
             We find no reason to interfere in the matter.”
6.           In view of the above discussions, I am of the view
that this Court even under its appellate jurisdiction under section
389 of the Code of Criminal Procedure must follow the provision
of section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act while considering the
application for bail as such provision is mandatory in nature and
grant of bail is controlled by such provision which has an
overriding effect over other provision of the Code. Obviously the
limitations imposed by sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act would come into
play only when the appellant has been convicted under sections
19 or 24 or 27-A of the N.D.P.S. Act or when the offence
committed involves commercial quantity. Since the appellants
have been convicted for possessing ‘commercial quantity’ of
ganja, merely because they have           already undergone more
than three years of the substantive sentence imposed on them
by the learned trial Court, without considering the bar under
section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act, they cannot be released on bail
during pendency of the appeal.

                                       16
                  Adverting to the contentions raised by the learned
counsels for the respective parties and on going through the
impugned judgment and order of conviction, apparently it cannot
be said at this stage that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the appellants are not guilty of the offence
charged or in view of any glaring infirmities, the impugned
judgment and order of conviction on the face of it is not
sustainable in the eye of law.
                 It is needless to say that at the stage of final hearing
of the appeal, there will be meticulous examination of the
evidence on record. Since twin conditions as provided under
section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act are required to be cumulatively
satisfied for grant of bail and the learned counsels for the
appellants have failed to satisfy on the first condition itself, it is
not at all required to discuss about the second condition.
7.               In the result, the bail applications filed by the
appellants being devoid of merits, stand rejected.
                                                   ……………………………
                                                      S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 24th January, 2018/Sisir


