                          IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                     CRLMC No. 1447 Of 2005
        An application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
        Procedure, 1973 in connection with G.R. Case No.36 of 2005
        pending on the file of S.D.J.M., Parlakhemundi.
                                            ---------------------------
               Pravanjan Sahu
               @ Bhanj                                ………                            Petitioner
                                                    -Versus-
               State of Orissa                       ………                             Opposite party
                      For Petitioner:                     -        None
                      For Opposite Party:                 -        Mr. Prem Kumar Pattnaik
                                                                   Addl. Govt. Advocate
                                          --------------------------
        P R E S E N T:
                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Date of Hearing and Judgment: 27.11.2017
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J.           None appears on behalf of the petitioner.
                          The petitioner Pravanjan Sahu @ Bhanj in this
        application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
        1973 has prayed for quashing the criminal proceeding in G.R.
        Case No.36 of 2005 pending in the Court of learned S.D.J.M.,
        Parlakhemundi. The said case arises out of Parlakhemundi P.S.

                                  2
Case No.27 of 2005 registered under section 420 of the Indian
Penal Code.
             The first information report was lodged by one Arun
Kumar Patra wherein it is stated that the petitioner was a local
person and he was managing the Parlakhemundi Branch of P.S.
Moneycraft & Fintech Ltd. (hereafter ‘the company’) and the
informant deposited Rs.20,000/- with said chit fund company
and the petitioner promised him for good return of his money
after maturity but the company closed its business in the month
of January 1999 and thereby misappropriated the invested
money of the informant.
             On perusal of the grounds taken in the application, it
is stated that the role of the petitioner in the business of the
Company was very limited and his duty was to make aware
about the policy of the company to its share holders, those who
come forward for the business with the said Company. It further
stated that the petitioner was working as Marketing Executive
and he himself has sustained a huge loss by not getting salary
and other service benefits due to untimely closure of the
Company. It is further stated that due to closure of the
Company, there was no willful intention or knowledge on the part
of the petitioner. It is further stated that there is no prima facie

                                  3
case to make out an offence under section 420 of the Indian
Penal Code.
             In case of State of Haryana -Vrs.- Ch. Bhajan Lal
reported in A.I.R. 1992 Supreme Court 604, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has laid down certain guidelines relating to
exercise of inherent power under section 482 Cr.P.C. by the High
Court to quash the first information report which are as follows:-
             “108. In the backdrop of the interpretation of
             the various relevant provisions of the Code
             under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law
             enunciated    by   this  Court   in a   series  of
             decisions relating to the exercise of the extra-
             ordinary   power    under   Article 226   or   the
             inherent powers under section 482 of the Code
             which we     have    extracted and reproduced
             above, we give the following categories of
             cases by way of illustration wherein such
             power could be exercised either to prevent
             abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise
             to secure the ends of justice, though it may
             not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly
             defined    and   sufficiently   channelised    and
             inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to
             give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
             wherein such power should be exercised.
             1.   Where the allegations made in the First
             Information Report or the complaint, even if

                    4
they are taken at their face value and accepted
in their entirety do not prima facie constitute
any offence or make out a case against the
accused.
2.   Where    the   allegations  in   the   First
Information Report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a
cognizable offence, justifying an investigation
by police officers under section 156(1) of the
Code except under an order of a Magistrate
within the purview of Section 155(2) of the
Code.
3.   Where    the  uncontroverted    allegations
made in the F.I.R. or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do
not disclose the commission of any offence and
make out a case against the accused.
4.   Where, the allegations in the F.I.R. do not
constitute a cognizable offence but constitute
only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation
is permitted by a police officer without an
order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
section 155(2) of the Code.
5.   Where the allegations made in the F.I.R.
or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent
person can ever reach a just conclusion that

                                  5
             there   is  sufficient  ground    for  proceeding
             against the accused.
             6.   Where there is an express legal bar
             engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code
             or the concerned Act (under which a criminal
             proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
             continuance of the proceedings and/or where
             there is a specific provision in the Code or the
             concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for
             the grievance of the aggrieved party.
             7.   Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly
             attended with mala fide and/or where the
             proceeding is maliciously instituted with an
             ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the
             accused and with a view to spite him due to
             private and personal grudge.”
            Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code prescribes
punishment for cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of
property.   Section    415   of  the   Indian   Penal  Code   defines
‘cheating’. The essential ingredients of the offence of "cheating"
are as follows: (i) deception of a person either by making a false
or misleading representation or by dishonest concealment or by
any   other   act   or   omission;   (ii)  fraudulent  or  dishonest
inducement of that person to either deliver any property or to
consent to the retention thereof by any person or to intentionally

                                 6
induce that person so deceived to do or omit to do anything
which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived; and
(iii) such act or omission causing or is likely to cause damage or
harm to that person in body, mind, reputation or property. To
constitute an offence under Section 420, there should not only
be cheating, but as a consequence of such cheating, the accused
should have dishonestly induced the person deceived (i) to
deliver any property to any person, or (ii) to make, alter or
destroy wholly or in part a valuable security (or anything signed
or sealed and which is capable of being converted into a valuable
security). The guilty intention is an essential ingredient of the
offence of ‘cheating’ and in order to constitute the offence of
cheating the intention to deceive should be in existence at the
time when the inducement was offered.
             Since on the face of the first information report,
prima facie ingredients of offence under section 420 of the
Indian Penal Code is made out against the petitioner and there is
likelihood of finding more materials in the case during course of
investigation, therefore, I am not inclined to exercise the
inherent    power   under   section 482     Cr.P.C   to quash  the
proceeding.

                                  7
                 Therefore, the CRLMC application being devoid of
merits stands dismissed.
                                             ..............................
                                                 S. K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 27th November, 2017/Sukanta


