           IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                    BLAPL No. 3939 of 2015
Application under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973.
                         --------------------
     Akshay Kumar Behera        …..…                     Petitioner
                              -Versus-
     State of Orissa            ………                      Opp. Party
            For Petitioner:       -  M/s. Asim Amitabh Dash
                                           Bijay Kumar Parida
                                           A.N.Pattanayak
                                           M.M.Panda
           For Opp.Party:        - Mr.     Sangram Keshari Nayak
                                           Addl. Govt. Advocate
                    BLAPL No. 4356 of 2015
     Satura @ Sadasiv @ Sasdasiv
     @ Sadasib Pradhan          …..…                     Petitioner
                              -Versus-
     State of Orissa            ………                      Opp. Party
           For Petitioner:        -  M/s. Milan Kanungo
                                           Sidhartha Das,P.R.Singh
                                           A.K.Mohanty
                                           R.K.Ghadei, B.P.Pattnaik
           For Opp. Party:        -  Mr. Sangram Keshari Nayak
                                          Addl. Govt. Advocate
                        ---------------------

                                          2
        P R E S E N T:-
                   THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S. K. SAHOO
        …………………………………………………………………………………………………………
        Date of Argument- 09.09.2015           Date of order- 21.09.2015
       …………………………………………………………………………………………………………
S.K.SAHOO, J.     The petitioner in BLAPL No.3939 of 2015 namely,
        Akshay Kumar Behera and petitioner in BLAPL No.4356 of 2015
        namely, Satura @ Sadasiv @ Sasdasiv @ Sadasib Pradhan have
        filed applications under Section 439 Cr.P.C. for bail as their
        prayer for grant of bail was turned down by the learned
        Additional Sessions Judge, Bhubaneswar in Bail Application
        No.126/929 of 2015 and Bail Application No.129/938 of 2015,
        both vide order dated 13.07.2015 respectively.
                  Since these two bail applications arise out of the same
        First Information Report, on the basis of which Nayapalli P.S.
        Case No.191 of 2015 dated 31.05.2015 was registered under
        section   306   read  with   section 34   of Indian   Penal   Code
        corresponding to C.T. Case No.2352 of 2015 pending in the
        Court of learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar, with the consent of the
        parties, the bail applications were heard analogously and the
        same are disposed by this common order.
        2.        On 01.04.2015 at about 8.30 p.m. one Balunkeswar
        Prusty of Neheru Basti, Unit-8, Bhubaneswar submitted a written
        report   before   Inspector-in-charge, Nayapalli   Police  Station,

                                 3
Bhubaneswar stating therein that he was residing with his family
in a hamlet in Unit-8, Bhubaneswar and on the same day at
about 4.00 p.m. he received information from the people of his
hamlet that his wife Bijaylaxmi Prusty (hereafter ‘the deceased’)
had committed suicide in his house.
          On the basis of such report, I.I.C., Nayapalli Police
Station registered Nayapalli P.S. U.D. Case No.19 of 2015 and
directed Deepak Kumar Lenka, S.I. of Police of Nayapalli Police
Station to inquire into the matter.
          During course of inquiry, on 02.04.2015 the inquiry
police officer conducted inquest over the dead body of the
deceased in presence of her husband, relatives and other
witnesses, sent the dead body to Capital Hospital, Bhubaneswar
for post mortem examination and seized a hand written suicidal
note of the deceased on being produced by her husband. After
post mortem examination, the cause of death was opined due to
asphyxia as a result of hanging. The ligature which was sent for
examination alongwith the dead body was opined to have
sufficient strength to bear the weight of the deceased. A number
of witnesses were examined and since it revealed a cognizable
case under section 306/34 of Indian Penal Code, the inquiry
police officer submitted a written report before IIC, Nayapalli
Police Station on 31.5.2015.

                                  4
3.        It is stated in the First Information Report that during
inquiry of U.D. Case No.19/2015 which was registered on the
report of one Balunkeswar Prusty regarding commission of
suicide of the deceased inside her house at Nehuri Basti, Unit-8,
Bhubaneswar, the informant visited the spot, conducted inquest
over the dead body of the deceased in presence of her relatives
and witnesses and sent the dead body to Capital Hospital for
post-mortem examination. During search of the house of the
deceased, a suicidal note of the deceased was recovered and
basing on the statement made in that suicidal note and other
materials collected during enquiry, it came to light that the
deceased used to go Sai Temple every day after the departure of
her husband to the office and two sons to the school. It is further
stated  that    the  petitioner  Sadasiv    Pradhan  developed   an
emotional attachment with the deceased and compelled the
deceased to adopt his daughter to materialize his mission. It is
further stated that the petitioner Sadasiv Pradhan wanted to
keep physical relationship with the deceased and gradually the
people of the hamlet came to know about it. On 31.03.2015 after
receipt of a telephone call from petitioner Sadashiv Pradhan, in
between 9 p.m. to 10 p.m.        the deceased left her house. The
deceased     had   also  developed    relationship  with petitioner
Akshaya Behera. When both the petitioners demanded illicit

                                 5
relationship with   her, the deceased returned home being
shocked and expressed her feeling in the suicidal note. During
inquiry, it was further ascertained that petitioner Sadashiv
Pradhan compelled the deceased to keep sexual relationship on
the date of occurrence which was disclosed before one Prasant
Pradhan by the deceased. As the neighbours came to know
about the incident, in order to save her social image and dignity,
the deceased committed suicide.
          On the basis of such First Information Report, Nayapalli
P.S. Case No. 191 of 2015 was registered against both the
petitioners on 31.05.2015 under section 306/34 of Indian Penal
Code. The Inspector-in-charge, Nayapali Police Station himself
took up investigation of the case.
4.        During course of investigation, the petitioner Sadashiv
Pradhan was taken into custody on 31.05.2015 and forwarded to
Court on the very day. Similarly the petitioner Akshaya Kumar
Behera was arrested on 31.05.2015 and forwarded to Court on
01.06.2015.
5.        The prayer for bail of both the petitioners was rejected
on the ground that the statements of the witnesses as well as
materials on record make out a prima facie case against the
petitioners and also for the reason that the investigation was
under progress.

                                  6
6.         Mr. Asim Amitabh Dash, learned counsel for petitioner
Akshay Kumar Behera submitted that the investigation has made
substantial progress in the meantime and the suicidal note
indicates that only one person is liable for the death of the
deceased but the name of that person has not been disclosed
therein. It is further submitted that it appears that accused
Sadashiv is the principal accused and major allegations are being
leveled against him. It is further contended that though the
petitioner was named in the FIR but no clinching incriminating
materials are available against him. The learned counsel further
urged that during the previous night of the occurrence i.e.
31.03.2015 in between 9.00 p.m. to 10.00 p.m., it is stated that
the deceased had received some telephone calls from the
petitioners and thereafter on the next day she committed
suicide. It is the further contention that when there is absence of
any proximate link between the conduct of the petitioner and the
commission of suicide of the deceased, it cannot be said that the
petitioner had abated the commission of suicide and therefore
the ingredients of the offence under section 306 of IPC are not
attracted.
7.         Mr. Milan Kanungo, learned counsel appearing for
accused petitioner Sadashiv Pradhan submitted that even though
it is alleged by the prosecution witnesses that the deceased was

                                 7
misbehaved by the petitioners on a number of occasions but
since there was no previous report before any authority in that
connection and when the deceased had kept mum for such a
long time, the prosecution case cannot be believed. The learned
counsel further submitted that the petitioner was taken into
custody on the basis of suspicion and the statements of the
witnesses collected so far are all hearsay evidence and cannot be
acted upon. It is the further contended that when there is no
chance of absconding of the petitioner or tampering with the
evidence, in the fitness of things, it is a proper case for grant of
bail.
8.        Mr. Sangram Keshari Nayak, learned Addl. Govt.
Advocate appearing for the State on the other hand vehemently
opposed the prayer for bail and submitted that both the
petitioners taking advantage of the simplicity of the deceased
had exploited her for which she was compelled to commit
suicide. He further contended that the materials available on
record suggest that on 31.3.2015 night the deceased had met
both the petitioners near Sai Temple after receipt of their phone
calls and returned home after meeting them and disclosed before
others that for the behaviour of the petitioners, she would
commit suicide. According to the learned counsel, such a
statement made by the deceased indicates the circumstances of

                                  8
the transaction which resulted in her death and as such it can be
taken as dying declaration in view of the provisions under
Section 32(1) of the Evidence Act. The learned counsel further
submitted that the petitioners are squarely responsible for
commission of suicide of the deceased at such an early age who
left behind her husband and two minor sons and as such it would
not be proper to grant them bail at this stage when the
investigation is under progress. He further submitted that there
is every chance of tampering with the evidence in case the
petitioners are released on bail.
9.        Before delving upon the rival contentions raised at the
bar, it would be proper to give a cursory glance at the relevant
provisions of sections 306 and 107 of Indian Penal Code. As per
the provisions under section 306 IPC, in case of suicide of a
person, whoever abates the commission of such suicide is liable
to be punished.
          Section 107 of Indian Penal Code deals with what
constitutes abatement. There are three clauses in section 107 of
IPC. In order to constitute abatement, the abettor must be
shown to have instigated any person to do a thing or engaged
with one or more other person or persons in any conspiracy for
the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal omission takes place in
pursuance of that conspiracy and in order to doing of that thing

                                 9
or intentionally aids any person the commission of doing of a
thing by any act or illegal omission. Instigation has to be
gathered from the circumstances of a particular case. No
straight-jacket formula can be laid down to find out as to
whether in a particular case there has been instigation which
forced the person to commit suicide. In a case, where there is no
direct evidence in regard to instigation, an inference has to be
drawn from the circumstances and it is to be determined
whether circumstances had been such which in fact had created
the situation that a person felt totally frustrated and committed
suicide.
          So far as first two clauses are concerned, it is not
necessary    that  the   offence   instigated  should  have     been
committed but so far as third clause is concerned, it applies to
case where the offence is committed. This scope of the word ‘aid’
in the third clause has been dealt in Explanation 2 of section 107
of IPC and it is stated that if a person either prior to or at the
time of commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate
the   commission     of  that  act   and   thereby  facilitates  the
commission thereof is said to aid the doing of that act.
          There must be a positive act on the part of the accused
to instigate or aid in committing suicide. There has to be a clear

                                10
mens rea to commit the offence. It requires an active act or
direct act on the part of the accused which led the deceased to
commit suicide seeing no option and this act must have been
intended to push the deceased in to such a position that he
committed suicide. Abatement involves a mental process of
instigating a person or intentionally aiding a person in doing of a
thing. Each individual’s suicidality pattern depends on his inner
subjective experience of mental pain, fear and loss of self
respect. Each of these factors are crucial and exacerbating
contributor to one individual’s vulnerability to end his own life,
which may either be an attempt for self protection or an
escapism from intolerable self. Act complained of in order to
amount to abatement has to be committed either prior to or at
the time of commission of offences.
10.       Adverting to the materials on record, it seems that the
prosecution mainly relies upon the statements made by the
deceased before others on the previous night of occurrence and
also the suicidal note seized during the course of U.D. case
inquiry.
          In case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda -V- State of
Maharashtra reported in AIR 1984 SC 1622, it is held that
where the main evidence consists of statements and letters

                                11
written by the deceased which are directly connected with or
related to her death and which reveal a tell-tale story, the said
statement would clearly fall within the four corners of section 32
of Evidence Act and therefore, admissible. The distance of time
alone in such cases would not make the statement irrelevant.
11.       In the suicidal note, the deceased has mentioned as
follows:-
          “O my mother, my husband! I cannot show my
          face to you. One person has spoiled my life. I was
          not aware about anything but this world showed
          me everything. I am handing you over my three
          sons and one daughter namely, Prasant, Silu, Jilu
          and Puja. Today somebody has conveyed me that
          I have no existence. O my husband! Don’t
          misunderstand me. I am leaving you in the half
          way. Take care of our children and make them
          good human beings. My smile paved way for my
          end.”
          On a plain reading of the suicidal note, it seems that
though the deceased has not named anybody to be responsible
for commission of suicide but it appears that the conduct of the
unnamed person had compelled her to take the extreme step of
ending her life.

                                12
12.       Who is that person or persons responsible for the death
of the deceased? What have they done with her?
          Many a statements have been collected during course
of investigation which indicates that both the petitioners came in
close contact with the deceased during her continuous visit to Sai
Temple for offering prayer. Both the petitioners tried to keep
physical relationship with the deceased who appears to be an
innocent and simple lady and she had not complained against
these two petitioners before any authority perhaps apprehending
disrepute to her family. It further appears that after the
deceased returned back in the night on 31.03.2015, she was
crying and she disclosed before Sukadev Behera who was her
neighbour that both the petitioners had behaved with her in such
a manner that she would commit suicide. Similar statement has
been made before a lady namely, Rashmirekha Sahoo. The
husband of the deceased namely, Balunkeswar Prusty has also
stated that the deceased complained before him regarding the
conduct of both the petitioners and he had advised her to avoid
the petitioners. The mobile call details seized from the service
provider company indicates that on 31.03.2015 the deceased
had conversation once with petitioner Akshaya Kumar Behera
and on six occasions with petitioner Sadasiv Pradhan in between
8.53 p.m. to 9.48 p.m.

                                 13
          The investigation is under progress. The suicidal note of
the deceased along with her other handwriting papers have been
sent to Handwriting Bureau, Bhubaneswar (T) ACP, Zone-V,
Bhubaneswar for examination and opinion. Many more things
may come up during course of investigation. At this stage when
prima facie materials are available and the chance of tampering
with the evidence, in case the petitioners are released on bail
cannot be ruled out; the grant of bail to the petitioners may
hamper the investigation. The investigating agency is yet to
collect materials as to what exactly transpired between the
deceased and the two petitioners on 31.03.2015 night when she
left her house getting the phone calls to meet them and what
was the topic of such telephonic conversation particularly when
two of such conversations with petitioner Sadasiv Pradhan are
for a quite longer duration. Where they actually met on that
night and how much time they stayed together is also to be
ascertained. Nobody from the Sai Temple or the vicinity of the
Sai Temple has been examined so far. Those persons are likely
to throw some light regarding the relationship of the petitioners
and the deceased.
13.       In view of the foregoing discussions, taking into
account the nature and gravity of the offence, availability of
prima facie materials on record against the petitioners as to how

                                     14
they had taken advantage of the simplicity of the deceased in
exploiting       her     which brought  her   untimely   sad   end and
particularly when the investigation is at the nascent stage, I am
not inclined to release the petitioners on bail.
14.           Before parting, I would humbly say that to be simple is
the unique gift of God. Simplicity is the greatest treasure of
human being. It gives joy, immense satisfaction and peace of
mind. But to be a simpleton is really a curse. Such a person can
be easily duped by anybody, anytime and anywhere. Believing
everyone and every time can be dangerous sometime.
              Accordingly, the bail applications stand dismissed.
                                                       …………………………
                                                         S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 21st September, 2015/Sisir
(2015) 62 OCR – 571


