                      IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                               CRLREV NO.645 of 2016
         From the order dated 26.07.2016 passed by the Sessions Judge,
         Kalahandi, Bhawanipatna in Sessions Case No.62 of 2004.
                                   ---------------------
              Deelip Kumar Meher          ………                       Petitioner
                                         -Versus-
              State of Orissa              ………                      Opp. party
                   For Petitioner:           -   Mr. Manas Chand
                                                 M.B. Patra
                                                 R.R. Mishra
                   For Opp. Party:           -   Mr. Jyoti Prakash Patra
                                                 Addl. Standing Counsel
                                   ---------------------
         P R E S E N T:
                       THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
         ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                       Date of Hearing and Order- 21.09.2016
         ------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. Sahoo, J.        The petitioner Deelip Kumar Meher has filed this
         revision    petition   challenging    the    impugned     order    dated
         26.07.2016 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Kalahandi,
         Bhawanipatna in Sessions Case No. 62 of 2004 in framing
         charges under sections 304-B/306/498-A of Indian Penal Code
         and section 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act against the petitioner.

                                2
            As it appears the petitioner earlier approached this
Court in Criminal Revision No.813 of 2004 challenging the order
dated 03.11.2004 of the learned Trial Court in framing charges
under sections 302/304-B/306/498-A of the Indian Penal Code.
This Court vide order dated 04.07.2016 allowed the revision
petition and quashed the impugned order and directed the
learned Trial Court to readdress the charge hearing of the parties
in exercise of the power under section 216 of the Cr.P.C.
            The learned Trial Court on consideration of the
submission raised by the learned counsels for both the sides has
been pleased to observe that the doctor conducting post-mortem
examination of the deceased has opined the cause of death of
the deceased was due to asphyxia and suicidal hanging. The
statements of the witnesses and inquest report also indicate
about the finding of the body hanging from a beam in the house
of the accused and the death of the deceased was within seven
years of the marriage. The learned Trial Court further observed
that the materials further indicate that the deceased suffered
death otherwise than under normal circumstances and the
statements of the informant and other witnesses indicate about
demand of cash and motorcycle by the accused. The learned
Trial Court further held that there is ground for presuming that

                                3
the    petitioner    has  committed   offences  under    sections
304-B/306/498-A of Indian Penal Code and section 4 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act and accordingly framed charge against the
petitioner. The petitioner pleaded not guilty to the charge and
claimed to be tried and accordingly, the case was posted for
recording evidence of the witnesses.
              The learned counsel for the petitioner Mr. Manas
Chand challenging the impugned order of the learned Trial Court
contended that there is no dispute that the marriage between
the   petitioner    and  the deceased    Jambubati  Meher     was
solemnized on 20.06.2002 and the unnatural death of the
deceased took place on 27.03.2004 and as per the post mortem
report, the cause of death of the deceased was asphyxia due to
suicidal hanging but the other ingredients of the offence under
section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code i.e. regarding cruelty to
the deceased in connection with demand of dowry are absent
and therefore, the learned Trial Court has committed illegality in
framing charges under sections 304-B and 306 of the Indian
Penal Code. The learned counsel for the petitioner further
contended that there is absolutely no material on record that
soon before the death, the deceased was subjected to cruelty in
connection     with   demand  of  dowry.   He  placed   the   first

                                4
information report, 161 Cr.P.C. statement of the informant as
well as the statement of the mother of the deceased namely,
Amruta Meher.
            Mr. Jyoti Prakash Patra, learned Additional Standing
Counsel on the other hand contended that there are materials
available on record to indicate that the ingredients of the
offences under sections 304-B and 306 of the Indian Penal Code
are made out and at this juncture, it is not excepted of the Trial
Court to shift the materials on record and when the Trial Court
has come to a finding basing on the materials available on record
that there are grounds to presume that the petitioner has
committed the offences under sections 304-B and 306 of the
Indian Penal Code along with other offences, this Court in
exercise of revisional jurisdiction should not interfere with the
impugned order.
            Section 227 of Cr.P.C. deals with discharge of the
accused. It confers special power on the Trial Judge to discharge
the accused at the threshold, if upon consideration of the records
and documents, the Trial Judge finds that “there is no sufficient
ground” to proceed against the accused. At the time of framing
of charge, it is not necessary for the prosecution to establish
beyond all reasonable doubt the accusations that have been

                               5
brought against the accused. The Court is not required to hold a
mini trial at that stage and to come to a conclusion that the
materials adduced in the case warrant conviction. At that stage,
the Court has to see whether materials available on record, if
unrebutted can be sufficient to bring home the offence which is
alleged against the accused. Law is well settled that even when
the materials placed before the Court disclose grave suspicion
against the accused then the Trial Court will be fully justified in
framing the charge.
            Coming to the contention of the learned counsel for
the petitioner that there is absolutely no material that soon
before the death of the deceased, she was subjected to torture
in connection with demand of dowry which is one of the essential
ingredients of the offence under section 304-B of the Indian
Penal Code, law is well settled that the expression “soon before
death” has not been defined either in the Penal Code or in the
Evidence Act and therefore, in each case, the Court has to
analyse the facts and circumstances leading to the death of the
victim and then decide if there is any proximate connection
between the demand of dowry and the act of cruelty or
harassment and death. The expression “soon before” refers to a
period either immediately before the death of the deceased or

                                6
within a few days or few weeks before death. What is relevant is
that there should be a perceptible nexus between the death of
the deceased and the dowry related harassment or cruelty
inflicted on her. No straight jacket formula can be laid down in
fixing any time limit. The expression is pregnant with the idea of
proximate test.
             Considering the First Information Report which was
lodged by none else than the father of the deceased namely,
Padma Lochan Meher, it is apparent that there are allegations
that there was demand of motor cycle as well as physical and
mental torture on the deceased by the petitioner. It is also
mentioned that after knowing about such torture, the informant
had given Rs.20,000/- on one occasion and Rs.10,000/- on
another occasion but in spite of that, the petitioner was
expecting some more money. Looking at the 161 Cr.P.C.
statement of the informant, it also appears that the petitioner
demanded Rs.50,000/- and a motor cycle and subjected the
deceased to physical torture. Coming to the statement of the
mother of the deceased namely, Amruta Meher, it appears that
in connection with the contract work, the petitioner and other
family members were assaulting the deceased and she has
stated about giving cash of Rs.5,000/- at one instance and

                                7
Rs.10,000/- at the other instance. The brother of the deceased
namely Santosh Meher has also stated that the petitioner, his
parents have killed the deceased and the petitioner was always
demanding     the   deceased   to  produce    the  original H.S.C.
certificate and creating disturbance and he has also stated that
his father had given Rs.30,000/- for the contract work of the
petitioner. There are also other materials available on record
against the petitioner which is not required to be analyzed at this
stage in a detailed manner.
             Considering the materials available on record and
particularly the fact that the death has taken place within two
years of marriage and as per the post mortem report, it is an
unnatural death and there are sufficient materials available on
record that the deceased was subjected to physical and mental
torture in connection with demand of dowry and particularly in
view of the provisions under sections 113-A and 113-B of the
Evidence Act, I do not find any illegality or impropriety in the
impugned order of the learned Trial Court and accordingly, the
revision petition stands dismissed.
             Since the FIR was lodged on 30.03.2004 and the
Sessions Case is also of the year 2004, the learned Trial Court is
directed to expedite the trial and conclude the same within a

                                   8
period of six months from the date of receipt of the order, if
possible by resorting to the procedure as laid down under section
309 of Cr.P.C. by conducting day to day trial.
                 It is made clear that any observation made while
adjudicating this revision petition challenging the legality of
framing charge should not influence the learned Trial Court and
he has to strictly proceed with the evidence to be adduced by
both the sides at the time of trial.
                                                   …………………………
                                                   S.K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 21th September, 2016/Sisir


