                          IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                                    CRLMC NO. 2324 OF 2004
        An application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
        Procedure, 1973 in connection with I.C.C. Case No.119 of 2004
        pending on the file of J.M.F.C., Jajpur Road.
                                           ----------------------------
               Satyabrata Lenka                       ………                          Petitioner
                                                    -Versus-
               State of Orissa and
               another                                ………                         Opposite parties
                      For Petitioner:                    -            Mr. Lalit Mishra
                      For the State:                      -           Mr. Prem Kumar Patnaik
                                                                      Addl. Govt. Advocate
                      For Opp. Party No.2:                -           Mr. Maitrijit Mohanty
                                           ----------------------------
        P R E S E N T:
                          THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Date of Hearing & Judgment: 24.07.2017
        ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. K. SAHOO, J.           Heard Mr. Lalit Mishra, learned counsel for the
        petitioner, Mr. Prem Kumar Patnaik, learned counsel for the
        State and Mr. Maitrijit Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for
        the opposite party no.2.

                                2
            The petitioner Satyabrata Lenka who was the Sub-
Inspector of Police, Jajpur Road Police Station has filed this
application under section 482 of the Criminal Procedure Code
challenging the impugned order dated 13.09.2004 passed by the
learned J.M.F.C., Jajpur Road in I.C.C. Case No.119 of 2004 in
taking cognizance of offences under sections 294/323 of the
Indian Penal Code and issuance of process against him.
            Learned counsel for the petitioner while challenging
the impugned order contended that on the first information
report of one Jogendra Kumar Agrawal, Jajpur Road P.S. Case
No.141 of 2004 was registered on 06.08.2004 for offences
punishable   under   sections  341/294/354/323/506/34       of the
Indian Penal Code against the complainant-opposite party no.2
Debabrata Nayak and others and at the relevant point of time,
the petitioner who was the Sub-Inspector of Police of Jajpur
Road Police Station took the complainant into custody in
connection with the said case and forwarded him to the Court of
learned J.M.F.C., Jajpur Road. After being released from custody,
the complainant has filed the complaint petition. It is further
contended that the averments made in the complaint petition
that while in custody in the police station, the petitioner abused
the complainant that “Mote Sala Vakila Dekhauchhu” and gave a

                                  3
slap on the left cheek and side of the ear of the complainant are
all concocted story and it has been made just to demoralize the
petitioner who is a public servant and arrested the complainant
in due discharge of his official duty and forwarded him to the
Court. It is further contended that while taking cognizance of the
offences, the learned Magistrate has not taken into consideration
the necessity of sanction as provided under section 197 of
Cr.P.C. and therefore, the impugned order is not sustainable in
the eye of law.
             In the case of Sudarsan Das -Vrs.- Smt. Sarojini
Mohapatra reported in (2017) 66 Orissa Criminal Reports
635, it is held as follows:-
             “5. Protection of sanction as envisaged
             under section 197 of Cr.P.C. serves a very
             salutary purpose, viz., it protects the honest and
             sincere officer in the performance of their official
             duty and prevents demoralization of such officer
             against threat of frivolous and malicious
             prosecution leading to harassment. "Official
             duty" implies that the act or omission should
             have been done in discharge of the duty. Once
             any act or omission has been found to have
             been committed by a public servant in discharge
             of his duty then it must be given liberal and
             wide construction. Existence of reasonable
             connection between the act complained of and
             the discharge of official duty is necessary. Law is
             well    settled   that    the    protection   given
             under section 197 of Cr.P.C. is not a cloak for

                                4
            doing the objectionable act. The excesses
            committed by the public servant during the
            performance of official duty are also protected
            under section 197 of Cr.P.C. It is the duty of the
            Court to find out whether the act done by the
            public servant and the official duty are so inter-
            connected/inter-related that one can postulate
            reasonably that it was done by the accused in
            performance of the official duty, though possibly
            in excess of the needs and requirements of the
            situation.”
            Keeping in view the factual aspect of this case and
the applicability of section 197 of Cr.P.C., it is clear that the
petitioner who is a public servant arrested the complainant-
opposite party no.2 in connection with Jajpur Road P.S. Case
No.141 of 2004 which is a cognizable case and it further appears
that the complainant was taken to the police station and then he
was forwarded to the Court of learned J.M.F.C., Jajpur Road and
subsequently the complainant was released on bail.
            In view of the factual scenario, the non-consideration
of the sanction aspect at all by the learned Magistrate while
taking cognizance of the offence and issuance of process against
the petitioner is against the principle laid down by this Court in
case of Sangram Kesari Behera -Vrs.- Niladri Dhir reported
in (2012) 52 Orissa Criminal Reports 362 wherein it is
observed and direction was issued to all the Magistrates to

                                5
exercise power of cognizance in complaint case against police
officer with due care and caution, especially, in cases where
complaints are lodged against police officers for alleged excess
act committed by them in course of due discharge of their official
duty. It was further held that the Magistrate should enquire from
the complainant as to whether the police officer against whom,
the complaints are being lodged had any connection with any
official duty, which was being discharged by the police officer or
not at the time of alleged incident. The Magistrate while taking
cognizance     of  offences  shall give   finding  regarding   the
applicability or otherwise of section 197 of Cr.P.C. which is
mandatory.
             The learned Magistrate has not inquired from the
complainant as to whether the petitioner against whom the
complaint petition was filed had any connection with any official
duty which was being discharged by him at the time of alleged
incident. The act complained of due to which the offence is
stated to have been committed against the complainant appears
to have committed by the petitioner while acting or purporting to
act in the discharge of his official duty. Even though the
allegations are that of commission of excesses by the petitioner
while performing his official duty, in my humble view, the

                                     6
petitioner cannot be prosecuted without sanction from the
competent authority. Sanction for prosecution under section 197
of Cr.P.C. by the appropriate authority is a necessary pre-
requisite before the Court of competent jurisdiction takes
cognizance of offences and issues process against a public
servant while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of his
official duty.
                  Resultantly, the impugned order suffers for non-
application of mind and is hereby set aside.
                  Accordingly, the CRLMC application is allowed.
                                                   ..……………………….
                                                      S. K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 24th July, 2017/Sisir


