                       IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
                              BLAPL NO. 3590 of 2016
         An application under section 439 of the Code of Criminal
         Procedure.
                                  ---------------------
             Rabi Narayan Sahoo           ………                       Petitioner
                                        -Versus-
             State of Orissa              ……..                      Opp. Party
                   For Petitioner            -      Mr. Devashis Panda
                   For Opp. party            -      Mr. Deepak Kumar
                                                    Addl. Standing Counsel
                                  -----------------------
         P R E S E N T:-
                     THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
         ………………………………………………………………………………………
         Date of Argument- 06.10.2016               Date of order- 31.10.2016
         ………………………………………………………………………………………
S. K. SAHOO, J.       The petitioner is an accused in Laxmisagar P.S. Case
         No. 45 of 2013 which corresponds to C.T. Case No. 797 of 2013
         pending on the file of Smt. S.S. Mishra, J.M.F.C., Bhubaneswar
         for offences punishable under sections 420, 467, 468 read with
         sections 120-B and 34 of the Indian Penal Code. He has filed this
         application under section 439 Cr.P.C. for bail as his prayer for

                                 2
grant of bail was turned down by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Bhubaneswar vide order dated 23.05.2016.
             The petitioner approached this Court earlier on bail in
BLAPL No. 2231 of 2015 which was allowed vide order dated
16.07.2015, inter alia, with condition that the petitioner shall
furnish cash security to the tune of Rs.50,00,000/-( Rupees Fifty
lakh) in the shape of fixed deposit in any Nationalized Bank. It is
submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that as the
petitioner failed to comply with the terms and conditions
imposed in the bail order, he could not be released from custody.
2.           The factual matrix of the prosecution case as
unfolded from the First Information Report lodged by one
Chittaranjan Das of Satya Bihar, Palasuni, Bhubaneswar on
25.02.2013 before Inspector in charge of Laxmisagar Police
Station is that as the informant was allured with false promise by
the petitioner and others who are the Directors of Systematics
Fund     Management     Limited (hereafter  ‘the   Company’),    he
invested money in the Company. The Company was executing
agreements with people to provide them land and flats since
2011. It is further stated that some of the Directors resigned
from the Company and the rest of the Directors were not able to
fulfill the promise made by the Company. Even though the

                                3
invested money of the informant matured since June 2012 but
the Company did not refund the maturity amount. The office of
the Company was closed down and the investors were in
darkness as to when they would get back their money. In spite
of repeated approach by the informant to the authorities, no
fruitful result came out.
             On the basis of such First Information Report,
Laxmisagar      P.S. Case No.45   of  2013    was  registered   on
25.02.2013 under sections 420/467/468/120-B/34 of the Indian
Penal Code.
             During course of investigation, it came to light that
Susanta Kumar Nayak as Managing Director, petitioner as
Director along with other associates were running the Company
at A-301, 3rd Floor, Acrux Gokul Plaza, Cuttack Road, Bomikhal.
The Company was dealing with shares, mutual funds, insurance,
Government securities, real estate business, gold and other
bonds and working as portfolio Manager for its plants. The
informant was assured by the company to be provided with a
land and accordingly, he paid cash of Rs.2,10,000/- and the
company had made an agreement with the informant to provide
land after the completion of maturity period. When the maturity
period was over and the informant deposited the agreement
before the company authorities, the company authorities neither

                                 4
provided him land nor refunded the money deposited by him.
After some days, the Managing Director of the company, the
petitioner and others absconded. Some other investors who also
paid cash to the company and executed agreements were also
cheated.   The   petitioner  was    arrested   on  27.02.2013    in
connection with another case and he confessed his guilt that he
along with other Directors have cheated around 100 persons all
over Odisha and he was taken on remand in this case. On
25.06.2013 charge sheet was submitted against the petitioner
and others under sections 420/467/468/120-B/34 of the Indian
Penal Code keeping the investigation open for collection of
material proof and to arrest the other accused persons.
3.          Mr.   Devashis   Panda,    learned   counsel  for  the
petitioner contended that the trial of the case commenced on
23.07.2013 with the framing of charge and on 16.01.2014 three
prosecution witnesses were examined, one more witness was
examined on 28.08.2014 and on 18.08.2015 two more witnesses
were examined and the case is pending awaiting examination of
the rest of the witnesses who are not turning up to give their
evidence due to the laches on the part of the prosecution. The
learned counsel for the petitioner further contended that the
offences are triable by Magistrate and even though the offences
are non-bailable but since the trial has not been concluded within

                                  5
a period of sixty days from the first date fixed for taking
evidence in the case, the petitioner is entitled to be released on
bail in view of sub-section (6) of section 437 of the Cr.P.C.
             Mr. Deepak Kumar, learned Addl. Standing Counsel
on the other hand opposed the prayer for bail and contended
that the petitioner is involved in an economic offence and the
provision under sub-section (6) of 437 of the Cr.P.C. is not
mandatory and the Magistrate has got power to refuse bail for
the reasons to be recorded in writing. The learned counsel
further urged that the learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Bhubaneswar has observed that the matter deals with cheating
the general public and the petitioner and other co-accused
persons hatched out a conspiracy to give effect to the offence by
influencing the customers who have lost their hard earned
money. The learned counsel further contended that in a case of
this nature, the petitioner is not entitled to be released on bail
however in view of the period of detention of the petitioner in
judicial custody, appropriate direction can be given to the Trial
Court for expeditious disposal of the trial.
4.           Section 437 (6) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
reads as follows:-
             S.437(6)-    If,  in   any   case  triable  by   a
             Magistrate, the trial of a person accused of any

                                  6
             non-bailable offence is not concluded within a
             period of sixty days from the first date fixed for
             taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if
             he is in custody during the whole of the said
             period, be released on bail to the satisfaction of
             the   Magistrate,  unless    for  reasons  to   be
             recorded in writing, the Magistrate otherwise
             directs.
             To attract the provision under sub-section (6) of
section 437 Cr.P.C., it is the requirement of law that the case
must be triable by a Magistrate and at least one of the offences
under which the accused is facing trial should be non-bailable. In
such a case, if the trial is not concluded within a period of sixty
days from the first date fixed for taking evidence in the case and
the accused is in custody during the whole of the said period
then the Magistrate on application being filed by the accused for
bail can release him on bail to his satisfaction. However if in spite
of the accused being remained in custody for such period, the
Magistrate is of the view that the accused should not be released
on bail, he has to record his reasons in that respect. There is no
dispute that taking into account the nature of offences which are
triable by Magistrate, the legislature in its wisdom has thought of
conclusion of such trial without any unreasonable delay. There
may be several contingencies for not concluding the trial by the

                                   7
Magistrate within a period of sixty days from the first date fixed
for taking evidence and in some cases the accused himself may
be responsible for that. For example, if after the commencement
of trial, the accused approaches the higher Court challenging
some order passed by the learned Magistrate and obtains an
order of stay or the accused deliberately takes time for cross-
examining the prosecution witnesses or adducing his defence
evidence then there is possibility of non-completion of trial within
the aforesaid period of sixty days. Being responsible for delay in
disposal of the trial, the accused cannot take benefit of this
provision and demand his right for being released on bail. There
may be number of chargesheet witnesses in a case or the
Presiding Officer may in some cases be not available after the
first date fixed for taking evidence or there may be huge
pendency of such types of cases in a particular Court. In some
such cases, the Magistrate may refuse to exercise his discretion
in favour of the accused if he feels that release of the accused on
bail will have a serious adverse impact on the society. Therefore,
it is the duty of the Magistrate not to grant unnecessary
adjournment in such cases and make every endeavour to
conclude the trial as expeditiously as possible keeping in view
the intention of the legislature in making such a provision. Even
otherwise also if the trial is not concluded within a period of sixty

                                 8
days from the first date fixed for taking evidence in the case
then also if the Magistrate feels that the release of the accused
would not be in the interest of justice or that the accused is a
habitual offender or an absconder then he can assign those
reasons for not releasing him on bail. In trial of warrant cases by
Magistrate, after framing of charge under section 240 Cr.P.C, the
date is fixed for taking evidence in the case and obviously the
period of sixty days has to be counted from that date. Similarly
in cases instituted otherwise than on police report, after framing
of the charge under section 246(1) Cr.P.C, if the accused wishes
to cross-examine any of the prosecution witnesses already
examined before framing of charge, the Magistrate shall fix the
date and the period of sixty days has to be counted from that
date. Therefore no straight jacket formula can be laid down as to
in which Magistrate triable non-bailable offence case, the
accused shall be released on bail in case is in custody during the
whole period of sixty days from the date fixed for taking
evidence in the case. It depends on the facts and circumstances
of each case. The right of the accused under section 437(6) of
the Code is not an absolute right. The very fact that the
discretion has been left to the Magistrate to direct otherwise than
to release the accused on bail after recording the reasons in
writing substantiate that the provision is not mandatory. The

                                 9
inbuilt exception has to be exercised with due care striking a
balance between the rights of the accused and the rights of the
society as a whole.
            In case of Nehul Prakashbhai Shah & Ors. -Vrs.-
State of Gujarat passed in Criminal Reference No.2 of 2011
decided on 06.07.2012 by a Division Bench of Gujarat High Court
reported in (2012) 3 Gujarat Law Reporter 685, the following
questions were referred for answer:-
            (i)     Whether in a case triable by the learned
            Magistrate particularly of a person accused of
            any non-bailable offence not concluded within a
            period of sixty days from the first date fixed for
            taking evidence in the case and such person is in
            custody during the whole of the said period,
            such person gets an absolute indefeasible right
            to be released on bail to the satisfaction of the
            learned Magistrate unless for the reasons to be
            recorded in writing by the learned Magistrate to
            direct otherwise?
            (ii)    Whether the provisions of sec. 437(6) of
            the Code is mandatory or not?
            (iii)   Whether the learned Magistrate has an
            option to refuse bail upon his satisfaction by
            recording reasons in writing and in such an
            eventuality, what could be the parameters,
            factors,  grounds   and   circumstances    to   be
            considered by the learned Magistrate vis-a-vis

                     10
the    application  preferred   by   the   accused
claiming absolute right in such circumstances as
mentioned in sub-sec. (6) of sec. 437 of the
Code?
(iv)    Whether the above factors, parameters,
circumstances and grounds for seeking bail by
the accused as well as the ground to be
considered by the learned Magistrate for his
satisfaction are to be similar to that of sub-secs.
(1), (2) of sec. 437 of the Code or other than
that or no straight-jacket formula can be laid?
(v)     Whether the parameters contained in
sec. 167(2)(a)(i)(ii) of the Code (default bail)
found in Chapter XII pertaining to 'information
to the police and their powers to investigate' can
be imported for exercising powers for seeking
bail under sec. 437(6) found in Chapter XXXIII
pertaining to the provisions as to 'bail and
bonds'?
(vi)    Whether a decision in principle on which
it is decided is binding to the Co-ordinate Bench
of equal strength when such decision of the
earlier Bench is a principle of law laid down
and/or a 'statement of law' in the context of the
subject-matter?
(vii)   Whether the accused has a fundamental
right under Art. 21 of the Constitution of India
for a speedy trial can it be pressed into service

                                 11
            vis-a-vis right of the accused accruing under
            sec. 437(6) of the Code.
            The Division Bench while answering the question
wise held as follows:-
            Q.1. An accused involved in a non-bailable
            offence triable by Magisterial Court whose trial is
            not concluded within a period of sixty days from
            the first date fixed for taking evidence in that
            case, and who has been in custody during the
            whole of the said period, does not get an
            absolute or indefeasible right to be released on
            bail to the satisfaction of the Magistrate. The
            Magistrate has discretion to direct otherwise
            (refuse bail) by recording in writing the reasons
            for such rejection.
            Q.2.    The provisions contained in sec. 437(6) of
            the Code are not mandatory.
            Q.3.    The Magistrate has option/discretion to
            refuse bail by assigning reasons there for. The
            parameters, factors, circumstances and grounds
            to be considered by Magistrate vis-a-vis such
            application preferred by the accused under
            sec. 437(6) of the Code may be:
                    1. Whether the reasons for being unable
            to conclude trial within sixty days from the first
            date fixed of taking evidence, are attributable to
            the accused?

                        12
        2. Whether there are any chances of the
accused tampering with evidence or causing
prejudice to the case of the prosecution in any
other manner?
        3. Whether there are any chances of
abscondance of the accused on being bailed out?
        4. Whether accused was not in custody
during the whole of the said period?
        If the answer to any one of the above-
referred fact situations or similar fact situations
is in affirmative than that would work as a fetter
on the right that accrues to the accused under
first part of sub-sec. (6) of sec. 437 of the Code.
The right accrues to him only if he is in custody
during the whole of the said period as can be
seen from the language employed in sub-sec.
(6) of sec. 437 of the Code by the legislature.
        It would also be relevant to take into
consideration the punishment prescribed for the
offence for which the accused is being tried in
comparison to the time that the trial is likely to
take, regard being had to the factors like volume
of evidence, number of witnesses, workload on
the Court, availability of prosecutor, number of
accused being tried with accused and their
availability for trial, etc.
        The factors which are quoted above by
this   Court    are     only illustrative  and  not
exhaustive.

                      13
Q.4.    The factors, parameters, circumstances
and grounds for seeking bail by the accused as
well as grounds to be considered by the learned
Magistrate for his satisfaction would not be
identical or similar to sub-sec. (1) and sub-sec.
(2) of the sec. 437 of the Code, but may be
relevant and overlapping each other depending
upon facts and there cannot be any straight-
jacket formula. But, we may add that the
reasons    for  rejection   of   applications   under
sec. 437(6) need to be more weighty than the
routine grounds of rejection.
Q.5.   The    parameters     relevant    for deciding
application    under    sec. 167(2)(a)(i)(ii) of  the
Code (default bail), cannot be imported for
exercise of power under sec. 437(6) of the Code.
Q.6.    A decision in principle rendered by a Co-
ordinate Bench of equal strength would bind
another Co-ordinate Bench as it lays down a
principle of law and not a statement of law in
context of subject-matter.
Q.7.    The      legislature,     while      enacting
sec. 437(6) of the Code, has not given an
absolute, indefeasible or unfettered right of bail.
But right of bail is given with a rider investing
the Magistrate with discretion to refuse bail by
recording reasons there for. Therefore, the right
of   accused     for   a   speedy     trial,  though,
constitutional and aimed at liberty of accused, is

                                  14
            not put on that high a pedestal that it becomes
            absolute. It is a right given with reasonable
            restrictions. This is the only way the provisions
            of sec. 437(6) of the Code and Art. 21 of the
            Constitution of India can be harmonised and
            have to read and interpreted accordingly.
            In case of Robert Lendi –Vrs.- The Collector of
Customs and another reported in 1986(3) Crimes 54, a
Division Bench of Delhi High Court held as follows:-
            “15.    This brings us back to sub-section (6) of
            sec. 437. The     object of      sub-section (6) of
            sec. 437 is that    if   the   trial of  non-bailable
            offences in the Court of Magistrate is not
            concluded within sixty days from the first date
            fixed for taking evidence in the case, such
            person shall, if he is in custody during the whole
            of the said period, be released on bail to the
            satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless for reasons
            to   be   recorded    in   writing,  the   Magistrate
            otherwise directs.
            16.    The expression "from the first date fixed
            for taking evidence in the case", cannot be read
            in isolation of the expression "if the trial of a
            person accused of any non-bailable offence is
            not concluded within a period of the sixty days".
            Both these expressions have to be read together
            and in harmony. A plain reading of the provision
            would clearly go to show that the period of sixty

                   15
days will start from the date fixed for taking
evidence in the case in which the accused has
been charged and has pleaded not guilty to the
charge, and has asked for being tried. In other
words the time spent on recording the pre-
charge evidence which is usually recorded in
complaint cases before the charge is framed, will
not be counted for purposes of sub-section (6)
of sec. 437 Cr.P.C. In our view, therefore, Mr.
Mehta's line of reasoning is not correct and it
does not commend to us.
17.    The   next   question   that    arises   for
consideration is whether while refusing bail
under sub-section (6) of sec. 437 of the Code
the Magistrate can only refuse bail on the limited
reasoning germane to the cause of delay and
whether the bail can be refused on the general
grounds recognised as good for refusal to grant
bail. Undoubtedly, the object of sub-section (6)
of sec. 437 of the Code is to eradicate delay in
trial. To  us,  it appears that     it is equally
important that the ends of justice do not suffer.
The procedural laws are essentially meant to
safeguard the interest of justice. The twin
objects namely to eradicate the delay in trial and
to achieve and ends of justice are necessarily to
be harmonized. It is in that the context one has
to find out whether the discretion exercised by
the Magistrate in withholding bail after sixty
days, has been properly and judicially exercised.

                      16
We find nothing in the provision to support the
assertion of Mr. Mehta that the reasons for the
declining the bail under this provision should be
only those which are germane to the cause of
delay. There is no reason to give such a
restricted   meaning      to   the   provision.  The
expression used in the provision is "unless for
the reasons to be recorded in writing, the
Magistrate otherwise directs". A plain reading of
the expression shows that the Legislature has
put no fetters on the powers of the Magistrate
that under this provision bail can only be refused
for reasons germane to the cause of delay. If
that   were   so,   the    Legislature   would  have
certainly made it clear. To us it appears that the
considerations    for   refusing    bail  under  this
provision can be the reasons which are generally
invoked and understood in law as the grounds
for refusing bail. All that is required of the
Magistrate is that should he decide to decline to
grant bail, he must record his reasons in writing.
There are no fetters placed on the exercise of
this discretion.
18.     It was next urged by Mr. Mehta that the
even if a distinction is recognised between the
'Enquiry' and 'Trial', the petitioner was entitled
to grant of bail, as the first date fixed for taking
evidence in the case was 17th of February 1986
and that since sixty days' period has expired,
the petitioner should be released on bail. We

                     17
have given our anxious consideration to the
contention of Mr. Mehta. The learned A.C.M.M.
has refused bail on the ground that the case
against the petitioner is a serious one involving
smuggling of gold and since the petitioner is a
foreigner and has no fixed residence in India,
there is likelihood of this jumping the bail. We
do not find anything wrong in the reasons given
by the learned Magistrate for refusing to grant
bail. We may, however, additionally state that
on a perusal of the copy of the order sheet, right
from 17-2-1986 onwards, it is abundantly clear
that the delay in the trial of the case against the
petitioner has mostly been caused due to the
conduct of the defense. In that view of the
matter and in the light of the reasons given by
the learned A.C.M.M. for refusing bail, we are of
the opinion that the petitioner cannot be granted
bail.
19.     In conclusion we may state that there is a
sharp distinction recognised by the Code of
Criminal Procedure between the Enquiry and
Trial. Under sub-section (6) of sec. 437 of the
Code, the first date fixed for taking evidence in
the case, would be the date fixed for recording
of evidence, after the accused is charge-sheeted
and the prosecution is given notice of the date
on which the evidence of the prosecution is to be
recorded. We are further of the view that the
reasons for refusing bail under this provision

                                  18
              need not be restricted to reasons which are
              germane to the cause of delay. We see no such
              fetters on the powers of the Magistrate and the
              only requirement of law is that should the
              Magistrate refuse to grant bail, he must record
              his reasons for so doing in writing. The reference
              is accordingly answered.”
5.            On perusal of the lower Court record which was
called for from the Court of Smt. S.S. Mishra, J.M.F.C.,
Bhubaneswar in C.T. Case No. 797 of 2013, it is found that
charge      was     framed     on   23.07.2013      under    sections
420/467/468/120-B/34 of the Indian Penal Code. Out of 12
charge sheet witnesses, P.W.1 Hemant Kumar Moharana, P.W.2
Ramachandra Parida, P.W.3 Dilip Kumar Bhatta were examined
on 16.01.2014. P.W.4 Sukanata Shekar Pradhan was examined
on 28.08.2014, P.W.5 Pradipta Kumar Pradhan and P.W.6
Sadasiv Behera were examined on 18.08.2015. The record
further reveals that after 18.08.2015, number of dates have
been fixed for examination of the rest of the witnesses and
summons were issued to the witnesses but the witnesses have
not turned up to give their evidence and the prosecution has also
not taken any concrete steps to ensure the attendance of such
witnesses. Therefore, I am of the view that the prosecution has
failed in its duty in taking expeditious steps for conclusion of trial

                                 19
particularly when the legislature has conferred a valuable right in
favour of the accused to seek for bail on completion of sixty days
from the first date fixed for taking evidence in a Magistrate
triable non-bailable offence case.
6.           Adverting to the contentions raised by the learned
counsels for the respective parties, looking at the oral as well as
documentary evidence available on record against the petitioner
relating to the commission of the offences under which charge
sheet has been submitted, the nature and gravity of the
accusation against the petitioner, the manner in which the
company where the petitioner was working as a Director has
siphoned off huge public money alluring the investors with false
promise and particularly when such type of crimes are rampant
in the society and chance of tampering with the further evidence
cannot be ruled out, striking a balance between the rights of the
petitioner under section 437(6) of the Cr.P.C. and also the rights
of the society as a whole, I am of the view that it would not be
proper to release the petitioner on bail in the larger interests of
public and State.
             However,    taking   into   account   the   period  of
incarceration of the petitioner in judicial custody and the date of
commencement of the trial, number of witnesses examined till
date and the fact that the last witness was examined more than

                                    20
 a year and two months back, keeping in view the right to speedy
 trial flowing from Article 21 of the Constitution of India, I direct
 the Investigating Officer/Inspector in Charge of Laxmisagar
 Police Station to appear before the learned Trial Court on or
 before 07.11.2016 and receive summons in respect of the rest of
 the prosecution witnesses to be examined and ensure their
 attendance on the next dates fixed for trial. The learned
 Magistrate is directed to conduct day to day trial and conclude
 the trial by 24.12.2016.
                  A copy of the order be handed over to the learned
 State Counsel to instruct the Investigating Officer/Inspector in
 Charge of Laxmisagar Police Station to do the needful.
                  Accordingly, the bail application sans merit and
 hence stands rejected.
                                                    ….………………………
                                                     S. K. Sahoo, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 31st October,2016/Sisir


