$~31
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                      Judgment delivered on: 1st December, 2015
+      CRL.M.C. 4880/2015
       MUKESH KUMAR & ORS.                             ..... Petitioners
                             Represented by: Mr. Parveen Saroha, Adv.
                      versus
       THE STATE (NCT OF DELHI) & ANR                          ..... Respondents
                             Represented by: Ms. Meenakshi Chauhan, APP
                             for State with SI Prem Singh, PS-Defence
                             Colony.
                             Respondent no. 2 in person.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SURESH KAIT
SURESH KAIT, J. (Oral)
       Crl. M.A. 17462/2015 (for exemption)
       Exemptions allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
       Accordingly, the application is allowed.
+      CRL.M.C. 4880/2015
1.     Vide the present petition, petitioners seek directions thereby
quashing of FIR No.272/2011 registered at Police Station Malviya Nagar,
Delhi for the offences punishable under Sections 498A/406/34 IPC and
the consequential proceedings emanating therefrom against them.
2.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submits that
the aforesaid case was registered on the complaint of respondent No.2,
namely, Ms. Manita due to some matrimonial disputes.                   Thereafter,
Crl.M.C. No.4880/2015                                                 Page 1 of 8

respondent no. 2 settled all disputes with the petitioners before Special
Judge, Saket Court, New Delhi on 01.09.2014. Consequent thereto,
marriage between petitioner no.1 and respondent no.2 has been dissolved
vide a decree of divorce dated 31.07.2015. As per the settlement, the
petitioners agreed to pay an amount of Rs. 6,00,000/- as full and final
settlement. Out of which Rs.2,00,000/- each has been paid at the time of
recording of first and second motion respectively and remaining amount
of Rs. 2,00,000/- has been paid today in the Court by way of DD
no.006288 dated 04.11.2015 drawn on HDFC Bank in the name of
respondent no.2. Thus, she does not want to pursue the case further
against the petitioners.
3.     Respondent No.2 is personally present in the Court with her father
namely Mahender Singh. She has been duly identified by SI Prem Singh,
Investigating Officer of the case. Respondent no. 2 submits that the
aforesaid case was registered due to some misunderstanding. Now she
has settled all her disputes with the petitioners. Consequent thereto her
marriage with petitioner no. 1 has been dissolved and she has received
entire agreed amount of Rs.6,00,000/-. She has no complaint whatsoever
against the petitioners and if the present petition is allowed, she has no
objection.
4.     Learned APP appearing on behalf of the State submits that after
investigation, police has filed the chargesheet, charges have been framed
and the case is pending for prosecution evidence. She further submits that
present case pertains to matrimonial disputes and since, the petitioners
and respondent no.2 have settled their disputes and marriage between
petitioner no.1 and respondent no.2 has been dissolved by a decree of
Crl.M.C. No.4880/2015                                          Page 2 of 8

divorce dated 31.07.2015, no purpose would be served if the petitioners
are directed to face trial. Therefore, the State has no objection, if the
present petition is allowed.
5.     Under the circumstances and looking to the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab and
Another (2012) 10 SCC 303, wherein the Apex Court has referred to a
number of matters for the proposition that even a non-compoundable
offence can also be quashed on the ground of a settlement agreement
between the offender and the victim, if the circumstances so warrant; by
observing as under:
            “58.      ....However,     certain     offences    which
           overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavour
           having arisen out of civil, mercantile, commercial,
           financial, partnership or such like transactions or the
           offences arising out of matrimony, particularly relating
           to dowry, etc. or the family dispute, where the wrong is
           basically to the victim and the offender and the victim
           have settled all disputes between them amicably,
           irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been
           made compoundable, the High Court may within the
           framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal
           proceeding or criminal complaint or FIR if it is satisfied
           that on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any
           likelihood of the offender being convicted and by not
           quashing the criminal proceedings, justice shall be
           casualty and ends of justice shall be defeated.”
6.     While recognizing the need of amicable resolution of disputes in
cases like the instant one, the aforesaid dictum has been affirmed by the
Apex Court in a recent judgment in Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of
Punjab & Anr. 2014 6 SCC 466. The pertinent observations of the Apex
Court are as under:-
Crl.M.C. No.4880/2015                                           Page 3 of 8

           29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and
           lay down the following principles by which the High
           Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
           the settlement between the parties and exercising its
           power under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the
           settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
           accept the settlement with direction to continue with the
           criminal proceedings:
            29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is
           to be distinguished from the power which lies in the
           Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
           Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High
           Court has inherent power to quash the criminal
           proceedings even in those cases which are not
           compoundable, where the parties have settled the matter
           between themselves. However, this power is to be
           exercised sparingly and with caution.
           29.2. When the parties have reached the settlement and
           on that basis petition for quashing the criminal
           proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases
           would be to secure:
           (i) ends of justice, or
           (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court.
           While exercising the power the High Court is to form an
           opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
           29.3. Such a power is not to be exercised in those
           prosecutions which involve heinous and serious offences
           of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,
           dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature and
           have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for the
           offences alleged to have been committed under special
           statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the
           offences committed by public servants while working in
           that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis
           of compromise between the victim and the offender.
           29.4. On the other hand, those criminal cases having
           overwhelmingly and predominantly civil character,
           particularly those arising out of commercial transactions
           or arising out of matrimonial relationship or family
Crl.M.C. No.4880/2015                                           Page 4 of 8

           disputes should be quashed when the parties have
           resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
           29.5. While exercising its powers, the High Court is to
           examine as to whether the possibility of conviction is
           remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases
           would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice
           and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
           quashing the criminal cases.
           29.6. Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the
           category of heinous and serious offences and therefore
           are to be generally treated as crime against the society
           and not against the individual alone. However, the High
           Court would not rest its decision merely because there is
           a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is
           framed under this provision. It would be open to the
           High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of
           Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the
           prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if
           proved, would lead to proving the charge under Section
           307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High
           Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether
           such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the
           body, nature of weapons used, etc. Medical report in
           respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally be
           the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie
           analysis, the High Court can examine as to whether
           there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances
           of conviction are remote and bleak. In the former case it
           can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the
           criminal proceedings whereas in the latter case it would
           be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea
           compounding the offence based on complete settlement
           between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
           swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties
           is going to result in harmony between them which may
           improve their future relationship.
           29.7. While deciding whether to exercise its power under
           Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play
           a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is
           arrived at immediately after the alleged commission of
Crl.M.C. No.4880/2015                                            Page 5 of 8

           offence and the matter is still under investigation, the
           High Court may be liberal in accepting the settlement to
           quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is
           because of the reason that at this stage the investigation
           is still on and even the charge-sheet has not been filed.
           Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed but the
           evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still at infancy
           stage, the High Court can show benevolence in
           exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie
           assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned
           above. On the other hand, where the prosecution
           evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the
           evidence the matter is at the stage of argument, normally
           the High Court should refrain from exercising its power
           under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial
           court would be in a position to decide the case finally on
           merits and to come to a conclusion as to whether the
           offence under Section 307 IPC is committed or not.
           Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already
           recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the
           appellate stage before the High Court, mere compromise
           between the parties would not be a ground to accept the
           same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has
           already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is
           proved under Section 307 IPC and conviction is already
           recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no
           question of sparing a convict found guilty of such a
           crime.”
7.     In the case of Jitendra Raghuvanshi & Ors. Vs. Babita
Raghuvanshi & Anr. (2013) 4 SCC 58, wherein the Supreme Court in
respect of the matrimonial disputes has specifically held as follows:-
             “15. In our view, it is the duty of the courts to
             encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
             particularly, when the same are on considerable
             increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
             they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
             satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
Crl.M.C. No.4880/2015                                              Page 6 of 8

             and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
             of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
             would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing
             of FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal
             proceedings.
             16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes
             in recent times. They institution of marriage occupies
             an important place and it has an important role to play
             in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made in
             the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to
             settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties
             ponder over their defaults and terminate their disputes
             amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out
             in a court of law, in order to do complete justice in the
             matrimonial matters, the courts should be less hesitant
             in exercising their extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite
             to state that the power under Section 482 should be
             exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
             the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
             record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
             would be an abuse of process of court or that the ends
             of justice require that the proceedings ought to be
             quashed….”
8.     Both the parties are present in the Court today, approbate to the
aforesaid settlement dated 01.09.2014 and undertake to remain bound by
the same.
9.     Since the subject matter of this FIR is essentially matrimonial,
which now stands mutually and amicably settled between the parties and
the complainant is no longer interested in supporting the prosecution
because of which, its chances of success in the matter are now greatly
diminished. Therefore, in view of the law discussed above, in the facts
and circumstances as noted above, I am of the considered opinion that this
matter deserves to be given a quietus as continuance of proceedings
Crl.M.C. No.4880/2015                                              Page 7 of 8

arising out of the FIR in question would be an exercise in futility.
10.    Consequently, FIR No.272/2011 registered at Police Station
Malviya Nagar, Delhi for the offences punishable under Sections
498A/406/34 IPC and all proceedings emanating therefrom are hereby
quashed against the petitioners.
11.    In view of the above, the present petition is allowed.
       Crl. M.A. 17463/2015
       Dismissed as infructuos.
                                                           SURESH KAIT
                                                              (JUDGE)
DECEMBER 01, 2015
Afa/jg
Crl.M.C. No.4880/2015                                           Page 8 of 8


