$~49
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                           Judgment delivered on: 11th September, 2015
+                          CRL.M.C. No.3744/2015
       PURAN CHAND AND ORS                                     ..... Petitioners
                           Represented by:    Mr.Mahesh Verma, Adv
                                              with petitioners in person.
                           versus
       STATE NCT OF DELHI AND ANR                           .... Respondents
                           Represented by: Mr.Kamal Kumar Ghei, APP
                                              for the State with SI Roshan
                                              Lal, PS Nangloi, Delhi in
                                              person.
                                              Mr.Sandeep Saini, Adv for
                                              respondent No.2with R2 in
                                              person.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SURESH KAIT
SURESH KAIT, J. (Oral)
Crl. M.A.No.13277/2015 (for exemption)
       Exemptions allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
       Accordingly, the application is allowed.
CRL.M.C. No.3744/2015
1.     By way of this petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, petitioners seek quashing of FIR No.492/2009
registered at Police Station Nangloi, Delhi, for the offences punishable
under Sections 498A/406/34 IPC and the consequential proceedings
emanating therefrom against them.
2.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submits that
      Crl.M.C.No.3744/2015                                      Page 1 of 8

the aforesaid case was registered on the complaint of respondent No.2,
namely, Mrs.Nitu, consequent upon certain matrimonial and domestic
disputes having arisen between the parties pursuant to the marriage of
petitioner No.2 with respondent No.2.        The police chargesheeted the
petitioners and pending for framing of charge. Meanwhile, the respondent
No.2 and the petitioners have amicably settled their disputes vide
Compromise Deed dated 30.04.2014 arrived at before the Mediation
Centre, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi, for a total sum of Rs.1.60Lac. As per the
said settlement, a sum of Rs.60,000/- each was paid at the time of
recording first motion petition and second motion petition and the balance
amount of Rs.40,000/- in cash is paid today.
3.     Learned counsel for the petitioners further submits that consequent
to the said settlement, marriage between the petitioner No.1 and
respondent No.2 has been dissolved vide decree of mutual divorce dated
19.05.2015 under Section 13 B (2) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
Since the agreed amount has been paid by the petitioners, thus, respondent
No.2 does not wish to pursue her case further against the petitioners.
4.     Respondent No.2 is personally present in the Court alongwith her
counsel named above. She has been duly identified by the Investigating
Officer SI Roshan Lal of Police Station Nangloi. The learned counsel,
under instructions, does not dispute the submissions made by learned
counsel for the petitioners and submits that the present matter has been
amicably settled, marriage between the respondent No.2 and the petitioner
No.1 has been dissolved vide decree of divorce dated 19.05.2015, the
entire agreed amount has been received by her and she has no complaints
whatsoever against the petitioners. It is further submitted that now no
      Crl.M.C.No.3744/2015                                   Page 2 of 8

dispute with petitioners survives and so, the proceedings arising out of the
FIR in question be brought to an end.
5.      Learned APP appearing on behalf of the State submits that police
chargesheeted the petitioners and the case is at the initial stage of trial as
matter is pending for framing of charge before learned Trial Court. He
submits that the present matter is a matrimonial one and since the
respondent No.2 does not wish to pursue the case further against the
petitioners, no purpose would be served if the petitioners are directed to
face trial. Therefore, the State has no objection, if this Court allows the
present petition.
6.      In view of the overall circumstances; and looking to the
pronouncements of the Supreme Court in Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab
and Another1, which has referred to a number of matters for the
proposition that even a non-compoundable offence can also be quashed on
the ground of a settlement agreement between the offender and the victim,
if the circumstances so warrant; and also Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs.
State of Punjab & Anr.2 , wherein the Supreme Court held as follows:-
             “29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and
            lay down the following principles by which the High
            Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
            the settlement between the parties and exercising its
            power under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the
            settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
            accept the settlement with direction to continue with the
            criminal proceedings:
1
  (2012) 10 SCC 303
2
  (2014) 6 SCC 466
       Crl.M.C.No.3744/2015                                   Page 3 of 8

      29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is
     to be distinguished from the power which lies in the
     Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
     Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High
     Court has inherent power to quash the criminal
     proceedings even in those cases which are not
     compoundable, where the parties have settled the matter
     between themselves. However, this power is to be
     exercised sparingly and with caution.
     29.2. When the parties have reached the settlement and
     on that basis petition for quashing the criminal
     proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases
     would be to secure:
     (i) ends of justice, or
     (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court.
     While exercising the power the High Court is to form an
     opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
     29.3. Such a power is not to be exercised in those
     prosecutions which involve heinous and serious offences
     of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,
     dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature and
     have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for the
     offences alleged to have been committed under special
     statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the
     offences committed by public servants while working in
     that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis
     of compromise between the victim and the offender.
     29.4. On the other hand, those criminal cases having
     overwhelmingly and predominantly civil character,
     particularly those arising out of commercial transactions
     or arising out of matrimonial relationship or family
     disputes should be quashed when the parties have
     resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
Crl.M.C.No.3744/2015                                    Page 4 of 8

     29.5. While exercising its powers, the High Court is to
     examine as to whether the possibility of conviction is
     remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases
     would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice
     and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
     quashing the criminal cases.
     29.6. Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the
     category of heinous and serious offences and therefore
     are to be generally treated as crime against the society
     and not against the individual alone. However, the High
     Court would not rest its decision merely because there is
     a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is
     framed under this provision. It would be open to the
     High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of
     Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the
     prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if
     proved, would lead to proving the charge under Section
     307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High
     Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether
     such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the
     body, nature of weapons used, etc. Medical report in
     respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally be
     the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie
     analysis, the High Court can examine as to whether
     there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances
     of conviction are remote and bleak. In the former case it
     can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the
     criminal proceedings whereas in the latter case it would
     be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea
     compounding the offence based on complete settlement
     between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
     swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties
     is going to result in harmony between them which may
     improve their future relationship.
     29.7. While deciding whether to exercise its power under
     Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play
     a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is
     arrived at immediately after the alleged commission of
Crl.M.C.No.3744/2015                                     Page 5 of 8

            offence and the matter is still under investigation, the
            High Court may be liberal in accepting the settlement to
            quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is
            because of the reason that at this stage the investigation
            is still on and even the charge-sheet has not been filed.
            Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed but the
            evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still at infancy
            stage, the High Court can show benevolence in
            exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie
            assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned
            above. On the other hand, where the prosecution
            evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the
            evidence the matter is at the stage of argument, normally
            the High Court should refrain from exercising its power
            under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial
            court would be in a position to decide the case finally on
            merits and to come to a conclusion as to whether the
            offence under Section 307 IPC is committed or not.
            Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already
            recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the
            appellate stage before the High Court, mere compromise
            between the parties would not be a ground to accept the
            same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has
            already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is
            proved under Section 307 IPC and conviction is already
            recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no
            question of sparing a convict found guilty of such a
            crime.”
7.      In the case of Jitendra Raghuvanshi & Ors. Vs. Babita
Raghuvanshi & Anr.3, wherein the Supreme Court in respect of the
matrimonial disputes has specifically held as follows:-
              “15. In our view, it is the duty of the courts to
              encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
              particularly, when the same are on considerable
              increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
              they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
3
  (2013) 4 SCC 58
      Crl.M.C.No.3744/2015                                       Page 6 of 8

            satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
            and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
            of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
            would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing
            of FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal
            proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes
            in recent times. They institution of marriage occupies
            an important place and it has an important role to play
            in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made in
            the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to
            settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties
            ponder over their defaults and terminate their disputes
            amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out
            in a court of law, in order to do complete justice in the
            matrimonial matters, the courts should be less hesitant
            in exercising their extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite
            to state that the power under Section 482 should be
            exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
            the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
            record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
            would be an abuse of process of court or that the ends
            of justice require that the proceedings ought to be
            quashed….”
8.     Both the parties who are present in the Court today, approbate the
aforesaid settlement dated 30.04.2015 and undertake to remain bound by
the same.
9.     Since the subject matter of this FIR is essentially matrimonial,
which now stands mutually and amicably settled between the parties and
the complainant is no longer interested in supporting the prosecution
because of which, its chances of success in the matter are now greatly
diminished. Therefore, in view of the law discussed above and the facts
      Crl.M.C.No.3744/2015                                     Page 7 of 8

and circumstances of the case as noted above, I am of the considered
opinion that this matter deserves to be given a quietus as continuance of
proceedings arising out of the FIR in question would be an exercise in
futility.
10.     Consequently, FIR No.492/2009 registered at Police Station
Nangloi, Delhi, for the offences punishable under Sections 498A/406/34
IPC and all proceedings emanating therefrom are hereby quashed.
11.     In view of the above, the present petition is allowed with no order
as to costs.
12.     A copy of this order be given dasti to the learned counsel for the
parties.
                                                           SURESH KAIT
                                                             (JUDGE)
SEPTEMBER 11, 2015
M
       Crl.M.C.No.3744/2015                                   Page 8 of 8


