$~15
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                            Judgment delivered on: 28th September, 2015
+      CRL.M.C. 3916/2015
       ANUJ DUDEJA AND ORS                                   ..... Petitioners
                              Represented by:Mr. I.J.S. Mehra with
                              Ms. Tabbassum, Advs.
                              versus
       STATE GOVT OF NCT OF DELHI AND ANR ..... Respondents
                              Represented by:Mr.Amit Chadha, APP for the
                              State with WSI Sangeeta, PS Model Town,
                              Delhi.
                              Mr. Rajeeev Kumar, Adv. for R-2.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SURESH KAIT
SURESH KAIT, J. (Oral)
Crl. M.A.No.13894/2015 (for exemption)
       Exemptions allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
       Accordingly, the application is allowed.
CRL.M.C. 3916/2015
1.     By way of this petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, petitioners seek quashing of FIR No.96/2014
registered at Police Station Model Town, Delhi, for the offences
punishable under Sections 498A/406/34 IPC and the consequential
proceedings emanating therefrom against them.
2.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submit that
the aforesaid case was registered on the complaint of respondent No.2,
namely, Ms. Yashika , consequent upon certain matrimonial and domestic
        Crl.M.C. No.3916/2015                                 Page 1 of 8

disputes having arisen between the parties. Meanwhile, the respondent
No.2 and the petitioners have amicably settled their disputes. Out of
settlement amount of Rs. 7 lac, 5 lac has already been paid; and the
remaining amount of Rs.2 lac is being paid in the Court today by way of
DD No.500621 dated 21.09.2015. Moreover, the marriage between the
respondent no.2 and the petitioner no. 1 has already been dissolved vide
decree of divorce dated 27.05.2015, which facts have not been disputed
by the respondent No.2. Accordingly, respondent No.2 does not wish to
pursue the case further against them.
3.     Respondent No.2 is personally present in the Court alongwith her
counsel named above and she has been duly identified by WSI Sangeeta,
Investigating Officer of the case. The learned counsel for respondent
No.2 under instructions does not dispute the submissions made by learned
counsel for the petitioners and submits that the present matter has been
amicably settled, marriage between the respondent No.2 and the petitioner
No.1 has been dissolved vide decree of divorce dated 27.05.2015, she has
received the entire agreed amount and has no complaints whatsoever
against the petitioner No.1 and his family members. Respondent No.2
states that now no dispute with petitioners survives and so the proceedings
arising out of the FIR in question may be brought to an end.
4.     Learned Additional Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of the
State submits that the aforementioned FIR was registered on 10.02.2014,
without arrest. The case is at the initial stage of trial as charge sheet has
been filed and charges are yet to be framed against the petitioners. He
submits that the present matter is a matrimonial one and since the
respondent No.2 does not wish to pursue the case further against
        Crl.M.C. No.3916/2015                                 Page 2 of 8

petitioners, no purpose would be served if the petitioners are directed to
face trial. Therefore, the State has no objection, if the present petition is
allowed.
5.     Under the circumstances and looking to the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab and
Another (2012) 10 SCC 303, wherein the Apex Court has referred to a
number of matters for the proposition that even a non-compoundable
offence can also be quashed on the ground of a settlement agreement
between the offender and the victim, if the circumstances so warrant; by
observing as under:
            “58.      ....However,     certain     offences    which
           overwhelmingly and predominantly bear civil flavour
           having arisen out of civil, mercantile, commercial,
           financial, partnership or such like transactions or the
           offences arising out of matrimony, particularly relating
           to dowry, etc. or the family dispute, where the wrong is
           basically to the victim and the offender and the victim
           have settled all disputes between them amicably,
           irrespective of the fact that such offences have not been
           made compoundable, the High Court may within the
           framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal
           proceeding or criminal complaint or FIR if it is satisfied
           that on the face of such settlement, there is hardly any
           likelihood of the offender being convicted and by not
           quashing the criminal proceedings, justice shall be
           casualty and ends of justice shall be defeated.”
6.     While recognizing the need of amicable resolution of disputes in
cases like the instant one, the aforesaid dictum has been affirmed by the
Apex Court in a recent judgment in Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of
Punjab & Anr. 2014 6 SCC 466. The pertinent observations of the Apex
Court are as under:-
        Crl.M.C. No.3916/2015                               Page 3 of 8

   29. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and
   lay down the following principles by which the High
   Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
   the settlement between the parties and exercising its
   power under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the
   settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
   accept the settlement with direction to continue with the
   criminal proceedings:
    29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is
   to be distinguished from the power which lies in the
   Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
   Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High
   Court has inherent power to quash the criminal
   proceedings even in those cases which are not
   compoundable, where the parties have settled the matter
   between themselves. However, this power is to be
   exercised sparingly and with caution.
   29.2. When the parties have reached the settlement and
   on that basis petition for quashing the criminal
   proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases
   would be to secure:
   (i) ends of justice, or
   (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court.
   While exercising the power the High Court is to form an
   opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
   29.3. Such a power is not to be exercised in those
   prosecutions which involve heinous and serious offences
   of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,
   dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature and
   have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for the
   offences alleged to have been committed under special
   statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the
   offences committed by public servants while working in
   that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis
   of compromise between the victim and the offender.
Crl.M.C. No.3916/2015                                 Page 4 of 8

   29.4. On the other hand, those criminal cases having
   overwhelmingly and predominantly civil character,
   particularly those arising out of commercial transactions
   or arising out of matrimonial relationship or family
   disputes should be quashed when the parties have
   resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
   29.5. While exercising its powers, the High Court is to
   examine as to whether the possibility of conviction is
   remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases
   would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice
   and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
   quashing the criminal cases.
   29.6. Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the
   category of heinous and serious offences and therefore
   are to be generally treated as crime against the society
   and not against the individual alone. However, the High
   Court would not rest its decision merely because there is
   a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is
   framed under this provision. It would be open to the
   High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of
   Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the
   prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if
   proved, would lead to proving the charge under Section
   307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High
   Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether
   such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the
   body, nature of weapons used, etc. Medical report in
   respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally be
   the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie
   analysis, the High Court can examine as to whether
   there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances
   of conviction are remote and bleak. In the former case it
   can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the
   criminal proceedings whereas in the latter case it would
   be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea
   compounding the offence based on complete settlement
   between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
   swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties
Crl.M.C. No.3916/2015                                Page 5 of 8

          is going to result in harmony between them which may
          improve their future relationship.
          29.7. While deciding whether to exercise its power under
          Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play
          a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is
          arrived at immediately after the alleged commission of
          offence and the matter is still under investigation, the
          High Court may be liberal in accepting the settlement to
          quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is
          because of the reason that at this stage the investigation
          is still on and even the charge-sheet has not been filed.
          Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed but the
          evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still at infancy
          stage, the High Court can show benevolence in
          exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie
          assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned
          above. On the other hand, where the prosecution
          evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the
          evidence the matter is at the stage of argument, normally
          the High Court should refrain from exercising its power
          under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial
          court would be in a position to decide the case finally on
          merits and to come to a conclusion as to whether the
          offence under Section 307 IPC is committed or not.
          Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already
          recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the
          appellate stage before the High Court, mere compromise
          between the parties would not be a ground to accept the
          same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has
          already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is
          proved under Section 307 IPC and conviction is already
          recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no
          question of sparing a convict found guilty of such a
          crime.”
7.    In the case of Jitendra Raghuvanshi & Ors. Vs. Babita
Raghuvanshi & Anr. (2013) 4 SCC 58, wherein the Supreme Court in
respect of the matrimonial disputes has specifically held as follows:-
       Crl.M.C. No.3916/2015                                 Page 6 of 8

            “15. In our view, it is the duty of the courts to
            encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes,
            particularly, when the same are on considerable
            increase. Even if the offences are non-compoundable, if
            they relate to matrimonial disputes and the Court is
            satisfied that the parties have settled the same amicably
            and without any pressure, we hold that for the purpose
            of securing ends of justice, Section 320 of the Code
            would not be a bar to the exercise of power of quashing
            of FIR, complaint or the subsequent criminal
            proceedings.
            16. There has been an outburst of matrimonial disputes
            in recent times. They institution of marriage occupies
            an important place and it has an important role to play
            in the society. Therefore, every effort should be made in
            the interest of the individuals in order to enable them to
            settle down in life and live peacefully. If the parties
            ponder over their defaults and terminate their disputes
            amicably by mutual agreement instead of fighting it out
            in a court of law, in order to do complete justice in the
            matrimonial matters, the courts should be less hesitant
            in exercising their extraordinary jurisdiction. It is trite
            to state that the power under Section 482 should be
            exercised sparingly and with circumspection only when
            the Court is convinced, on the basis of material on
            record, that allowing the proceedings to continue
            would be an abuse of process of court or that the ends
            of justice require that the proceedings ought to be
            quashed….”
8.    Both the parties who are present in the Court today, approbate the
aforesaid settlement dated 12.08.2014 and undertake to remain bound by
the same.
9.    Since the subject matter of this FIR is essentially matrimonial,
which now stands mutually and amicably settled between the parties and
the complainant is no longer interested in supporting the prosecution
       Crl.M.C. No.3916/2015                                  Page 7 of 8

because of which, its chances of success in the matter are now greatly
diminished. Therefore, in view of the law discussed above and in the
facts and circumstances as noted above, I am of the considered opinion
that this matter deserves to be given a quietus as continuance of
proceedings arising out of the FIR in question would be an exercise in
futility.
10.     Consequently, FIR No.96/2014 registered at Police Station Model
Town, Delhi and all proceedings emanating therefrom are hereby
quashed.
11.     In view of the above, the present petition is allowed with no order
as to costs.
12.     A copy of this order be given dasti to the learned counsel for the
parties.
Crl. M.A.No.13938/2015
        Dismissed as infructuous.
        .
                                                           SURESH KAIT
                                                             (JUDGE)
SEPTEMBER 28, 2015
RS
         Crl.M.C. No.3916/2015                              Page 8 of 8


