 IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
       CRL M C 1808/2008 & Crl M A 6587, 6589/2008
       SUMATI                                 .... PETITIONER
                     Through: Mr. Pawan Kumar, Advocate
                           Versus
       SARLA PURI                             ... RESPONDENT
                           Through Mr. G.D. Gandhi, Advocate
       CORAM
       HON’BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
 1. Whether Reporters of local papers may be
     allowed to see the judgment?                     No
2. To be referred to the Reporter or not?             Yes
3. Whether the judgment should be reported in         Yes
    Digest?
                           ORDER
                           09.02.2009
1. This is a petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1973 („CrPC‟) seeking the setting aside of an order
dated 29th June 2007 passed by the learned Additional Sessions
Judge („ASJ‟), Delhi in Criminal (R) No. 2 of 2006 whereby the
order dated 4th July 2007 passed by the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate („MM‟), Delhi dismissing the criminal complaint of
the respondent was reversed.
2. The facts leading of the filing of the present petition are that
the marriage between the Petitioner and son of the Respondent
was solemnized on 11th March 1999. Consequent upon disputes
between the parties that arose soon thereafter, the father of the
CRL M C 1808/2008                                         Page 1 of 8

Petitioner filed a complaint against the Respondent and her
family members on 24th Jun 1999 in the Crime Against Women
(„CAW‟) Cell Nanakpura. Ultimately an FIR No. 518 of 2000
under Sections 498-A/406/34 IPC came to be registered at
Police Station Shalimar Bagh against the Respondent and her
family members.
3. It is stated by learned counsel for the Petitioner that as a
counterblast to the filing of the aforementioned criminal
proceeding, the Respondent filed a criminal complaint under
Sections 380/420/34 IPC on 7th October 2005 against the
Petitioner, wherein she alleged that the Petitioner on 1st April
1999, while leaving her matrimonial home, had taken the
jewellery given to her in the dowry and „wari‟ to her parental
house.     It was further alleged by the Respondent that the
Petitioner also took away a box containing the jewellery of the
respondent and certain jewellery of her son which were gifted
to him by his grand mother. In para 7 of the complaint it was
alleged that the Respondent‟s son Rajeev Puri had a dialogue
with the mother of the Petitioner in which she is alleged to have
admitted that the Petitioner had taken away the box containing
the jewellery of the Respondent. It is stated that the Petitioner
had kept the matter lingering by promising that the jewellery
would be returned. Thereafter the respondent was constrained
to file the aforementioned complaint.
CRL M C 1808/2008                                        Page 2 of 8

4. By an order dated 2nd March 2006 the learned MM, after
going through the complaint as well as the pre-summoning
evidence     adduced by the Respondent, concluded that
ingredients of Section 380/420 IPC were not even prima facie
made out and accordingly dismissed the complaint.
5. Aggrieved by the dismissal of the complaint the Respondent
filed Criminal (R) No. 2 of 2006 to the court of the learned
ASJ. By the impugned order dated 29th June 2007 the learned
ASJ reversed the order dated 2nd March 2006 passed by the
learned MM with a direction to the learned MM to issue
summons to the Petitioner to face trial under Section 380 IPC
and proceed further with the complaint in accordance with law.
6. Learned counsel for the Petitioner submits that the impugned
order is unsustainable in law because when the complaint is
read as a whole not even a prima facie case under Section 380
IPC is made out against the Petitioner. He submits that DD No.
9A dated 2nd July 1999 recorded by the police at the instance of
the husband of the petitioner with the Police Station Model
Town, Delhi only mentions that the Petitioner left the
matrimonial home. It does not allege that the petitioner
committed theft of the jewellery of the Respondent. No such
allegation has been made in the divorce petition filed
CRL M C 1808/2008                                       Page 3 of 8

subsequently by the petitioner‟s husband. Likewise, no such
allegation was made in the application for anticipatory bail filed
by the Respondent accused. It is submitted that the filing of the
aforementioned criminal complaint six and a half years after the
Petitioner left the matrimonial home was malafide and purely as
a counterblast to the criminal proceedings instituted by the
Petitioner against the Respondent and her family members.
7. On behalf of the Respondent it is contended that in the
complaint there was an explanation for the delay in filing the
complaint to the effect that the parties were expecting an
amicable settlement of all the disputes and therefore, the
complaint could not be filed earlier. Counsel for the Respondent
submits that the pre-summoning evidence would show that
there were taped conversations between the parties which
would support the allegations in the complaint. Reliance is also
placed upon the judgments of the Gujarat High Court in Arvind
Mills Limited v. State of Gujarat 2003 (2) All India Criminal
Law Reporter 88 to urge that the mere delay in filing the
complaint cannot be a ground for its quashing.
8. Having considered the respective submissions of learned
counsel for the parties, this Court is of the view that the
Petitioner should succeed. It is not in dispute that the Petitioner
and the son of the Respondent hardly lived together for 20 days
CRL M C 1808/2008                                         Page 4 of 8

after the marriage which took place on 11th March 1999. It is
also seen that prior to the filing of the criminal complaint in
question on 7th October 2005 (which appears to have been
presented in the Court on 15th October 2005 and made over to
the learned MM on 22nd October 2005 at 2.00 pm), there was no
such allegation made in any of the proceedings between the
parties.
9. In the entire complaint the only explanation for the delay is
in para 12 where it is stated as under:
       “12. That the accused persons further kept on
       lingering on the matter by flowery promises and
       assurances that the ornaments/jewellery taken
       away by the accused no.1 would be returned and
       sometime saying that they were lying in safe
       custody in the bank locker meaning thereby that
       they were lying intact and would be returned and
       thus kept on the complainant in illusion of an
       amicable settlement but the later conduct of the
       accused persons clearly showed that it was simply
       a time gaining device and the accused had no
       intention to settle the matter but were looking for
       an opportune time to involve and implicate the
       complainant and her family members like a cat set
       in the cage of pigeons and it is unfortunate that
       premonitions over took the complainant and her
       family members and they had to undergo
       unnecessary harassment and humiliation for their
       simplicity. It was because of the legal jockeying
CRL M C 1808/2008                                       Page 5 of 8

       played by the accused persons that necessary legal
       action could not be taken by the complainant then
       and there and a long rope had been given to the
       accused little knowing that the accused would steel
       a march by way of registration of a false case later
       on.”
10. In the considered view of this Court the aforementioned
explanation for not filing the complaint for as long as six and
half years after the parties began living separately is
unacceptable and unconvincing. Entertaining the complaint of
theft by the daughter-in-law six and half years after she has left
the matrimonial home would in the circumstances constitute an
abuse process of law.
11. The learned ASJ has, while reversing the order dated 2nd
March 2006 of the learned MM dismissing the complaint,
observed as under:
        “From the perusal of the trial court record, it is
        reflected that the complainant in support of her
        complaint have got examined herself as CW-1 and
        her son Rajeev Puri as CW-2 during the course of
        pre-summoning evidence. From the perusal of the
        same and the relevant material as available on the
        trial court record and taking the cue from the
        aforesaid judgment, I am of the considered view
        that the complainant has been successful in
        bringing on record prima facie material for
        offence punishable u/s 380 IPC only against Smt.
CRL M C 1808/2008                                        Page 6 of 8

        Sumti, who has been arrayed as accused no.1 in
        the original complaint and no material for any
        offence for summoning accused no.2 Smt. Karuna
        Sethi and accused no.3 Subhash Chander Sethi are
        found available on the case record.”
12.    In the considered view of this Court the aforementioned
reasoning of the learned ASJ is unconvincing. The pre-
summoning evidence which is placed on record does not offer a
valid explanation for the inordinate delay of six and half years
after the alleged date of theft in filing the complaint. The
complaint was, in the circumstances, an abuse of the process of
law. There is also merit in the contention that the complaint
was in retaliation to the FIR registered against the respondent
and her family members at the instance of the petitioner. These
factors appear to have not been appreciated by the learned ASJ.
13. Learned counsel for the respondent referred the various
portions of the transcript of the alleged taped conversations
between the mother of the Petitioner and the son of the
Respondent in which allegedly she has admitted that the
Petitioner has taken away the jewellery. Even this does not
appear to be correct. From the transcript of one of these
conversations it appears that the mother of the Petitioner has
asserted that the jewellery items belong to the Petitioner. In the
background of the case, as noticed hereinbefore, not even a
CRL M C 1808/2008                                        Page 7 of 8

prima facie case can be said to be made out in the complaint for
summoning the petitioner under Section 380 IPC. It is held that
the learned ASJ erred in concluding to the contrary.
14. The impugned order dated 29th June 2007 passed by the
learned ASJ in Criminal (R) No. 2 of 2006 is accordingly set
aside and the order dated 2nd March 2006 passed by the learned
MM dismissing Complaint Case No. 870/1/05 is restored.
15. The petition is accordingly allowed with no order as to
costs. The pending applications are disposed of.
                                       S. MURALIDHAR, J.
FEBRUARY 9, 2009
rk
CRL M C 1808/2008                                      Page 8 of 8


