       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                           CS(OS) 1314/2009
       AGI LOGISTICS INC & ANR                               ..... Plaintiffs
                           Through Mr. Samdarshi Sanjay with
                           Ms. Surbhi Agarwal, Advocate
                    versus
       MR. SHER JANG BHADHUR & ANR                        ..... Defendants
                           Through Ms. Vibha Mahajan Seth, Advocate
                           for D-1 to 5 and 7/applicants in IA 9768/09.
                           Mr. Bhaskar Mishra, Advocate for D-.8.
       CORAM:
        HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE S. MURALIDHAR
1.     Whether reporters of the local newspapers be allowed to
       see the order?                                              No
2.     To be referred to the Reporter or not?                      Yes
3.     Whether the order should be reported in the Digest?          Yes
                           ORDER
                           16.09.2009
IA No.9768/2009
1. This is an application filed by Defendants 2 to 5 and 7 (hereinafter
„applicants‟/„defendants‟ under Order XXXIX Rules 3 and 4 CPC
seeking vacation of an ex parte ad interim injunction granted by this
Court by an order dated 22nd July 2009 in IA No.9150/2009 in the above
suit.
2. Notice in this application was directed to issue by this Court on 3rd
August 2009. Replies have been filed by the Plaintiffs and a rejoinder
thereto has been filed by the applicants.
3. This Court has heard the submissions of Mr. Samdarshi Sanjay, the
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                                 Page 1 of 12

learned Advocate for the Plaintiffs and Ms. Vibha Mahajan Seth, the
learned Advocate for the Applicants/Defendants 2 to 5 and 7.
4. It is stated in the application that despite this Court in its order dated
22nd July, 2009 directing that the Plaintiffs should comply with the
requirements of Order XXXIX Rule 3 CPC within one week, the
Plaintiffs did not serve upon the Applicants within one week a copy of
the plaint, the applications, the affidavits and documents filed by the
Plaintiffs along with the Plaint. It is stated that this Court had appointed
Local Commissioners to visit the Defendants‟ premises to examine the
records including electronic records and seize any incriminating evidence
to establish if the Defendants were carrying on business by using the
words `AGI‟, `AGI Logistics‟ and `AG Freight‟ and whether they were
dealing with the customers of the Plaintiffs. It is stated that even at the
time of the visit of the Local Commissioner to the premises of
Applicants/Defendants on 23rd July 2009 in Gurgaon, the complete set of
papers were not served on the Applicants/Defendants or their counsel. It
is further stated that at the time of the visit of the Local Commissioner,
counsel for the Defendants had asked for copy of the plaint and entire
documents from the counsel for the Plaintiffs assisting the Local
Commissioner but this was declined.
5. It is stated in the application that a copy of the court notice was
delivered to Defendant No.4 on 26th July 2009 by speed post. The cover
in which the said notice was dispatched, has been placed on record. It has
a postal receipt affixed to it showing that the weight of the envelope at
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                               Page 2 of 12

the time of dispatch was 25 gms. and the postage paid was Rs.24/-. It is
obvious that the entire papers i.e. the plaint, affidavits, applications and
documents were not sent by post by the counsel for the Plaintiffs to the
Applicants/Defendants.
6. In reply to this application, the Plaintiffs state in para 6 as under:-
       “It is submitted the plaintiffs/Non Applicants through
       their     counsel     had     issued     notices     on     the
       defendants/applicants informing them of the order dated
       22.07.2009     of this     Hon‟ble     Court, but      due to
       inadvertence and under bonafide mistake the copies of
       the plaint and the documents were not enclosed with the
       notices    as  issued    on    24.07.2009. However,         the
       plaintiffs/Non-applicants had no intention of purposefully
       disobeying the orders of this Hon‟ble Court as the Court
       on its own had permitted the plaintiffs to comply with the
       provisions of Order 39 Rule 3 within one week from the
       date of the order i.e. on or before 29.07.2009, so under
       the mistaken impression, that it would suffice if the
       plaintiffs/non-applicants filed the process fee for service
       of summons of the suit by way of ordinary process as
       well as through registered covers on all the defendants, it
       was for the said purposes that 18 sets of plaint and 9 sets
       of the documents were filed in the Registry of this
       Hon‟ble Court vide Diary No.117266 on 27.07.2009.
       Further, in compliance of the orders of the Court on
       04.08.2009, the plaintiffs/non-applicants have supplied
       the copies of the plaint as well as the entire set of
       documents to the defendants/applicants, counsel, during
       the course of the proceedings. In view of the submissions
       made hereinabove, the averments of the present
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                                 Page 3 of 12

       application of the defendants/applicants, deserve no
       consideration at all.”
7. Counsel for the Plaintiffs further drew attention of this Court to the
affidavit of compliance filed by the Plaintiffs on 27th July 2009 enclosing
therewith copies of the covering letter alongwith notices which were sent
to the Defendants by way of registered post. A perusal of the said
affidavit filed on 27th July 2009 shows that it is accompanied by copies of
identical letters dated 23rd July 2009 addressed to each of the Defendants.
A copy of the postal receipt affixed thereto again shows the total weight
of the packet in which it was sent to be 25 gms. and the postage paid to
be Rs.24/- each and the date of dispatch to be 24th July 2009. There is no
other document attached to this affidavit which purports to be filed by
way of the compliance of the Order XXXIX Rule 3 CPC.
8. Counsel for the Plaintiffs does not dispute that the complete set of the
papers were delivered to the counsel for the Defendants/applicants only
on 4th August 2009 in this Court when notice was first issued in this
application.
9. There can be no manner of doubt that in the face of the above
admissions by the counsel for the Plaintiffs that the requirement of Order
XXXIX Rule 3 CPC was not complied with. The said provision reads as
under:-
       “3. Before granting injunction, Court to direct notice
       to opposite party— The Court shall in all cases, except
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                             Page 4 of 12

       where it appears that the object of granting the injunction
       would be defeated by the delay, before granting an
       injunction, direct notice of the application for the same to
       be given to the opposite party:
       Provided that, where it is proposed to grant an injunction
       without giving notice of the application to the opposite
       party, the Court shall record the reasons for its opinion
       that the object of granting the injunction would be
       defeated by delay, and require the applicant—
       (a) to deliver to the opposite party, or to send to him by
       registered post, immediately after the order granting the
       injunction has been made, a copy of the application for
       injunction together with—
              (i) a copy of the affidavit filed in support of the
              application;
              (ii) a copy of the plaint; and
              (iii) copies of documents on which the applicant
              relies, and
       (b) to file, on the day on which such injunction is granted
       or on the day immediately following that day, an
       affidavit stating that the copies aforesaid have been so
       delivered or sent.”
10. It is plain that the Plaintiffs, after obtaining an ex parte ad interim
injunction    against    the   Defendants,     failed   to   deliver   to     the
Applicants/Defendants or to send them by registered post within one
week, a copy of the application for ad interim injunction together with (i)
a copy of the affidavit filed in support of the application (ii) a copy of the
plaint and (iii) copies of the documents on which the Plaintiffs rely upon.
The statutory requirement is unambiguous. Every document filed by the
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                                Page 5 of 12

Plaintiffs themselves, on the basis of which they obtained an ad interim
ex parte injunction, has to necessarily be “delivered” to the Defendant.
The word `deliver‟ would necessarily mean actual physical delivery on
the Defendant. The only alternative mode that the provision envisages is
dispatch by registered post, immediately after the order granting
injunction has been made. The dispatch by registered post as again would
be of the entire set of documents as set out under Clause (a) to the
proviso to Order XXXIX Rule 3 CPC. There can be no escape from
complying with this provision.
11. The learned counsel for the Plaintiffs repeatedly urged that this was a
bonafide mistake by associate counsel in the office of the learned
Counsel for the Plaintiffs and that they should not be penalized for non-
compliance with the above provision. He submits that the intention of the
Plaintiffs was not to disobey the requirement of law as the entire process
fee was filed as soon as the court granted the ex parte ad interim
injunction.
12. The mandatory nature of the requirement of the provision has been
emphasized by the Supreme Court in A. Venkatasubbiah Naidu v. S.
Chellappan AIR 2000 SC 3032 and this Court in Himalaya Drug v. SBL
Ltd. 1996 III AD (Delhi) 853. There is a logic behind insisting that a
Plaintiff who obtain an ex parte ad interim injunction order should, at the
earliest point in time, deliver to the party against whom such injunction
has been granted, all the documents on the basis of which such injunction
was granted. This is to enable the opposite party to know what the case
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                            Page 6 of 12

against it is and to approach the court at the earliest point in time to seek,
if necessary, a variation of the interim order.
13. In this context following observations of the Supreme Court in Shiv
Kumar Chadha Vs. MCD (1993) 3 SCC 161 are relevant:-
       “34. The imperative nature of the proviso has to be
       judged in the context of Rule 3 of Order 39 the Code.
       Before the proviso aforesaid was introduced, Rule 3 said
       "the Court shall in all cases, except where it appears that
       the object of granting the injunction would be defeated
       by the delay, before granting an injunction, direct notice
       of the application for the same to be given to the opposite
       party". The proviso was introduced to provide a
       condition, where Court proposes to grant an injunction
       without giving notice of the application to the opposite
       party, being of the opinion that the object of granting
       injunction itself shall be defeated by delay. The condition
       so introduced is that the Court "shall record the reasons"
       why an ex parte order of injunction was being passed in
       the facts and circumstances of a particular case. In this
       background, the requirement for recording the reasons
       for grant of ex parte injunction, cannot be held to be a
       mere formality. This requirement is consistent with the
       principle, that a party to a suit, who is being restrained
       from exercising a right which such party claims to
       exercise either under a statute or under the common law,
       must be informed why instead of following the
       requirement of Rule 3, the procedure prescribed under
       the proviso has been followed. The party who invokes
       the jurisdiction of the Court for grant of an order of
       restraint against a party, without affording an opportunity
       to him of being heard, must satisfy the Court about the
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                                Page 7 of 12

       gravity of the situation and Court has to consider briefly
       these factors in the ex parte order. We are quite conscious
       of the fact that there are other statutes which contain
       similar provisions requiring the Court or the authority
       concerned to record reasons before exercising power
       vested in them. In respect of some of such provisions it
       has been held that they are required to be complied with
       but non-compliance thereof will not vitiate the order so
       passed. But same cannot be said in respect of the proviso
       to Rule 3 of Order 39. The Parliament has prescribed a
       particular procedure for passing of an order of injunction
       without notice to the other side, under exceptional
       circumstances. Such ex parte orders have far reaching
       effect, as such a condition has been imposed that Court
       must record reasons before passing such order. If it is
       held that the compliance of the proviso aforesaid is
       optional and not obligatory, then the introduction of the
       proviso by the Parliament shall be a futile exercise and
       that part of Rule 3 will be a surplusage for all practical
       purpose. Proviso to Rule 3 of Order 39 of the Code,
       attracts the principle, that if a statute requires a thing to
       be done in a particular manner, it should be done in that
       manner or not all. This principle was approved and
       accepted in well-known cases of Taylor v. Taylor (1875)
       1 Ch.D. 426, Nazir Ahmed v. Emperor AIR 1939 PC
       253. This Court has also expressed the same view in
       respect of procedural requirement of the Bombay
       Tenancy and Agricultural Lands Act in the case of
       Ramchandra Keshav Adke v. Govind Joti Chavare AIR
       1975 SC 915.”
14. If the Court were to take a lenient view and not insist on strict
compliance with the mandatory requirement of Order XXIX Rule 3, then
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                               Page 8 of 12

it would be possible for most Plaintiffs to continue to enjoy an ad interim
ex parte stay in their favour for any length of time and plead genuine
mistake by their counsel for non-compliance. Numerous suits
accompanied by applications seeking urgent ex parte reliefs are filed in
our courts everyday. The court, on a perusal of the documents filed
before it, forms a prima facie view for grant of an parte ad interim
injunction against the opposite party, even in the absence of the opposite
party. The Court at that stage has no means of knowing what the version
of the opposite party is. The court, therefore, makes such interim order
both time bound and conditional. The condition is that there must be
compliance with Order XXXIX Rule 3 CPC within the time specified by
the court. Although Order XXXIX Rule 3(b) CPC requires the filing of
an affidavit of compliance “on the day on which such injunction is
granted or on the day immediately following that day”, this Court has
been granting a longer time accounting for the fact that the certified copy
of the order passed by the court may not be available on the same day or
even on the next date. However, there is no question of the Plaintiff not
being required to comply with the mandatory requirement of Order
XXXIX Rule 3 CPC within the time granted by the Court. In the
considered view of this Court, a strict compliance with the mandatory
requirement of this provision must be insisted and any laxity shown to
parties might well defeat the very purpose for which such provision has
been inserted.
15. The filing of process fee in this Court for service of summons/notice
upon Defendants, no doubt, is another mandatory requirement of law.
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                            Page 9 of 12

However, that alone is not enough. If the Plaintiff wants to take the
benefit of an ex parte ad interim injunction, then there is no escape from
complying with the mandatory requirement of Order XXXIX Rule 3
CPC.
16. Since it is plain that the Plaintiffs have not complied with the
requirement of Order XXXIX Rule 3 CPC, the interim order passed by
this Court on 22nd July 2009 hereby stands vacated. IA No. 9768 of 2009
is accordingly allowed.
I.A. No. 9150/2009
17. The interim order dated 22nd July, 2009 stands vacated.
18. List this application on 27th October, 2009.
IA No.11114/09(by Defendant No.7 under Order 39 Rules 1 & 2 CPC
19. This is an application by Defendant No.7 (AG Freight Carrier Pvt.
Ltd.) seeking a direction to restrain the Plaintiffs from causing any
impediment in the way of the Defendant No.7 carrying on its business
under a changed name.
20. At the hearing of the above suit on 4th August 2009, a submission was
made by counsel for Defendant No.7 that Defendant No.7 proposes to
adopt „AWL Logistics India Pvt. Ltd.‟ as its changed name. The counsel
for the Plaintiffs sought time to get instructions. It appears that thereafter
on 16th August 2009, a letter was written by the Plaintiff No.1 to the
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                              Page 10 of 12

Registrar of Companies (ROC) requesting that “the name of AG Freight
Carriers Pvt. Ltd. may kindly not be allowed to be changed”.
21. It requires to be noted that the grievance of the Plaintiffs is that the
Defendant No.7 by adopting the name of AG Freight Carriers Pvt. Ltd., is
in fact infringing the trademark, trade name/corporate name of the
Plaintiff No.1. Counsel for the Plaintiffs, while not denying that the
aforesaid letter was written to the ROC, states that the concern of the
Plaintiff is also that the Defendant No.7 should not deal with the
clients/customers of Plaintiff No.1.
22. Counsel for the Applicant/Defendant No.7 has placed on record an e-
mail dated 28th April 2006 by Defendant No.3 Mr. Rahul Mehra to James
Minutello of Plaintiff No.1 which encloses a list of the clients of Plaintiff
No.1 with whom no business was being conducted. She submits that the
Plaintiff No.1 was throughout aware of the existence of AG Freight
Carriers Pvt. Ltd. The copies of the e-mail dated 23rd May 2006 and e-
mail dated 31st October 2007 have also been placed on record. Counsel
for the Defendants states that these documents show that the only client
which the Plaintiffs have referred to viz., „M/s Kohler‟ was in fact a
client introduced by Defendant No.3 to Plaintiff No.1.
23. Counsel for the Plaintiffs states that he will place on record the list of
clients of the Plaintiff No.1 who, according to him, are being either
approached or contacted by the Defendants. He permitted to do so within
two weeks by way of an affidavit.
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                              Page 11 of 12

24. List this application for further consideration on 27th October 2009.
IA No.12060/2009(under Order XXVII Rule 1 CPC)
25. Learned counsel for the Plaintiffs/applicants states that he wishes to
withdraw this application.
26. Dismissed as withdrawn.
IA No. 12061/2009(under Order XXXIX Rule 2A CPC)
27. In view of the orders passed today, this application has become
infructuous and it is dismissed as such.
IA No. 12066/2009(under Section 151 CPC by Defendant No.8)
28. In view of the orders passed today vacating the ad interim injunction
granted on 22nd July 2009, this application seeking extension of that order
does not survive. The Defendant No.8 may file an appropriate application
seeking directions in accordance with law.
29. This application is dismissed.
IA Nos.12062, 12064 and 12065/2009
30. List on 27th October, 2009.
                                                S. MURALIDHAR, J.
SEPTEMBER 16, 2009
ak
CS(OS) No.1314/2009                                              Page 12 of 12


