*             IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                        W.P.(C.) No. 7903/2008
%                   Date of Decision: 05th March ,2010
#      VARSHA MAHAVRA
                                                               .....PETITIONER
!                   Through:   Mr. Naresh Kaushik and Ms Aditi Gupta,
                               Advocates.
                                     VERSUS
$      DELHI SUBORDINATE SERVICES SELECTION BOARD & ORS.
                                                          .....RESPONDENTS
^                   Through:    Ms. Ruchi Sindhwani, Advocate.
CORAM: Hon'ble MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.     Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see the
       judgment? YES
2.     To be referred to the reporter or not? YES
3.     Whether the judgment should be reported in the Digest? YES
S.N.AGGARWAL, J
       Pursuant to an advertisement issued by Delhi Subordinate Services
Selection Board (respondent No. 1 herein) in the Employment News of
13-19/01/2007 for inviting applications for filling up of various posts of
Teachers, the petitioner had applied for her appointment to the post of
TGT, Punjabi (Female) against Post Code No. 117/2006. She had qualified
the preliminary examination but the result of her main examination was
withheld by respondent No. 1. The petitioner later on came to know
through information under RTI Act that she had also qualified the main
examination but was denied appointment as she did not fulfill the
eligibility criteria on the cut-off date of 02.02.2007 mentioned in the
advertisement pursuant to which she had applied. Aggrieved therefrom,
the petitioner has filed the present writ petition seeking issuance of a writ
W.P.(C) No. 7903/2008                                                Page 1 of 5

of certiorari quashing the cut-off date of 02.02.2007 fixed by the
respondents for determining the eligibility for the post of TGT, Punjabi
(Female) vide its advertisement in the Employment News dated
13-19/01/2007       (Advertisement     No.06/2006)     as    arbitrary     and
discriminatory.    The   petitioner  has  prayed   for   directions   to   the
respondents to consider her for appointment to the post of TGT, Punjabi
(Female).
2      I have heard the arguments of learned counsel for both the parties
and have also perused the record.
3      In the advertisement pursuant to which the petitioner had applied
for her appointment to the post of TGT, Punjabi (Female), the cut off date
of 02.02.2007 was specifically mentioned as the date on which the
candidates applying for various posts should meet the eligibility criteria
mentioned in the said advertisement. The last date of receipt of
applications from eligible persons mentioned in the advertisement was
02.02.2007. It was specifically provided in the advertisement that the
educational qualification, age, experience and other conditions of
eligibility as stipulated in the advertisement shall be determined as on
the closing date of applications i.e. 02.02.2007.
4      As per the advertisement, one of the essential qualifications
required by a candidate for appointment to the post of TGT, Punjabi
(Female) was a degree or diploma in Education. Admittedly, the
petitioner did not possess the said degree of B. Ed. or diploma in
Education on the cut-off date of 02.02.2007. She is stated to has passed
the B. Ed. course through distant education from University of Jammu on
15.03.2007. There is no dispute about this fact.
5      Mr. Naresh Kaushik learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner has contended that since the petitioner was allowed to sit in
W.P.(C) No. 7903/2008                                              Page 2 of 5

the preliminary as well as in the main examination held for the post, it
should be deemed that the respondent had treated the petitioner as
eligible for her appointment to the post she had applied for. He has
further argued that since the petitioner possess the requisite qualification
required for her appointment to the post of TGT, Punjabi (Female) and as
the vacancies are also available, the Court should direct the respondents
to appoint her to the post for which she has qualified the preliminary as
well as the main examination.
6      I have given my anxious consideration to the above arguments
advanced on behalf of the petitioner but I am sorry I could not persuade
myself to agree with the same in view of            judgments of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in State of Haryana & Ors. Vs. Anurag Srivastava & Ors.
JT 1998 (9) SC 190 ; Bhupinderpal Singh Vs. State of Punjab AIR 2000
SC 2011; State of Uttar Pradesh Vs. Vijay Kumar Misra AIR 2003 SC
4411; Ashok Kumar Sonkar Vs. UOI & Ors. (2007) 4 SCC 54.
7      It will be apt to refer to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in Ashok Kumar Sonkar's case (Supra), wherein the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held that in order to avoid any uncertainty for determining the
eligibility conditions, fixation of a cut off date is a must. It is further held
in the said judgment that in the absence of any cut off date specified in
the advertisement or in the Rules, the last date for filing the application
should be considered as a cut off date.
8      In the present case the cut off date for determining the eligibility of
the candidates for the post of TGT, Punjabi (Female) was specifically
mentioned in the impugned advertisement as the last date of receipt of
applications from eligible candidates, which was 02.02.2007. Since the
petitioner did not possess the essential qualification of B. Ed. prescribed
in the advertisement for her appointment to the post of TGT, Punjabi
W.P.(C) No. 7903/2008                                                Page 3 of 5

(Female) on the said cut off date, she was rightly not considered for her
appointment to the post in question. Acquiring of essential qualifications
by her on a subsequent date after the cut off date is of no consequence.
I am of the view that by no stretch of imagination it can be said that the
cut off date for determining the eligibility mentioned in the impugned
advertisement was arbitrary particularly in view of a specific clause
contained in the advertisement in question regarding cancellation of
candidature which is extracted below:-
              “The candidates applying for the posts should ensure that
       they fulfill all the eligibility conditions. Merely because a candidate
       has been allowed to appear at the examination will not be
       considered as a valid ground for his/her being eligible for the
       selection. If on verification at any time before or after the written
       examination or at any stage of selection process, it is found that
       they do not fulfill any of the eligibility conditions, his/her
       candidature for the post applied for, will be cancelled by the
       Board/Appointing Authority.”
9      The petitioner had sufficient notice of the clauses contained in the
advertisement pursuant to which she had applied for her appointment to
the post of TGT, Punjabi (Female) that her candidature was likely to be
cancelled as she did not possess the requisite essential qualification of
degree in education which she admittedly acquired after the cut-off date
of 02.02.2007 and therefore, she cannot make any grievance regarding
fixing of cut off date of 02.02.2007 in the advertisement by respondent
No. 1.
10     Mr. Naresh Kaushik learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner has argued that the respondents have power to relax the rules
depending on facts of a particular case. He submits that in the facts of
the present case, the respondents should have relaxed the eligibility
W.P.(C) No. 7903/2008                                                    Page 4 of 5

conditions for the petitioner and should have offered appointment to her
as she has qualified the preliminary as well as the main examination. I do
not find any substance in this argument urged by the petitioner's
counsel. In case this argument of the petitioner is accepted, then it will
amount to denial of opportunity to those who might have become eligible
like the petitioner during the period intervening between the cut-off date
and the date on which the petitioner acquired the essential qualification
of B.Ed. Degree on 15.03.2007. The acceptance of this argument of the
petitioner's counsel will be in complete violation of provisions contained
in Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India and this cannot be allowed
to happen.
11     In view of the foregoing, I do not find any merit in this writ petition
which fails and is hereby dismissed but with no orders as to costs.
MARCH 05, 2010                                         S.N.AGGARWAL, J
'A'
W.P.(C) No. 7903/2008                                             Page 5 of 5


