*            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+            W.P.(C.) No. 4714/2004 & C.M. No. 12725/2005
%                  Date of Decision: 26th August, 2009
# SHRI RAJAN NAIR
                                                          ..... PETITIONER
!                  Through: Ms. R.K. Tripathi, Advocate.
                                  VERSUS
$ M/S KRISHNAN ASSOCIATES (P) LTD.
                                                      .....RESPONDENT
^                  Through: Mr. Jagat Arora, Advocate.
CORAM:
Hon'ble MR. JUSTICE S.N. AGGARWAL
1.    Whether reporters of Local paper may be allowed to see
      the judgment? NO
2.    To be referred to the reporter or not?NO
3.    Whether the judgment should be reported in the
      Digest?NO
S.N.AGGARWAL, J (ORAL)
      The workman Mr. Rajan Nair, in this writ petition, is aggrieved by an
award dated 06.10.2003 in ID No. 33/1987 passed by the Industrial
Adjudicator dismissing his claim for reinstatement and back wages for
want of territorial jurisdiction.
2     The petitioner was appointed as Quality Control Inspector with the
management of the respondent w.e.f. 08.10.1983. The registered office
of the respondent was in Delhi and it had its factory at Noida. The
appointment of the petitioner was for the factory of the respondent at
Noida. The petitioner was allegedly terminated by the respondent w.e.f.
28.03.1986. The factory of the respondent at Noida was closed down on
30.11.1985. The petitioner in his statement of claim filed before the
W.P.(C) No.4714/2004                                               Page 1 of 3

Labour Court has alleged that before his services were terminated by the
respondent w.e.f. 28.03.1986, he was asked by the management of the
respondent to go and report for duty with M/s Prima Engineering at
Faridabad and was insisting on the petitioner to put up his paper for
resignation. Since the petitioner did not agree with the proposal of the
management of the respondent for putting up his paper for resignation,
his services were allegedly terminated by the respondent w.e.f.
28.03.1986. The petitioner aggrieved by his termination had raised an
industrial dispute which was referred by the appropriate Government in
Delhi for adjudication to the Labour Court. The Labour Court vide its
impugned award has dismissed the reference made to it for want of
territorial jurisdiction.
3      Mr. R.K. Tripathi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner contends that the appointment letter as well as termination
letter were both issued to the petitioner by the respondent from its
registered office at Delhi. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner has further submitted that the petitioner was even drawing his
salary from the respondent in Delhi. The petitioner has produced
evidence to prove both these facts mentioned above before the Labour
Court but strangely enough, the Labour Court has not considered the
evidence on this aspect produced by the petitioner while dismissing the
reference for want of territorial jurisdiction. These are important aspects
of the matter to decide the question of territorial jurisdiction for
entertaining an industrial dispute raised by a workman. In the considered
opinion of this Court, the impugned award of the court below suffers from
perversity as it has failed to take into account the fact that the petitioner
was appointed by the respondent from its registered office at Delhi and
that his services were also terminated from Delhi and further that he was
W.P.(C) No.4714/2004                                              Page 2 of 3

getting his salary from Delhi though he was working at Noida.
4      For the foregoing reasons, the impugned award is set aside. This
writ petition is allowed. The case is remanded back to the concerned
Labour Court/successor court for adjudication of the claim of the
petitioner on merits after giving an opportunity of hearing to both the
parties as per law. The Labour Court is directed to decide the dispute
between the parties as expeditiously as possible preferable within eight
months from today. The parties are directed to appear before the
concerned Labour Court/successor court for directions at 02:00 PM on
10.09.2009. This writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
       A   copy   of  this  order   be sent  to   the  concerned    Labour
Court/successor     court  for  information  and   necessary   compliance
forthwith.
AUGUST 26, 2009                                       S.N.AGGARWAL, J
'a'
W.P.(C) No.4714/2004                                            Page 3 of 3


