 *           IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                   Date of Reserve: October 13, 2009
                                                  Date of Order: November 03, 2009
+IA No.9474 of 2008 in CS(OS) 700/2008
%                                                                              03.11.2009
        Shri Rohit Shekhar                                              ...Plaintiff
        Through:       Ms. Meenakshi Arora, with Mr. Mohit D. Ram, Advocates
        Versus
        Shri Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Anr.                                 ...Defendants
        Through:       Mr. Rajeev Nayar, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Pradeep K. Bakshi,
                       Mr. Sanjeev Chanda and Mr. Mohit Bakshi, Advocates
                       Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, Advocate for D-2
        JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1.      Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the judgment? Yes.
2.      To be referred to the reporter or not?                                             Yes.
3.      Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?                                     Yes.
        ORDER
1.      By this order, I shall dispose of an application under Order 7 Rule 11 of
CPC for rejection of plaint. Defendant no.1 has sought rejection of the plaintiff
on the ground that this Court had no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
plaint. The rejection of plaint is also sought on the ground of limitation.
2.      Plaintiff in this case has sought a declaration that he was a naturally
born son of defendant no.1 through defendant no.2, who is not the wife of
defendant no.1. It is plaintiff’s own case that he was living with defendant
no.2, his mother. However, defendant no.1 who allegedly sired him had not
been recognizing him to be his son from the year 1995 onward, when plaintiff
was aged around 16 years (plaintiff is now around 30 years of age and was
aged around 29 years when he filed the present suit). It is also submitted by
CS(OS) 700 of 2008     Rohit Shekhar vs. Shri Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Anr.       Page 1 Of 7

plaintiff that defendant no.1 had been giving threatening calls to defendant
no.2, his mother and in the year 2001 when plaintiff tried to meet defendant
no.1 in Delhi, defendant no.1 got him insulted. Between 2002 and 2005
plaintiff and his mother had attended some of the functions of defendant
no.1. However, on 7th December 2005, plaintiff approached defendant no.1
with his maternal grandmother at the airport in Delhi to seek an appointment
with him but defendant no.1 avoided him and thereafter many attempts have
been made by plaintiff to contact defendant no.1 but he refused to meet.
3.      It is submitted by counsel for defendant that in view of the averments
made by the plaintiff in the plaint, this plaint was barred by limitation and
also that this Court had no territorial jurisdiction. Admittedly, the residential
address of defendant no.1 is of Andhra Pradesh. Defendant no.2 is the mother
of plaintiff and there is no denial that she is supporting the case of plaintiff.
No relief has been sought qua her except that she and defendant no.1 should
make a publication in the newspaper that plaintiff was their son. It is
submitted that no such relief can be granted by the Court and Court cannot
compel a person to make a publication in the newspaper of any fact. Thus,
this relief was deliberately added in the plaint and defendant no.2 was
deliberately made a party to the plaint just to create jurisdiction of this Court
when this Court has no jurisdiction. Defendant no.1 was living in Hyderabad
being the Governor of Andhra Pradesh in the Governor House and if at all
there was territorial jurisdiction of any Court it was the Court at Andhra
Pradesh since suit was practically against defendant no.1 personally.
4.      In response to this application of defendant no.1, it is submitted by
plaintiff that the permanent address of defendant no.1 was C-1/9, Tilak Lane,
CS(OS) 700 of 2008    Rohit Shekhar vs. Shri Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Anr. Page 2 Of 7

New Delhi and the present address of defendant no.1 was merely a
temporary address since he was Governor of Andhra Pradesh therefore, the
suit has been rightly filed in Delhi.
5.      I consider that this argument of plaintiff must fail. A suit can be filed in
a Court having appropriate jurisdiction. Where the relief sought is against a
defendant personally, Section 20 of CPC provides that the suit shall be
instituted in Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant,
or each of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time of the
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on
business, or personally works for gain. It is an undisputed fact that defendant
no.1 was residing and carrying on business in Hyderabad. A suit against him
could have been filed only at Andhra Pradesh in the Court at Hyderabad. The
question arises whether by making defendant no.2 as a party, the plaintiff
can create jurisdiction of the Court which this Court does not have. In the
present case, defendant no.2 is the mother of plaintiff. She, as per plaintiff
has at no point of time disputed the status of plaintiff either as her son or as a
son born out of her union with defendant no.1. In the written statement filed
by her she has supported the case of plaintiff in toto. She could have at the
most been either a co-plaintiff or a witness to the plaintiff’s case, as and when
the Court had to record evidence. A witness needs not be made a defendant
and so she could not have been made a defendant. She being the mother of
plaintiff supported the case of plaintiff and is equally interested in the
declaration sought by the plaintiff as is reflected from her written statement.
Making her as a defendant in the suit seems to have been done only for the
purpose of creating jurisdiction of this Court as she lives in Delhi. I consider
that no person can be given liberty to create jurisdiction of a Court by making
another person, who is totally an unnecessary party, as defendant. If this is
CS(OS) 700 of 2008   Rohit Shekhar vs. Shri Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Anr. Page 3 Of 7

allowed, the Courts can be used as a tool of harassment and a person from
one corner of this country can be sued 2000 km away just because an
unnecessary party is made defendant in the suit by plaintiff, to create
jurisdiction. This cannot be the intent and purpose of Section 20 CPC where it
is specifically provided that a suit can be filed, if there are more than one
defendants, where any of the defendants personally works for gain. The
choice of Court can be done by the plaintiff in case where an actual or
meaningful relief is against all the defendants who live at different places and
who are necessary party to the suit. The choice cannot be made by plaintiff
by making somebody as a Performa party or making witness as defendant.
Where a defendant could equally be arrayed as a plaintiff but is deliberately
arrayed as a defendant, would only show that both were in league with each
other. On the basis of residence of such a defendant, a Court cannot exercise
territorial jurisdiction to entertain a suit. I, therefore, consider that this Court
has no territorial jurisdiction to entertain the instant suit.
6.      According to plaintiff his paternity was denied by defendant no.1 in the
year 1995 when he was aged around 16 years. The plaintiff attained majority
in the year 1997. He could have sought declaration from the Court within
three years from his attaining the age of majority. He did not approach the
Court within that period. Merely attending functions of defendant no.1 by the
plaintiff did not amount to acknowledgment and existence of relationship of
son and father between defendant no.1 i.e. host and plaintiff, a guest. In any
event, it is not the case of plaintiff that defendant no.1 acknowledged him
publicly as his son at any point of time. Nor it is the case of plaintiff that in
1995, defendant no.1 who had earlier acknowledged him as his son told him
that he was not his son. The contention of plaintiff is that in 1995 defendant
no.1 refused to meet defendant no.2, and instructed that she should not be
CS(OS) 700 of 2008     Rohit Shekhar vs. Shri Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Anr. Page 4 Of 7

allowed to enter the house and thereafter he refused to do anything with
defendant no.2 or plaintiff and, therefore, defendant no.2 decided to stay
away from defendant no.1. Similar allegations have been made by plaintiff
about year 2001 when it is stated that in 2001 he again tried to meet
defendant no1 and defendant no.1 did not meet him and he was manhandled
by the guards of defendant no.1. The other contention of plaintiff is that after
defendant no.1 became Chief Minister of Uttranchal, he met plaintiff for some
time and thereafter again absolutely refused to see him for a number of years
and lastly in 2005 when plaintiff went to see him at the airport on 7 th
December 2005 defendant no.1 avoided to meet the plaintiff.
7.      Mere refusal by a person of meeting with another person gives rise to
no cause of action. A person can refuse to meet his own brother, father, son,
or wife. There is no law by which a person can be compelled to keep
relationship with his father, mother, brother, sister or other relatives etc.
Mutual relations are developed by mutual trust of the relatives and not by
legal injunctions. The Court cannot compel a person to meet other person
only because he is related to him. Mere non-meeting of defendant no.1 with
plaintiff thus would not give rise to a cause of action for filing a suit.
8.      On 7th November 2007 plaintiff got served a notice on defendant no.1
claiming himself to his son. Merely serving of a notice does not extend the
period of period of limitation. This notice was not responded by defendant
no.1. The cause of action in this case according to plaintiff’s own admissions
in the plaint arose in 1995 and plaintiff attained the age of majority in 1997,
therefore, the cause of action for filing a suit was available with the plaintiff in
1997 itself.
CS(OS) 700 of 2008  Rohit Shekhar vs. Shri Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Anr. Page 5 Of 7

9.      Counsel for plaintiff argued that limitation would not run against
plaintiff and every denial gives rise to a fresh period of limitation. He relied on
1950 INDLAW ALL 211 [Allahabad High Court] Bhoop singh v. Tarif Singh
wherein the Allahabad High Court held as under:
                “As regards the question of limitation, on which the Courts
                below differed, the lower appellate Court took an obviously
                wrong view. The latter Court applied Art.120, Limitation Act,
                which is an article applying to cases not provided for by any
                other article of the Act. It pointed out that the defendant having
                for a number of years been denying the parentage of the
                plaintiff, limitation had long since commenced to run against
                the latter, and that the present suit was, therefore, time barred.
                The trial Court, on the other hand, had held that each denial of
                the plaintiff’s status was a fresh encroachment on the latter’s
                right, giving rise to a fresh case of Action in his favour. I entirely
                agree with this view. A man may have reveled in slanderous
                attacks on another for a time, but her acquires no license by
                their mere frequency or the long period of their duration to
                resume his role, after a certain period, with impunity. It would
                be fallacious to imagine any artificial barrier to the power of the
                Court to grant redress on any ground of deficiency of the
                offence first committed. The person traduced would on each
                repetition of the libel have a right to challenge it and claim
                relief. I need say nothing more on the point.” (para 23)
10.     In the case before Allahabad High Court the plaintiff had sought a
declaration that he was a legitimate son of legally wedded wife of Mokam
since Mokam had denied his legitimacy specifically. In the case in hand, it is
not alleged by plaintiff that at any point of time he was acknowledged as a
son by defendant no.1 before anybody and defendant no.1 later denied this
relationship. What has been alleged is that whenever plaintiff went to meet
defendant no.1, defendant no.1 did not allow him to meet. I, therefore,
consider that a mere refusal to meet a person does not tantamount to
CS(OS) 700 of 2008       Rohit Shekhar vs. Shri Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Anr.   Page 6 Of 7

acknowledgment or denial of relationship and would not give rise to a fresh
cause of action. The suit is barred by limitation and is hereby dismissed on
this ground.
11.     In view of my foregoing discussion, the application under Order 7 Rule
11 CPC filed by defendant no.1 for rejection of plaint is hereby allowed and
the present suit is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed. The suit is
hereby dismissed. Parties are left to bear their own costs.
November 03, 2009                                   SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA J.
rd
CS(OS) 700 of 2008  Rohit Shekhar vs. Shri Narayan Dutt Tiwari & Anr. Page 7 Of 7


