 *          IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                   Date of Reserve: July 28, 2009
                                              Date of Order: September 17, 2009
+Arb. Appeal 8/2009
%                                                                           17.09.2009
       Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.                                  ...Appellant
       Through: Mr. A.M. Singhvi, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Rakesh Sawhney, Ms. Mona
       Aneja and Mr. Munindra Dvivedi, Advocates
       Versus
       Iranian Offshore Engineering &
       Construction Company                                     ...Respondent
       Through: Mr. V.P. Singh, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Airi, Mr. Budhiraja and
       Mr.Seshadri, Advocates.
       JUSTICE SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA
1.     Whether reporters of local papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
2.     To be referred to the reporter or not?
3.     Whether judgment should be reported in Digest?
       JUDGMENT
1.     This appeal under Section 37 of the Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996
(“the Act, for short) has been preferred by the appellant against an order
dated 20th May, 2009 passed by arbitral tribunal whereby it allowed an
application on 15th January, 2009 of Iranian Offshore Engineering &
Construction Company (IOECC), respondent herein, under Section 17 of the
Act and directed that a joint measurement in respect of work undertaken by
contractor after the order of termination, will be in the interest of all
concerned and would assist the Tribunal in arriving at a just conclusion. It
further ordered that the costs incurred on joint measurement shall be shared
by both the parties equally. The joint measurement was ordered to be done
by the National Institute of Oceanography.
Arb. Appeal 8 of 2009 Indian Oil Corporation vs. Iranian Offshore Engineering & Construction
Company                                                                     Page 1 Of 6

2.     Needless to say that costs of joint measurement was huge and for this
reason, the applicant/respondent despite earlier moving an application before
the High Court under Section 9 for joint measurement and despite order
passed by this Court allowing the applicant (respondent herein) to carry the
joint measurement, did not carry out the joint measurement and withdrew the
application under Section 9 from this Court and made an application before
the Tribunal for sharing of costs on the ground that the joint measurement
involved huge costs. The relevant paragraph of the application reads as
under:
               “k.    It is submitted that since the joint inspection and
               measurement is to be jointly conducted in terms of the
               Contract with, and in the presence of the representatives
               of the Claimant and the Respondent and in view of the
               high costs that are involved in conducting the joint
               inspection and measurement, such as hiring, purchasing
               specialized      equipment, chartering a diving support
               vessel, employing divers, amongst other things, it is only
               fair and in the interests of justice, that the costs of the
               joint inspection and measurement exercise that is to be
               conducted by the National Institute of Oceanography be
               shared equally by the Claimant. In the circumstances, this
               Application has been filed seeking appropriate orders
               from this Hon’ble Tribunal           directing the Claimant to
               equally share the costs of the joint measurement and
               inspection exercise with the Respondent since both the
               parties agreed to have the joint measurement and
               inspection exercise conducted by the National Institute of
               Oceanography.”
3.     Prior to making this application for sharing the costs, IOECC had not
raised an issue of sharing the costs either before the High Court or before the
Arb. Appeal 8 of 2009 Indian Oil Corporation vs. Iranian Offshore Engineering & Construction
Company                                                                     Page 2 Of 6

Tribunal. Before the High Court also IOECC had only prayed that IOC be
directed to participate in the joint measurement. This Court had allowed joint
measurement and directed IOC to participate in the joint measurement to be
organized by respondent. Initially, before the Tribunal also applications were
made for extension of time. In earlier application, it was stated that IOC
should be directed to agree to a joint inspection and measurement as the
respondent would not be in a position to incur heavy expenses in mobilizing
vessel and other equipments to carry out the inspection and measurement
exercise unless IOC agrees for joint inspection and measurement. The
Tribunal had allowed IOECC’s application for enlargement of time to carry the
joint measurement in view of technical nature of work vide order dated 10th
May, 2008. It is only thereafter that IOECC then made this application for
sharing of costs and passing of impugned award by the Tribunal.
4.     The Tribunal had gone into the rival arguments in its order as to under
the contract it was whose responsibility to do joint measurement and referred
to different clauses of the contract. The Tribunal came to conclusion that a
combine reading of clauses 7.0.1.03.0 and clause 6.1.1.0 and 6.1.6.0 would
indicate that in case where the owner terminates the contract, he has to
indicate in the notice of termination the reasons for the same and also time
and place for conducting survey and measurement for the work performed
under    the   contract.    Thereafter,     the   Tribunal     observed     that    a   joint
measurement and inspection of the work undertaken by IOECC after the order
of termination would be in the interest of all concerns and would assist the
Tribunal in arriving at a just conclusion. It further observed that sub clause 8
of Section 31 of the Act provides that costs of arbitration shall be fixed by the
Tribunal. Clause 31(a) (iv) contemplates that any other expenses incurred in
Arb. Appeal 8 of 2009 Indian Oil Corporation vs. Iranian Offshore Engineering & Construction
Company                                                                     Page 3 Of 6

connection with the arbitration proceedings shall be the costs of arbitral
proceedings. The Tribunal concluded that the costs incurred in having a joint
measurement would come within the purview of Section 31(a) explanation
(iv). The Tribunal therefore observed that the costs incurred for the purpose
of joint measurement pursuant to the order of Tribunal to be borne equally by
the parties and therefore both should bear the costs.
5.     I consider that the Tribunal fell in grave error observing that costs of
measurement of the work has to be considered as costs of arbitral
proceedings. It is not that the Tribunal in this case for the sake of clarification
of a claim of party, irrespective of the stand of parties, wanted to hire an
expert’s services for its assistance and the expenses payable to expert may
be considered as costs of arbitral proceedings or that Tribunal wanted to visit
the site and see the site itself and the expenses incurred on account of visit
were being considered as costs of arbitration proceedings. In the present
case, the measurements of the work done is sought by the party as an
evidence in support of its claim. In case the party could prove its claim
without measurement, the party would not ask for of measurement. IOECC
had been all along insisting for measurement only because the measurement
would help IOECC in establishing its claim/ counterclaim before the Arbitral
Tribunal and the measurements are to be used as evidence. It is not the job
of the Tribunal to order for collecting evidence on behalf of a party or to ask
the other party to bear the expenses of collecting of evidence by one party
because the expenditure involved is heavy expenditure. Neither the
expenditure in collection of evidence can be considered as costs of arbitration
proceedings. It may be that a party when succeeds in establishing its claim
may stake a claim of expenditure incurred on collecting evidence also during
Arb. Appeal 8 of 2009 Indian Oil Corporation vs. Iranian Offshore Engineering & Construction
Company                                                                     Page 4 Of 6

arbitral proceedings and make the expenses of collection of evidence by way
of measurement as a part of the expenditure incurred by it. However, the
Tribunal cannot, under law ask a party to bear the expenses incurred by other
party on collection of evidence by way of measurement of the work done,
though it can give directions to IOC to be present at the time of measurement
so that measurement becomes as acceptable evidence and objection, if any,
about the measurement are realistic objections.
6.     The reliance of the arbitral tribunal on the provisions of the contract
could have been of no help after termination of the contract. IOC vide its
letter dated 5th April 2007 written to IOECC clearly indicated that it should
immediately return to IOC, all designated sources, owners, materials in its
custody and it also informed IOC that the measurement and survey of the
works performed under the contract upto date will be conducted on 10 th April,
2007. This date of conducting survey was postponed at the request of IOECC
to 16th April, 2007. IOECC vide its letter dated 11th April, 2007 informed that
its representative would be visiting site soon. IOECC however did not join the
measurement and survey of the work done despite postponement of the
date.   IOC    informed    vide    letter   dated     14th   April  2007     that    further
postponement of the date would not be possible and its representative should
be available at site to participate in the joint measurement on 16 th April 2007.
IOECC sought further postponement vide its letter dated 15th April, 2007.
However, IOECC did not join IOC in the measurement. It is under these
circumstances that IOECC made application to the High Court for joint
measurement and did not do the same at its own costs. In this Court it was
not stated that IOC will have to share the costs. While seeking extension of
time for joint measurement before the Tribunal no issue of costs was raised. It
Arb. Appeal 8 of 2009 Indian Oil Corporation vs. Iranian Offshore Engineering & Construction
Company                                                                     Page 5 Of 6

is only subsequently that IOECC made an application for sharing of costs.
7.     I consider that the Tribunal exceeded its jurisdiction in ordering IOC to
share the costs of collection of evidence. This evidence could be the basis of
all claims of respondent. It is the responsibility of respondent to produce
evidence in support of its claim. It is not the responsibility of IOC to meet the
expenses of the evidence of IOECC.
8.     I, therefore, allow this appeal. The impugned order passed by the
Arbitral Tribunal regarding sharing of costs by IOC or treating the costs as
costs of arbitral proceedings is hereby set aside.
9.     With above order, the appeal stand disposed of.
September 17, 2009                                   SHIV NARAYAN DHINGRA J.
rd
Arb. Appeal 8 of 2009 Indian Oil Corporation vs. Iranian Offshore Engineering & Construction
Company                                                                     Page 6 Of 6


