                   HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                  W.P.(C) No.21828 of 2010
       In The matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
       Constitution of India.
                                                ---------
       Smt. Maguni Chhatria                                 ……             Petitioner
                                  - Versus-
       Collector, Balangir and others.                     ……      Opposite Parties
              For Petitioner         :     M/s Rabindranath Prusty, C.R.Kar
                                                  and N.N.Mohapatra.
              For Opp.Parties        :     Addl.Govt. Advocate ( for O.Ps.1 to 3)
                                           M/s Dinesh Kumar Mohanty,
                                                 D.K.Rath and K.Dang.
                                                    ( for O.P.No.4)
                                       ---------
       PRESENT:
                     THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE S.N.PRASAD
       ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                  Date of hearing and judgment: 8.04.2015
       ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S.N.Prasad,J.           Petitioner being aggrieved with the order dated 22.9.2010
       in Revenue Misc.Appeal No.17 of 2010 passed by the Additional District
       Magistrate, Bolangir by which the appeal preferred by the petitioner has
       been rejected, has approached this Court.
        2.              Brief facts of the case is that the petitioner along with
        opposite party no.5 and others had participated in the selection process
        for being engaged as Anganwadi Worker for Gatesarbarpara Anganwadi
        Centre.      The petitioner although eligible in all respect has not been

                                    2
considered rather opposite party no.4 has been considered and selected
as Anganwadi Worker of the concerned centre.
3.         The petitioner coming to know that the certificate on the
basis of which candidature of opposite party no.4 has been considered
and selected is a forged certificate has made a complaint before the
appellate authority praying therein to struck down selection of opposite
party no.4 based upon forged certificate.            The petitioner has
substantiate her stand before the appellate authority that the school
leaving certificate which was obtained from Golmuri Utkal Samaj High
School, Jamshedpur, Jharkhand on 28.9.1997 is forged one as the
Headmaster of the said school has reported vide his report dated
6.5.2010 that opposite party no.4 was not the student of the said
school.   Opposite party no.4 appeared before the appellate authority
and submitted that the school leaving certificate granted by the school
situated at Jamshedpur in the year 1997 but the same has not been
challenged prior to 2010 and at the time of selection no objection was
made by any person within the stipulated period i.e. within 7 days as
provided under the guideline dated 2.5.2007, hence his issue cannot be
rejected at this stage.
4.            Case of the petitioner is that since opposite party no.4 has
committed forgery and got engagement on the basis of forged certificate
she has no right to remain in service and the moment it came to the
notice of the authority, engagement of the opposite party no.4 is to be
struck down on the ground that illegality cannot be perpetuated.
5.         On the other hand, learned counsel for the opposite party
no.4 argued at length and has submitted that order of the appellate
authority has passed the order by framing two issues and both the

                                    3
issues are dealt with specific reason and as such order impugned needs
no interference.
6.           Further submission has been made on behalf of opposite
party that the appellate authority has refused to interfere with the
selection process on the ground         contained in Clause (d) of the
guideline dated 2.5.2007 which provides for making complaint within a
period of 7 days. Since objection has been made at a belated stage,
appellate authority has rightly rejected claim of the petitioner.
7.           Heard learned counsel for parties at length.
8.           The fact which is not in dispute is that in pursuance to the
selection process for engagement of Anganwadi Worker the petitioner as
well as opposite party no.4 was considered and in which opposite party
no.4 was selected.
9.        The petitioner has raised objection questioning validity of
school leaving certificate of opposite party no.4 and her contention was
also corroborated from the stand of the Headmaster of the concerned
school to the effect that opposite party no.4 was never been a student of
that school.
10.          Opposite party no.4 had appeared before the appellate
authority through her Advocate, he has also not disputed this aspect of
the matter, rather he has gone into the provisions as contained in
Clause (d) of the guideline dated 2.5.2007 and stated that objection is
only to be raised within a period of 7 days.         Since school leaving
certificate was issued by the school in question in the year 1997 but it
had never been question after a long period, at this stage it cannot be
questioned.

                                       4
11.        The appellate authority had passed order rejecting claim of the
petitioner on the ground that objection has been raised belatedly i.e.
beyond the period of 7 days as provided in Clause (d) of the guideline
dated 2.5.2007.        The appellate authority although has came to
conclusion by making observation in the impugned order that “on
verification of the letter of Headmaster,Golmori Utkal Samaj High School
dt.6.5.2010 and the original S.L.C. of Gouri Panigrahi issued on 1997
it is found that the seal affixed on the letter and the SLC does not tally
with each other.
12.        This observation/finding of the appellate authority suggests
that the appellate authority was also of the view that there has been
manipulation of school leaving certificate but he has given finding solely
on the basis of clause (d) of the guideline dated 2.5.2007 which speaks
that seven days time will be given for filing of objection. In this context,
clause (d) of the guideline dated 2.5.2007 is being reproduced below:
           “7 days time will be given for filing of objection, if any, by the
           community on the issue of nativity, educational qualification
           and caste certificate.”
13.         In this guideline, provision has been made conferring power
upon the community to make objection within seven days. This
provision does not entitle any candidate to make an objection.                Even
assuming that seven days has elapsed and after seven days the parties
come to know forgery committed on the part of the candidate and
selected by way of producing forged certificate, the said candidate has
no right to remain in the post on the ground of forgery which has been
discussed in the case of Devendra Kumar –vs- State of Uttaranchal
and others reported in (2013) 9 SCC 363 wherein in para-13 which is
being reproduced below:

                                       5
      “ It is settled proposition of law that where an applicant gets an
      office by misrepresenting the facts or by playing fraud upon the
      competent authority, such an order cannot be sustained in
      the eye of the law. “Fraud avoids all judicial                   acts,
      ecclesiastical or temporal”. (Vide S.P.Chengalvaraya Naidu –v-
      Jagannath reported in (1994) 1 SCC 1 : AIR 1994 SC 853. In
      Lazarus Estates Ltd. vs- Beasley reported in (1956)1 QB 702 the
      Court observed without equivocation that :
              “ …. No judgment of a court, no order of a Minister can be
           allowed to stand if it has been obtained by fraud, for fraud
           unravels everything.””
14.           In view of the said principles of law which provides that
fraud avoids all judicial acts, ecclesiastical or temporal. If the ratio laid
down in the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court will be compared
with the facts of the instant case, it is admitted position which has also
been admitted by the appellate authority that there is discrepancy in the
signature of Headmaster and seal affixed on the letter and the school
leaving certificate which suggest that some fraud has been committed by
the private opposite party.
15.           Finding given by the appellate authority that since objection
has been raised beyond seven days is based on incorrect finding in view
of the settled position of law that illegality cannot be permitted to be
perpetuated and the moment it came to know about the fraud, it is the
duty of the authority to rectify the same.
              On the basis of the said principles, this Court come to
conclusion that finding of the Additional District Magistrate passed in
the memorandum of appeal is not sustainable and hence the same is
hereby set aside.
16.         Since on the ground for submission of forged certificate by
the opposite party no.4 the candidature of the petitioner could not have

                                      6
been considered, hence the case of the petitioner needs to be considered
by the authority concerned.
17.          Accordingly,      that matter    is remitted to the opposite
party no.1 who will pass appropriate order afresh within a reasonable
period, preferably within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of
copy of this order.
            The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
                                                 ….…………………
                                                    S.N.Prasad, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 8th April,2015/Palai


