                                HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                       W.P.(C) No.17337 of 2016
          In the matter of an application under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
                                                 ---------
          Subhashri Maharana                                 ……            Petitioner
                                              - Versus-
          State of Orissa and others                         ……            Opposite Parties
                 For Petitioner               :    M/s. Srinivas Mohanty, S. Routray,
                                                          K. Patra, S.S. Moharana, S. Mohanty
                                                          & A. Rout.
                 For Opposite Parties         :    Mr. S. Mohanty,
                                                   Additional Standing Counsel
                                                   (For opposite parties No.1 to 3)
                                                   M/s. Kaniska Rath & D. Nanda.
                                                   (For Intervener)
                                              ---------
          PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE SUJIT NARAYAN PRASAD
          ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                             Date of hearing and judgment : 08.11.2017
          ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. N. Prasad, J.        This writ petition under Article 226 and 227 of the
          Constitution of India has been filed wherein the direction has been
          sought for upon the opposite parties to explain as to why the age of the
          Anganwadi Worker retrospectively fixed by 01.01.2006 although the
          advertisement is issued on 21.09.2016 with further prayer to accept the
          application of the petitioner for the sake of interview.

                                     2
2.          The brief facts of the case are that the petitioner is an
aspirant to be considered for engagement as Anganwadi Worker.            An
advertisement has been issued on 21.9.2016 wherein recruitment of
minimum age has been stipulated being 18 years as on 1.1.2016.
3.          Petitioner, being aggrieved with the cut-off date of 1.1.2016, is
before this Court by way of this instant writ petition on the ground that
when the advertisement is dated 21.9.2016, then why the cut-off date of
determining the minimum or maximum age would be 1.1.2016.
According to the petitioner, that is arbitrary and unreasonable decision
and due to that reason the petitioner, who is short of two months age as
on 1.1.2016 is being deprived from consideration of her candidature,
although she has already attained the age of 18 years on the date of
issuance of advertisement i.e. 21.09.2016.
4.          Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon
the judgment rendered in the cases of K. Narayanan and others v.
State of Karnataka and others passed in Civil Appeal Nos.630-32 of
1989, State of Andhra Pradesh v. T. Ramakrishna Rao and Ors.
Passed in Civil Appeal No.1461 of 1971, Sasidhar Reddy Sura v.
The State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. and Satyabrata Kanungo v.
State of Odisha and Ors., reported in 2016 (II) ILR-CUT 69.

                                      3
              He has also relied upon the Notification issued by the
General Administration Department dated 27th October, 1989 wherein
there is no reference of the cut-off date in the case of determining the
minimum or maximum age.           As such, he contends that the guideline
itself is illegal and hence the candidature of the petitioner is to be
considered.
5.            Counter affidavit has been filed by the State-opposite parties
inter alia therein it has been stated that the Anganwadi Worker in the
State is to be engaged in pursuant to the guideline issued by the Women
& Child Development Department on 2.5.2007 wherein as per the
provision made in Clause-2, the requirement of age for the female
candidate is 18 to 42 years.      She should have attained the age of 18
years, but not 43 years on the first day of the year in which the
application has been invited.
6.            According to the learned counsel appearing for the State-
opposite parties, the advertisement is on 21.9.2016, but the age
minimum or maximum is to be seen on the first day of the year. Since
the advertisement is of the year 2016, hence the cut-off date to determine
the minimum or maximum age would be 1.1.2016.
              It has been fairly submitted that there is no infirmity in the
advertisement. The petitioner has not challenged the Condition No.2 of

                                      4
the guideline and as such, she now cannot raise           any     grievance
questioning the condition of the guideline dated 2.5.2007.
7.          Heard the learned counsel for the parties and on appreciation
of the rival submission, it is evident from the pleading made by the
parties that the petitioner has questioned the condition of advertisement
dated 21.9.2016 wherein the minimum age of 18 years has been taken to
be on 1.1.2016.
            Petitioner’s grievance is that when the advertisement is dated
21.9.2016, then why the cut-off date of determining the minimum or
maximum age would be 1.1.2016.
8.          It is not in dispute that the Anganwadi Worker is not a post
under the regular establishment of the State Government. It is only for
the purpose of extending the benefit meant to the persons below the
poverty line and for that reason, a concept is to create Anganwadi Centres
to extend the benefit to the beneficiaries, who are entitled to get it under
the Scheme has been evolved. To run the Centres, the requirement of a
In-Charge with the Helper has been thought to be taken.                  The
Government, in the light of this pretext, has decided to engage female
candidates to run the Centre to be known as Anganwadi Worker. The
decision has been taken by the Government to engage the Anganwadi
Worker of the same locality to extend maximum benefit to the local people
of the area.   The Government has also taken the decision to maintain

                                      5
fairness and transparency in the matter of engagement            of      the
Anganwadi Worker and for that purpose, guideline             have       been
prepared in continuation of the same.       The revised guideline has been
published     on   2.5.2007   under    the  seal  and   signature    of  the
Commissioner-cum-Secretary         to   Government,    Women      &     Child
Development Department of the State of Odisha. The guideline contains
the provision of selection of engagement as well as eligibility condition.
The eligibility condition regarding the age has also been reflected therein,
which is reproduced herein below:-
                    “The applicant will be a female candidate
            in the age group of 18 to 42 years. She should
            have attained the age of 18 years, but not 43
            years on the first day of the year in which the
            application has been invited.”
9.           It is evident from the said provision that the minimum and
maximum age has been provided therein with a cut-off date that is on the
date of order in which the application has been invited.        There is no
dispute in the legal proposition that the advertisement is to be issued on
the basis of provision of the recruitment rule and guideline which is
prevalent. The authority has given with an advertisement on 21.9.2016
wherein the applications have been invited from the eligible candidates in
between the age group of 18 to 42 years as on first day of the year in
which the applications have been invited.

                                      6
              It   is   evident    from     the advertisement that since it
has been advertised on 21.9.2016 and as such, the cut-off date to
determine the minimum or maximum age would be the first day of the
year, i.e., 1.1.2016
10.           The admitted case of the petitioner is that she short of two
months age as on 1.1.2016 although she has completed more than 18
years as on the date of advertisement and as such, she may participate in
the selection process.
              However, admitted position is that the petitioner has not
challenged the guideline dated 2.5.2007 as also the condition of the
advertisement requiring to fix the minimum or maximum age as on
1.1.2016.      Although, he has relied upon the Notification dated 27th
October, 1989 issued by the General Administration Department in order
to strengthen his argument that even the Government has not come out
with any decision to fix the minimum or maximum age by fixing the cut-
off date and as such, the stipulation made in the guideline dated
2.5.2007 fixing the cut-off date is not proper.
11.           So far as the reliance put by the petitioner in the General
Administration Department Notification dated 27th October, 1989 is
concerned, it has already been said hereinabove that the post of
Anganwadi Worker is not under the regular establishment of the
Government rather, it is totally in contract on payment of remuneration

                                      7
by way of consolidated money and as such, the         guideline   has   been
formulated on 2.5.2007.
             The petitioner is relying upon the Notification dated 27 th
October, 1989, but the condition of advertisement has not been assailed
in this writ petition and as such, the said notification is of no help to the
petitioner.
12.          So far as the judgments relied upon by the petitioner referred
hereinabove, the same are being dealt with hereunder.
             The judgment rendered by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the
case of The State of Andhra Pradesh (supra), the issue in the said case
does not pertains to the question of fixing the cut-off date for determining
the minimum or maximum age, rather the same is the method to select
the candidate and as such, the same is not applicable in the facts and
circumstances of the instant case.
             The judgment rendered by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the
case of K. Narayanan and others (supra), the fact leading to the said case
is retrospective application of a rule, but here the subject matter is
entirely different. Hence, it is not applicable.
             The judgment rendered by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the
case of Sasidhar Reddy Sura (supra), the fact leading to the said case is
not regarding the cut-off date rather, the issue was as to whether with
regard to the minimum age of a candidate to the post in question whereas

                                      8
the Commission had expressed its view in its report      that    only   after
completion of 35 years of age a person should be appointed as a
District and Sessions Judge but the said recommendation has not been
incorporated in the Rules.     Hence, the fact of the instant case is also
different. Hence, it is not applicable.
            The judgment rendered by this Court in the case of
Satyabrata Kanungo (supra), the fact leading to the said case is related to
the eligible condition provide under Clause-I(6) of the Guidelines for
candidates for Post Graduate Medical courses in the Medical Colleges and
if any candidate does not join or leaves after joining the PG Course, due
to which a seat goes lapsed, then the candidate concerned shall not be
considered for selection in the next three academic sessions of the PG
Course and the stipend/salary already received by him/her will have to
be refunded and the said provision of law was under scrutiny before this
Court, but that is not the fact involved herein. Hence, it is not applicable.
13.         So far as the fact of the instant case is concerned, admittedly
the petitioner has not challenged the guideline dated 2.5.2007 and the
stipulation made in the advertisement regarding fixing the minimum or
maximum age is on the first day of the year in which the application has
been invited that is in pursuant to the provision made in the guideline
dated 2.5.2007 under Clause-2 as already quoted above.            Hence, the

                                        9
condition made in the advertisement cannot to be said illegal, rather it
is in consonance with the guideline dated 2.5.2007.
14.            So far as the prayer of the petitioner is that her case may be
considered, since the date of submission of application, she has already
attained the age of the minimum 18 years, but this argument is not
acceptable to this Court for the reason that any condition put in the
guideline or the rule governing recruitment and the advertisement has
been issued in pursuant to the rule or guideline, it is incumbent upon the
authorities to follow the same without making any confusion otherwise it
will lead to unfairness or non-transparency in the selection process. The
further issue would be that if the petitioner would be granted such
benefit, then why not others.
15.            In view of such a position and in view of the reason aforesaid,
the petitioner has failed to make out a case.
               Accordingly, the writ petition fails and it is dismissed.
                                            ….....………………
                                              S.N. Prasad, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 8th November, 2017/D. Aech


