                                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                           W.P.(C) No.6107 of 2018
             In the matter of an application under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
                                                     ---------
           Debasish Hati & others                                 ……              Petitioner
                                                  - Versus-
           State of Odisha and others                             ……              Opposite Parties
                   For Petitioner         :    M/s. Sambit Rath, P.K. Pattnaik & B.K. Nayak-3.
                                               Mr. Ganeswar Rath, Senior Counsel.
                   For Opp. Parties       :    Mr. S.K. Samal, Standing Counsel.
                                                  ---------
           PRESENT:
                    THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE SUJIT NARAYAN PRASAD
           ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Date of hearing and judgment : 16.04.2018
           ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. N. Prasad, J.           This writ petition has been filed under Article 226 and 227 of
           the Constitution of India wherein direction has been sought for upon the
           opposite parties to allow the petitioners to appear in the examination
           (entrance test) to be held on 10.4.2018 or to arrange separate
           examination for the petitioners before the publication of result.
           2.              According to the petitioners, the case in brief, which has been
           filed by the students represented by their guardians, is that even though
           they are possessing to participate in the examination (entrance test) for
           admission in the Odisha Adarsha Vidyalaya, has not been allowed to

                                        2
appear in the entrance test although the benefit has been extended in
favour   of  one    candidate,    namely,  Rudra Narayan Moharana.
             According to the petitioners, they are the students of
Saraswati Shisu Mandir, Kalpathar, Cuttack and had applied for
admission into Class-VI and Class-VII of Odisha Adarsha Vidyalaya of
Jokidola    under    Banki     Block  of  Cuttack    Distrcit  pursuant    to
advertisement floated by the State Project Director, Odisha Adarsha
Vidyalaya Sangathana published on 17.3.2018. Their cases are that they
have passed out from Saraswati Shisu Mandir Kalpathar, Cuttack and
the competent authority has issued NOC on 20.9.2016 in favour of the
school where the petitioners are prosecuting their studies. After expiry of
the NOC, the school authorities have applied for obtaining certificate of
recognition from academic session 2017-18 to 2021-22 (5 years) which
was pending consideration before the authorities.
             It is their case that now provision of Right to Education Act to
provide education to all children upto the age of 14 years is the right of
the every child to have proper education for their bright future but
without any rhyme and reason being small kids have been deprived from
appearing in the examination (entrance test). As such, the instant writ
petition has been filed.
3.           It has been contended by Mr. Ganeswar Rath, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the petitioners that the petitioners had taken
admission in the school in question after seeing that the school in
question has been recognized for the academic session 2015-16 and

                                       3
applications for getting NOC for the next academic session 2017-18 has
also been filed, keeping the said matter pending             before     the
authorities, the petitioners have not been allowed to participate in the
entrance test is highly illegal and unreasonable action on the part of the
opposite parties.
4.           The opposite parties have appeared and filed counter affidavit
inter alia therein it has been stated that the entrance examination for
Odisha Adarsha Vidyalayas is to be conducted in pursuant to the general
guidelines for admission of students wherein as per the provision
contained in Clasue-1.3, it has been provided that the children passing
out of schools running under State Government/ICSE/CBSE are eligible
for taking admission in Odisha Adarsha Vidyalayas provided that the
Institution possesses the status of recognition/got NOC/Certificate of
recognition from the State Government or applied for NOC & Duly
recommended by the Block Education Officer/District Education Officer
of the District.
             According to them, the school in question has not got its NOC
and as such, the students studying in the said school is not treated to be
eligible candidates as per the provision made therein.
             It has been stated that as per the general guidelines for
admission of students in the Odisha Adarsha Vidyalayas in order to be
eligible for sitting in the entrance examination, the child must have
passed/continuing Class/Std. V from any recognized Institution/School
of the respective block for admission into Class-VI of the OAV. Similarly,

                                      4
the child continuing/passing out of Class Std.-VI of the respective block
can seek admission into Class-VII of the OAV respectively.       The child
belonging to the respective block but passing/continuing Class V in a
school other than the home block is eligible to apply provided he has to
produce the residential certificate. Similarly, the child belonging to the
respective block but passing /continuing in Class VI in a school other
than the home block is eligible to apply provided he has to produce the
residential certificate.
             As per Clause-1.7.1 of the general guidelines, it has been
mentioned therein that the entrance examination of 2018-19 will be
conducted at OAVs/ the block point in the block headquarter high school
or the centre selected by the DEO. The Principal/BEO-cum-Principal-in-
charge will act as the Centre Superintendent and remain in charge of
conduct of the examination.
             It has been stated that the present petitioners those who had
applied in respect of OAV, Jokidola which comes under the Block
Education Officer, Banki had applied for admission to Block Education
Officer, Banki and after scrutiny of their application forms it was found
that they do not satisfy the Clause 1.3 of the general guidelines as
regards passing out from a school which is the status of recognition/got
NOC/got certificate of recognition from the Government or applied for
NOC and duly recommended by the Block Education Officer/District
Education Officer of the District.

                                       5
              It has been contended that in the application form, against
Column No.12, the petitioners had mentioned ‘yes’       but   in  fact  their
school does not have either NOC or certificate of recognition or applied for
certificate of recognition with the recommendation of the DEO/BEO and
after ascertaining the same their candidature has been rejected and they
have not been issued with admit card.
              It has further been stated that the present petitioners belong
to Cuttack district and they have applied for taking admission in the OAV,
Jokidala under Cuttack district for which it could be immediately
ascertained that their school does not have the certificate of recognition or
certificate of recognition is pending before the authorities with the
recommendation of the District Education Officer/Block Development
Officer as because both the authorities conducting the entrance
examination for admission into OAV as well as the recommending
authority or issuance of certificate of recognition are same.       But one
Rudra Narayan Moharana, who was a student of the very same school
from where the present petitioners have passed out from Class-V and VI
respectively, but his application form has been honoured in respect of
OAV, Nota, Nayagarh and he has been issued with admit card.
              It has been submitted that with respect to the grievance of
the petitioners regarding Rudra Narayan Moharana that he had passed
out Class-V from Saraswati Sisu Mandir, Kalapathara, from which the
present petitioners have also passed out, but in the application form
against the Clause-12 he had categorically mentioned that the school is a

                                          6
recognized school and since he had applied in respect of different district,
the    concerned      authority,     the    District Education          Officer,
Nayagarh did not have immediate scope to verify the records, status of his
school and as such, he was issued with admit card, but his admission
will be subject to final verification of the documents.
              It has further been stated that the school where the present
petitioners have passed out has applied for issuance of certificate of
recognition, but the name of the school could not be recommended by the
District   Education    Officer,   Cuttack   for   issuance  of certificate   of
recommendation as the school authorities did not submit relevant
documents to satisfy that they fulfill the conditions of recognition as
mentioned in the schedule to the Right of Children to Free and
Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (in short ‘ the Act’) and as per the
schedule one of the condition at Clasue-2 is that the school must have of
building basic amenities. Besides that the school should have teaching
staff at the ratio of 30:1 i.e. 1 teacher for 30 students. Since the school is
as per the roll strength, supplied by the school, has 489 students and
accordingly in the 30:1 ratio, the school is supposed to have 16 qualifying
teachers whereas as per the documents submitted by the school they
have only 11 teachers and accordingly the school does not have satisfy
the requirements for grant of certificate of recognition.
              It has been stated that the Managing Committee has
purchased one acre of land in the name of the school and construction of
the permanent building is on progress which itself suggest that the

                                        7
permanent building of the school is not there and as such, in this pretext,
since the school in question has not followed the Act, 2009, hence the
recognition/NOC has not been given to the same and in consequence
thereof, the petitioners have been declined to be ineligible as per the
provision of clause-1.3 of the general guidelines.
5.            In response, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners
submits that since the school has submitted their application which is
lying pending before the authorities, neither has it been rejected nor any
order has been passed and as such, in this pretext denying the
petitioners to not appearing in the entrance test is nothing but absolutely
illegal exercise of power.
              He further submits that the opposite parties are putting
reliance upon the guideline, but it is settled position of law that the
guideline cannot be said to be its statutory force and further it is clear-cut
case of discrimination, since with respect to Rudra Narayan Moharana,
the admit card has been issued and he is allowed to participate in the
selection process.
6.            Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the
documents available on record.
7.            This Court thinks it proper before appreciating the rival
submission of the parties to deal with the provision of the Right of
Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009.
              The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
Act or Right to Education Act (RTE) is an Act of the Parliament of India enacted

                                             8
on 4 August 2009, which describes the modalities of the importance
of free and compulsory      education for      children between the age of 6 to 14
years in India under Article 21A of the Indian Constitution India.
              The title of the RTE Act incorporates the words ‘free and
compulsory’. ‘Free education’ means that no child, other than a child who
has been admitted by his or her parents to a school which is not
supported by the appropriate Government, shall be liable to pay any kind
of fee or charges or expenses which may prevent him or her from
pursuing and completing elementary education. ‘Compulsory education’
casts an obligation on the appropriate Government and local authorities
to provide and ensure admission, attendance and completion of
elementary education by all children in the 6-14 age group.
              Section-18 of the Act, 2009 provides that no school to be
established without obtaining certificate of recognition.                  For ready
reference, the same is quoted herein below:-
              “18. No school to be established without obtaining
              certificate of recognition.-
              (1) No school, other than a school established, owned or
              controlled by the appropriate Government or the local
              authority, shall, after the commencement of this Act, be
              established or function, without obtaining a certificate of
              recognition from such authority, by making an application
              in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.
                      (2) The authority prescribed under sub-section (1)
              shall issue the certificate of recognition in such form, within
              such period, in such manner, and subject to such
              conditions, as may be prescribed:
                      Provided that no such recognition shall be granted to
              a school unless it fulfils norms and standards specified
              under section 19.

                                            9
                       (3) On the contravention of the conditions of
              recognition, the prescribed authority shall, by an order in
              writing, withdraw recognition:
                       Provided that such order shall contain a direction as
              to which of the neighbourhood school, the children studying
              in the derecognised school, shall be admitted:
                       Provided further that no recognition shall be so
              withdrawn without giving an opportunity of being heard to
              such school, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
                       (4) With effect from the date of withdrawal of the
              recognition under sub-section (3), no such school shall
              continue to function.
                       (5) Any person who establishes or runs a school
              without obtaining certificate of recognition, or continues to
              run a school after withdrawal of recognition, shall be liable
              to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of
              continuing contraventions, to a fine of ten thousand rupees
              for each day during which such contravention continues.”
              It is evident from the provision contained in Section-18 of the
Act, 2009 that no school, other than a school established, owned or
controlled by the appropriate Government or the local authority, shall,
after the commencement of this Act, be established or function, without
obtaining a certificate of recognition from such authority, by making an
application in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. The
authority prescribed for such, shall issue the certificate of recognition in
such form provided that no such recognition shall be granted to a school
unless it fulfils norms and standards specified under section 19.
              Section-19 of the Act, 2009 contains the norms and
standards for school which stipulates as follows:-
              “19. Norms and standards for school.-(1) No school shall
              be established, or recognised under section 18, unless it
              fulfils the norms and standards specified in the Schedule.
                       (2)    Where a school established before the
              commencement of this Act does not fulfill the norms and
              standards specified in the Schedule, it shall take steps to

                                          10
              fulfill such norms and standards at its own expenses,
              within a period of three years from the date of such
              commencement.
                      (3)   Where a school fails to fulfil the norms and
              standards within the period specified under sub-section (2),
              the authority prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 18
              shall withdraw recognition granted to such school in the
              manner specified under sub-section (3) thereof.
                      (4)   With effect from the date of withdrawal of
              recognition under sub-section (3), no school shall continue
              to function.
                      (5)   Any person who continues to run a school
              after the recognition is withdrawn, shall be liable to fine
              which may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of
              continuing contraventions, to a fine of ten thousand rupees
              for each day during which such contravention continues.
              It is evident from provision as contained in Section-19 that no
school shall be established, or recognised under section 18, unless it
fulfils the norms and standards specified in the Schedule. Where a school
established before the commencement of this Act does not fulfill the
norms ad standards specified I the Schedule, it shall take steps to fulfill
such norms and standards at its own expenses, within a period of three
years from the date of such commencement. Where a school fails to fulfil
the norms and standards within the period specified under sub-section
(2), the authority prescribed under sub-section (1) of section 18 shall
withdraw recognition granted to such school in the manner specified
under sub-section (3) thereof. With effect from the date of withdrawal of
recognition under sub-section (3), no school shall continue to function.
              Section-25 of the Act, 2009 contains the Pupil-Teacher Ratio,
as per which, within three years from the date of commencement of this
Act, the appropriate Government and the local authority shall ensure that
the Pupil-Teacher Ratio, as specified in the Schedule, is maintained in

                                            11
each school.       As per the said schedule, the Pupil-Teacher Ratio in the
instant case is 30:1.
8.           The fact of the case herein is that the petitioners, who are
studying in Saraswati Sisu Mandir admittedly is a school not controlled
by the State Government and as such, as per requirement of the Act,
2009, the school is to be recognized under Section-18 subject to
fulfillment of condition as laid down under Section-19.
             The petitioners contends that the school in question has been
given conditional NOC during the academic year 2015-16 is allowed to
function with the existing infrastructure for the current year i.e. 2016-17
with the stipulation that the school is supposed to fulfill all norms as per
the RCFCE Act, 2009 and RCFCE Rules-2010 before filling up application
for obtaining recognition/NOC for the next academic session 2017-18.
The same would be evident from Annexure-3 to the writ petition.
             The school in question has applied for getting recognition, but
as per the pleading made by the opposite parties in counter affidavit, the
basic requirement as stipulated under Act, 2009 as per schedule which
requires that the school must have building consisting of :-
             (i)      At least one class room for every teacher and an
                      Office-cum-store room-cum-Head teachers room;
             (ii)     Barrier free access;
             (iii)    Separate toilets for boys and girls;
             (iv)     Safety adequate drinking water facility to all
                      children;
             (v)      Kitchen where the MDM is cooked in the school;
             (vi)     Play ground; and
             (vii)    Arrangement for securing school building by
                      boundary wall or fencing amongst other conditions.

                                         12
              The Pupil-Teacher Ratio is also to be maintained as per
schedule given therein. As per which, so far the            present  school  is
concerned, total number of students is 489.           Accordingly, in the 30:1
ratio, the school is supposed to have 16 qualifying teachers whereas as
per the documents submitted by the school they have only 11 qualified
with B.Ed. teachers Accordingly, the statement made in the statute under
Section-25 has also not been fulfilled.
               It is also admitted position in the counter affidavit that the
school in question has applied for getting permanent recognition as
stipulated in Annexure-3, but the same has not been recommended by
the District Education Officer under which jurisdiction, the school falls
due to not fulfilling the criteria laid down under Section-19 and 25 of the
Act, 2009 and accordingly, the District Education Officer has not made
any recommendation for want of the relevant documents as required
under the said provision, meaning thereby the school in question in
which the petitioners are studying is not recognized.
9.            In the light of the factual situation, it is to be examined as to
whether the decision taken by the authority in not issuing the admit card
in favour of the petitioners is correct or not?
10.           This Court in order to appreciate the submission on this
account of the rival parties has gone into general guidelines for admission
of the students in Odisha Adarsha Vidyalaya wherein under Clause-1.3
the eligibility of the candidates has been provided which reflects herein
below:-

                                           13
                      “The child must have passed/continuing Class/Std.
              V from any recognized Institution/School of the respective
              block for admission into Class-VI of the OAV. Similarly,
              the child continuing/passing out of Class Std.-VI of the
              respective block can seek admission into Class-VII of the
              OAV respectively. The child belonging to the respective
              block but passing/continuing Class V in a school other than
              the home block is eligible to apply provided he has to
              produce the residential certificate. Similarly, the child
              belonging to the respective block but passing /continuing in
              Class VI in a school other than the home block is eligible to
              apply provided he has to produce the residential certificate.
                      The children passing out of schools running under
              State Government/ICSE/CBSE are eligible for taking
              admission in Odisha Adarsha Vidyalayas provided that the
              Institution possesses the status of recognition/got
              NOC/Certificate of recognition from the State Government
              or applied for NOC & Duly recommended by the Block
              Education Officer/District Education Officer of the District.”
              It is evident from the eligibility condition stipulated in Clause-
1.3 of the general guidelines that the children passing out of schools
running under State Government/ICSE/CBSE are eligible for taking
admission in Odisha Adarsha Vidyalayas provided that the Institution
possesses the status of recognition/got NOC/Certificate of recognition
from the State Government or applied for NOC & Duly recommended by
the Block Education Officer/District Education Officer of the District.
11.           Here in the instant case, the recognition/NOC/Certificate of
recognition have not been extended in favour of the school in question.
However, the application has been made for getting NOC, but as would be
evident from the statement made in the counter affidavit that it has not
recommended by the District Education Officer of the district due to non-
fulfilling the required criteria as laid down under Section-19 and 25 of the
Act, 2009.

                                      14
12.          Learned   Senior   Counsel    appearing    for   the   petitioners
contends that merely on account of the fact that          the   eligibility  of
candidates as contained under Clause-1.3 of the general guidelines that if
the students are not fulfilling the said criteria, the petitioners who being
kid may not be deprived from appearing in the entrance examination and
in order to demonstrate his argument, he has taken aid of the provision of
Right to Education Act which provides free education to all children in
between the age of 6 to 14, but this Court is of the view that the Right to
Education Act although provides to get free and compulsory education to
the children in between the age group of 6 to 14, but simultaneously, the
other provisions as also the law laid therein under which the liability has
been casted upon the concerned school to maintain the norms and
standards of school so that there may be uniform system of education
across the country and for that certain provision has been made which is
mandatorily to be followed i.e. regarding maintenance of the school, its
standards, the pupil-teacher ratio etc. as discussed hereinabove.
13.          The question of providing free and compulsory education is
no doubt is there, but it can be said to be deprived to such section of
students even if they are following the provision as contained in the Act,
2009.
14.          Here in the instant case, the petitioners admittedly are
students of the Saraswati Shisu Mandir.        The said school has not got
recognition rather has not also been recommended by the competent
authority due to not filling of the candidature, the requirement as

                                       15
provided under the Act, 2009 and, therefore, the students who have
submitted their application for sitting in the entrance       test for  their
admission in Class-V and VI under the Odisha Adarsha Vidyalaya has not
been issued the admit card.
15.          According to my considered view, the action of the authority
cannot be said to be unjustified. Admittedly, the institutions, where the
petitioners are studying, are not fulfilling the norms as given under the
Act, 2009 as discussed above.
16.          The petitioners claims that one Rudra Narayan Moharana
has been issued the admit card and as such, there is clear-cut violation of
provision of Article-14 of the Constitution of India by discriminating them,
as would be evident from the pleading made in the counter affidavit since
the school in question situated in the district of Cuttack and record for
getting recognition is available within the same authority, who is also
scrutinizing authority of the application form and as such, the authority
who is scrutinizing the application form has easily traced out regarding
the status of the school in question and it has been found in course of
scrutiny that the school in question has not been recognized rather it has
also not recommended.         Hence, decided not to issue admit card.
However, one Rudra Narayan Moharana, who has applicant of district
Nayagarh and in the application, under Column No.12, he has filled up
the column showing therein that the school in question has been
recognized and the authorities leaving upon them has issued admit card,

                                      16
but it has been stipulated in the counter affidavit that the final result
selection would be done subject to verification of the documents.
17.           It has been stated by Mr. S.K. Samal, learned Standing
Counsel that although admit card has been issued in favour of Rudra
Narayan Moharana, but the school in question has not been recognized
and as such, there is no question of publishing his result.
18.           This Court has also come across to the fact that the Column
No.12, the petitioner has filled up by giving therein the details of
recognition wherein it has been stated by them that the school in
question has recognized, but on scrutiny, it was found that the school
has not recognized.     Hence, the petitioners have tried to mislead the
authorities and as such, the petitioners cannot deserve any sympathy to
try to mislead the authority. Moreover, the writ court being the court of
equity, it is expected from the party to approach to court of law who is
court of equity with clean hand and not with suppression of fact.
19.           Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners, at this
juncture, has submitted that the petitioners have taken fresh admission
during the relevant time when the school in question was temporarily
recognized and as such, there is no fault on their part since the day when
they have taken admission, the school was recognized, but this argument
is not worth to be considered for the reason that the authorities has come
out with guideline stipulating therein condition for eligibility of students
as per which the petitioners have not come upto mark.            Hence, the
authorities have decided not to issue admit card.

                                        17
             He   further   submits    that   the guideline cannot be said
to have its statutory force and as such, it is not mandatorily to be obeyed,
but this contention is not worth to be considered by reading the guideline
along with the Act, 2009 wherein it has been provided that to accord
recognition to schools by fulfilling the norms as provided under Section-
19 and 25 of the Act, 2009 and the competent authority of the State of
Odisha while formulating the guideline has taken into consideration the
provision of Right to Education Act, 2009 otherwise the action of the
authority will be said to be contrary to the statutory provision as
contained under the provision of Act, 2009 and as such, it cannot be said
that guideline is of no statutory force after all the education is to be
imparted to the students to maintain the standards in education in order
to give quality education and for that purpose the provision of the Act,
2009 has been formulated and when this provision itself has been
violated, the petitioners cannot be allowed to take part in the admission
process which is contrary to eligibility clause contained in the guideline.
             He has also tried to impress upon the Court that the
petitioners are small children and as such, the order may be passed by
taking sympathetically view, but it is settled that on sympathy, no order
cannot be passed and if it can be passed to the petitioners, then why not
to the other schools which has not been recognized which this Court
sitting under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot allow to flout
the provision of law following the principle that if anything is to be done

                                           18
as provided in the statute, the thing is to be done strictly in accordance
with law, since this Court is of the view that no positive direction can
be passed otherwise there will be no rule of law.
20.             This Court, after keeping all these facts into consideration, is
of the view that the decision taken by the authority in not issuing admit
card cannot be said to be unjustified and unreasonable.
                In view thereof, the writ petition fails and it is dismissed.
                                                  …..……...…………
                                                   S.N. Prasad, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 16th April 2018/D. Aech


