                    ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK.
                          W.P.(C) No. 9251 of 2003
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
                                    -----------
Sukadev Acharya & another                      ……                       Petitioners
                             -Versus-
State of Orissa & others                        ……                     Opp. Parties
       For Petitioner          :   M/s. J.K Rath, S.N. Rath, P.K. Rout,
                                      S. Mishra, C.K. Rajguru and D.N. Rath
       For Opp. Parties        :   Addl. Government Advocate
                                   (For opp. Party no.1)
                                   M/s. D. K. Mohapatra, Miss Minati Mishra
                                   (For opp. Party nos.2 & 3)
PRESENT :
              THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE S.N.PRASAD
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
               Date of hearing and judgment :- 25.06.2015
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. N. Prasad, J.       Heard.
2.             The    petitioner    has     approached      this   Court     to
regularize them in service in the regular establishment of the
Rourkela Development Authority.
3.             The case of the petitioners is that they have been
engaged as Work Sarkars under the then Rourkela Regional
Improvement Trust and accordingly started discharging their
duties having been appointed on 1.4.1983.

                                   2
4.            The petitioner no.1 was engaged as Work Sarkar on
N.M.R. basis since March, 1983 and the petitioner no.2 engaged
since March, 1979 on payment of consolidated amount. To that
effect, orders have been issued by the opposite party-Trust at
that time subsequently the petitioners have been engaged and
performed their duties as Work Sarkars.
5.            The petitioners thereafter had appeared before the
Departmental Promotion Committee and directed to be engaged
on temporary Work Sarkars initially for a period of 89 days
subsequently for a period of 44 days on the basis of in the scale
of pay of Rs.800 – 1150/- so far as the case of petitioner no.2 is
concerned, while the petitioner no.1 was engaged as Work
Sarkar on 44 days on the basis of consolidated amount of
Rs.900/- per month. Accordingly, both the petitioners were
continuing to discharge their duties as Work Sarkars.
6.            Though the petitioners have been directed to
perform their duties by engaging them on 44 days basis but
actually the petitioners have permitted to work without any
break.
7.            The Rourkela Regional Improvement Trust has been
renamed as Rourkela Development Authority by virtue of
notification    No.30935/HUD     dated   15.10.1995.   Being  the
employee     of   Rourkela   Regional   Improvement    Trust  the
petitioner’s service have been taken and they have been
permitted to discharge their duties under Rourkela Development
Authority.

                                     3
8.            The grievance of the petitioners is that they were
continuing in service regularly but the opposite parties have not
taken them in the regular establishment.
9.            However, after considering the grievance of the
petitioners, the Establishment Committee of the Rourkela
Development authority conducted a meeting and it was held on
06.04.2010 considering the case of the petitioners apart from
other items. To adjudicate the case of the petitioner in
paragraph-5 with the heading “Adhoc DLRs” wherein a decision
has been taken by the RDA to regularize them, the relevant
portion which is being reproduced herein below:-
              “The adhoc employees        who have been
       engaged under RDA since 1978 to 1983 against
       the existing vacant posts and as per power
       conferred at item No.5 of the 3rd Authority meeting,
       by specially creating of 5 (five) additional posts as
       per the seniority and qualification.
              It has also been resolved by the Committee
       that the case of Sri Maheswar Biswal-petitioner
       no.2 (date of joining 22.05.1979) and Sri sukadev
       Acharya-petitioner no.1 (date of joining 1.4.1983)
       the Committee took a decision that they can be
       absorbed in the regular post of Chainman (new)
       and Ferro printer respectively only after final
       disposal of the Writ Petition filed by them against
       the authority pending before the Hon’ble High
       Court of Orissa.”
10.           The grievance of the petitioners is that in spite of
decision having been taken by the establishment committee in
the meeting held on 6.4.2010, the decision has not been

                                      4
implemented rather the authorities have taken a decision to
absorb the petitioner under work charge establishment.
11.           The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner
is that the petitioner cannot be absorbed under the work charge
establishment rather they have to be absorbed in the regular
establishment by regularizing them in service.          In view of the
submission and considering the ratio laid down by the judgment
rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Secretary, State of Karnataka and others vrs. Umadevi and
others reported in (2006) 4 SCC 1 at paragraph-53 it has been
held as follows:-
              53. “One aspect needs to be clarified. There
       may be cases where irregular appointments (not illegal
       appointments)         as      explained        in      S.V.
       Narayanappa,(1967) 1 SCR 128 :AIR 1967 SC 1071,
       R.N. Nanjundappa, (1972) 1 SCC 409 : (1972)2 SCR
       799 and B.N. Nagarajan, (1979) 4 SCC 507 and
       referred in para 15 above, of duly qualified persons in
       duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been made
       and the employees have continued to work for ten
       years or more but without the intervention of orders of
       the courts or of tribunals. The question of regularization
       of the services of such employees may have to be
       considered on merits in the light of the principles settled
       buy this Court in the cases above referred to and in the
       light of this judgment. In that context, the Union of
       India,    the      State    Governments       and     their
       instrumentalities should take steps to regularize as a
       one-time measure, the services of such irregularly
       appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in
       duly sanctioned posts but not under cover of orders of
       the courts or of tribunals and should further ensure that
       regular recruitments are undertaken to fill those vacant
       sanctioned posts that require to be filled up, in case
       where temporary employees or daily wagers are being
       now employed. The process must be set in motion
       within six months from this date. We also clarify that
       regularization, if any already made, but not sub judice,
       need not be reopened based on this judgment, but there
       should be no further bypassing of the constitutional

                                     5
      requirement and regularising or making permanent,
      those not duly appointed as per the constitutional
      scheme.”
12.          It is also settled in the judgment rendered by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Karnataka and
others vrs. M.L. Kesari and others reported in (2010) 9 SCC
247 at para-10 which is quoted herein below:-
      “10.          At the end of six months from the date of
      decision in Umadevi cases of several daily wage/ad-
      hoc/casual employees were still pending before
      courts. Consequently, several departments and
      instrumentalities did not commence the one-time
      regularization process. On the other hand, some
      government department or instrumentalities undertook
      the one-time exercise excluding several employees
      from consideration either on their ground that their
      cases were pending in courts or due to sheer
      oversight. In such circumstances, the employees who
      were entitled to be considered in terms of the para-53
      of the decision in Umadevi will not lose their right to
      be considered for regularization, merely because the
      one-time exercise was completed without considering
      their cases, or because the six months period
      mentioned in para-53 has expired. The one-time
      exercise should consider all daily wage/ad-
      hoc/casual employees who had put in 10 years of
      continuous service as on 10.04.2006 without availing
      the protection of any interim orders of courts or
      tribunals. If any employer had held the one-time
      exercise in terms of para-53 of Umadevi, but did not
      consider the cases of some employees who were
      entitled to the benefit of para-53 of Umadevi, the
      employer concerned should consider their cases also,
      as a continuation of the one-time exercise. The one-
      time exercise will be concluded only when all the
      employees who were entitled to be considered in terms
      of para -53 of Umadevi, are so considered.”
13.          It is also settled by the judgment rendered by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Jharkhand and
others vrs. Kamal Prasad and others reported in (2014) 7 SCC
223 at para-14, it has been held that:-

                                     6
       “14. The Division Bench of the High Court after
       referring to State of Karnataka v. Umadevi has clearly
       held that if a person has served for 10 years or more,
       then it is the duty of the State Government to consider
       his case for regularization in the post. The said
       conclusion came to be reached by relying on Articles 309,
       14, 16 of the Constitution of India. Relying upon
       Umadevi, the High Court has further referred to the
       judgment in State of Karnataka vrs. M.L. Kesari which is
       considered by this Court and this Court has clearly held
       that Umadevi casts duty upon the State Government to
       take steps to regularize the services of those irregularly
       appointed appointees, who had served for more than 10
       years without the benefit or protection of any interim
       order. Further in the said case, this Court has declared
       that is has been clearly ordered that one-time
       settlement/measure should be taken within six months
       i.e. from 10.04.2006.“
14.            By referring the said judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court it has been submitted by learned Senior
Counsel for the petitioner that RDA has taken a decision in view
of the judgment pronounced in the meeting held on 6.4.2010
but the same has not been implemented rather the authorities
have decided to absorb the petitioners under the work charge
establishment which is absolutely illegal and arbitrary decision
of the opposite parties.
15.            On the other hand learned counsel for the opposite
party-Rourkela Development Authority has argued the case and
by refuting the prayer of the petitioners stating that although
the decision has been taken by the RDA in its meeting held on
6.4.2010. However, same has not given effect by the RDA but it
cannot be said that the RDA has not taken any decision rather
decision has been taken for absorbing the petitioners under the
work charged establishment, the petitioners has been offered
the said order for their absorption in the work charge
establishment, it is the petitioners who refused to accept the

                                   7
same and as such no fault has been committed on the part of
the RDA.
16.          Further submission has been made by learned
counsel for the opposite party-RDA that RDA has taken a
decision in view of the resolution of Housing and Urban
Development dated 13.07.2013 wherein a decision has been
taken that the RDA on the basis of the provision laid down in
Odisha Work Charged Employees (Appointment and Conditions
of Services) Instructions, 1974      to regularize the petitioners
under the work charged establishment and the RDA being
under Housing and Urban Development Department and
accordingly RDA has taken a decision in the light of the
resolution of the Government dated 13.07.2013 and offered the
petitioners   for   their  absorption     in  the    work-charged
establishment.
17.          Heard the parties at length.
18.          The fact which is not disputed in this case is that
both the petitioners were performing their duties right from the
year 1979 and 1983 respectively.
19.          The contention of the petitioners is that they were
continuously discharging their duty has not been disputed by
the RDA. The fact that the petitioners have not discontinued
from service is also apparent that the meeting held on 6.4.2010
wherein the Committee has taken a decision to regularize the
petitioners taking into consideration the fact that the petitioners
are working in daily rated basis or as Work Sarkars in between
the year 1979 to 1983 have been regularized by creating five
additional posts apart from the existing post of RDA. Further

                                    8
decision has been taken by the Committee that the case of the
petitioners can be considered for absorption only after disposal
of the writ petition.
20.          This aspect of the matter which is the basis of the
decision held on 6.4.2010 the same has been annexed by the
petitioners in Misc. Case No.12945 of 2013 as contained in
Annexure-9 which has not been considered by the RDA or by
the State Government.
21.          In the light of the ratio laid down in the case of
Umadevi the proposition of law is settled if a daily rated
employee working for more than 10 years continuously without
any support of order or any interim measure passed by any
Court of law shall be regularized by way of one time exercise and
the said exercise has been directed to be completed within a
period of 6 months.
22.          These ratio stipulates that an employer if need of
service on the daily rated basis, the authority will be duty bound
to take them in regular establishment or if the authority is no
need of service, the authority will be at liberty to throw them out
from the service.
23.          In the case at hand the petitioners have been
working right from the year 1979 and 1983 regularly without
any break and this fact has not been disputed by the RDA. The
ration laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Umadevi squarely applicable to the case of the petitioners.
24.          Further reference of the judgment rendered by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case State of Karnataka and

                                   9
others vrs. M.L. Kesari reported in (2010) 9 SCC 247 is also
watch to be seen which has been decided in the light of the
observation at paragraph-53 of Umadevi (3) from their lordships
in the case of M.L. Kesari.
25.          The RDA after taking into consideration the settled
proposition of law has taken the matter in the meeting held on
6.4.2010 and accordingly decided to regularize in service. But
the benefit of the decision of the meeting held on 6.4.2010 has
not yet been implemented.
26.          Learned counsel for the RDA at this juncture has
submitted that the RDA also wanted to regularize in service but
it is due to the resolution of the Government dated 13.07.2013
the effect of the decision taken in the meeting held on
16.04.2010 has not been given.
27.          Perused the resolution dated 13.07.2013 issued by
the Housing and Urban Development Department (Annexure-
D/2) to the additional affidavit which has been referred on the
basis of the Odisha Work Charged Employees (Appointment and
Conditions of Services) Instructions, 1974 and by which the
decision has been taken to take service of the petitioner under
the work-charged establishment.
28.          So far as he implication of the resolution dated
13.07.2013 is concerned, the said resolution since been issued
on the basis of executive instruction issued in the year 1974 by
the Government of Odisha in Odisha Work Charged Employees
(Appointment and Conditions of Services) Instructions, 1974
and as such it needs to decide as to whether executive
instruction will be followed or the judicial pronouncement of the

                                      10
Hon’ble Supreme Court by its constitutional rule will prevail. To
adjudicate this issue it needs to refer Article 141 of the
Constitution     of   India   which     speaks    regarding   binding
proceeding laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
29.           The binding principle of the judgment has been
discussed in the recent judgment reported in AIR 2015 S.C. 375
in the case of Balwant Rai Saluja & Another vrs. Air India
Limited & others at paragraph-25 it has been held as follows:-
       “The binding nature of a decision would extend to
       only observations on points raised and decided by
       the Court and neither on aspects which it has not
       decided nor had occasion to express its opinion
       upon. The observation made in a prior decision on a
       legal question which arose in a manner not requiring
       any    decision   and   which     was   to   an   extent
       unnecessary, ought to be considered merely as an
       obiter dictum. A ratio of the judgment or the principle
       upon which the question before the Court is decided
       must be considered as binding to be applied as an
       appropriate precedent.”
30.           Since the resolution dated 13.07.2013 has been
passed by executive instruction in the year 1974, the day when
there is no judgment by the Hon’ble supreme Court as has been
referred in the case of Umadevi since the said judgment has
been pronounced on 10.04.2006 and as such after 10.04.2006
it will be presumed the instruction, 1974 which is contrary to
the rule of the Hon’ble Supreme Court at paragraph-53 will have
binding effect on the State Government. In view of the
proposition as contained in Article 141 of the Constitution of

                                   11
India as also held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Balwant Rai Saluja (supra).
31.          Since   the  decision    has been   taken   by  the
Government dated 6.4.2010 that after the judgment in the case
of Umadevi i.e. 10.04.2006. The ratio laid down by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Umadevi at paragraph-53 will
prevail over and above executive instruction in the year 1974 in
view of the said reason.
32.          Since as per the contention of learned counsel for
the RDA that although the same has not been stated on oath
but orally stated it is due to the resolution dated 13.07.2013,
decision has been taken by the meeting on 10.04.2006 has not
been implemented.
33.          This contention of learned counsel for the RDA is
absolutely contrary to the legal proposition because that
moment they have taken decision in the meeting 06.04.2010 to
have regularize the petitioner in service and they are awaiting
for the outcome due to pending writ petition and as such they
cannot take the plea that it is due to the resolution dated
13.07.2013 the petitioners have been offered to be engaged
under their work-charged establishment because if an employee
has been working since 1979 and 1983 without any break and
they have already performed their duty, an employee cannot be
permitted to superannuate from the service as daily rated or
work-charged employee and that is the reason the judgment has
been referred in the case of Umadevi if an employee has
completed 10 years of service without support of interim order
so that daily rated employee may be regularized and they get

                                      12
 pensionary benefit if admissible under the law after his/her
 superannuation.
 34.            In view of discussion made hereinabove I hereby
 direct the Rourkela Development Authority to take a decision in
 view of their own decision meeting held on 6.4.2010 for
 regularization the petitioners in service if they are coming under
 the parameter of the Paragraph-53 of Umadevi case, a required
 decision shall be taken within 10 weeks from the date of receipt
 of certified copy of this order.
         The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
                                               ……………………..
                                               S. N. Prasad, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
Dated the 25th June, 2015/RRJ


