                       HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                      W.P.(C) No.1201 of 2018
                  In the matter of application under Article 226 and 227 of the
                                          Constitution of India.
                                                    ---------
                  Sanatan Dash                                          …… Petitioner
                                                 - Versus-
                  CM-cum-Director, OPTC Ltd. BBSR                      ……      Opposite Parties
                  and others
           For Petitioner                        :M/s. Manoja Ku. Khuntia, G.R. Sethi,
                                                 J.K. Digal, B. Pattnaik.
           For Opposite Parties                  :
           PRESENT:
                    THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE SUJIT NARAYAN PRASAD
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                             Date of hearing and judgment : 20.03.2018
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. N. Prasad, J.          The instant writ petition has been filed for quashing the order
           dated 24.11.2017 as contained under Anenxure-3, whereby and where
           under the provisional pension sanctioned vide office order No.21091 dated
           12.12.2017, has been withheld with immediate effect as per Rule-7(1) of
           OCS Pension Rules, 1992 till finalization of the appeal against the
           judgment of conviction in connection with a judicial proceeding instituted

                                      2
against the petitioner for the offence under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
2.           Case of the petitioner in brief is that he was appointed as
Lower Division Clerk in the year 1965 under Orissa State Electricity Board
(hereinafter referred to as „Board‟) the Board after having been taken over
by the GRIDCO, he became the employee of the GRIDCO. He was promoted
to the rank of Upper Division Clerk and thereafter to the rank of Head
Clerk, while continuing as such he was posted as Jr. Accountant and
finally posted as Accountant, during the period he was working as
Accountant has discharged his duty to the utmost satisfaction of all
concerned. The Department of Energy, Govt. of Odisha issued a notification
dated 19.06.2005 bringing out a transfer scheme called as Odisha
Electricity Reform (Transfer of Transmission electrical activities) Scheme,
2005 for transfer of undertakings, assets liabilities, proceeding and
personnel of GRIDCO related to transmission of electricity to OPTCL named
as Odisha Power Transmission Corporation Ltd. (hereinafter called as
OPTCL), as per the said Scheme all the employees of GRIDCO were
transferred to OPTCL.
             The petitioner while working there has been implicated in a
criminal case related to an offence committed by him under Section 7 and
13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and
as such a T.R. Case No.26 of 1993 has been initiated in which he was

                                       3
convicted to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 2 years and pay fine of
Rs.1000/-. The petitioner has challenged the said judgment before this
Court in Criminal Appeal No.322 of 2003 which has been admitted for final
hearing by this Court        vide order dated 18.12.2003 and stayed the
realization of fine till disposal of the appeal and also released on bail by
furnishing the sureties and bonds of Rs.20,000/-.
             The petitioner on attaining the age of superannuation retired
from service on 31.08.2004, but after his retirement, even though the
Criminal Appeal was pending, his provisional pension was sanctioned vide
order dated 5.4.2005. While the petitioner was getting the provisional
pension, a show cause notice was issued to him on 23.10.2017 asking him
to respond to the said show cause notice as to why provisional pension
extended in his favour be not stopped since the provision to extend the
benefit of provisional pension as stipulated under Rule 66 of the OCS
(Pension) Rules, 1992 is only in case of departmental or judicial proceeding
but the moment the conviction order is there, the provision as contained
under Rule-66 of the OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 will not be applicable.
             The petitioner in the light of the said show cause has
responded to it by filing response dated 30.10.2017 stating therein that
under the provision of Rule-46 which provides that pension/gratuity shall
be forfeited of a Government servant who is dismissed or removed from
service. In the proviso, it is provided that the authority competent to

                                      4
dismiss or remove him from service may, if the case is receiving of special
consideration,    sanction   a   compassionate allowance       not    exceeding
two-third of pension or gratuity or both which would have been admissible
to him if he had retired on compensation pension, as such it was requested
that he may be allowed to draw provisional pension. The authority
thereafter has passed order on 24.11.2017 withholding the provisional
pension with immediate effect by exercising the power conferred under
Rule-7(1) of OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 till finalization of the appeal.
3.            The petitioner being aggrieved with the said order is before this
Court on the grounds that the order dated 24.11.2017 has not passed by
the competent authority since according to the learned counsel for the
petitioner the “pension sanctioning authority” happens to be the appointing
authority and the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the Corporation is
the appointing authority, he is only having the power to take decision for
withholding the provisional pension but the order has been passed by the
General    Manager    (HRD),   Pension,   hence    the  decision   is   without
jurisdiction.
              Second ground taken by the petitioner is that under the
provision of Rule-46, the pension can be forfeited only on the ground of
dismissal or removal from service but since the petitioner has allowed to
attain the age of superannuation, as such the same cannot be forfeited.

                                       5
              Third ground has been taken that the petitioner has
challenged the order conviction and sentence before        this   Court     by
preferring an appeal and as such the appeal being in continuation of the
trial court proceeding will amount to pendency of the criminal proceeding,
hence the provision of Rule 66 of the OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 will be
applicable.
4.            This Court, after hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner
and on appreciation of her argument, both on factual as well as legal aspect
has considered it by going through the statutory provision as contained in
OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992.
              It is the admitted position that the provision of OCS (Pension)
Rules, 1992 is applicable to the petitioner, as such the arguments
advanced on behalf of the petitioner is required to be appreciated on the
basis of legal provision as contained in OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 which
has been incorporated under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution
of India. The provision contains the definition of “Pension Sanctioning
Authority” under the provision of Rule 2(q), which speaks as follows:-
         Rule 2(q) “Pension Sanctioning Authority” means the
         appointing authority competent to make appointment to
         the post held by the retiring Government servant :
              [Provided that where the appointing authority is the
         Government or the Principal Secretary, Commissioner-
         cum-Secretary or Secretary to Government or Heads of
         Departments listed in Appendix-3 in the Orissa Service
         Code, may delegate the power of authority to sanction

                                      6
          pension to any subordinate officer not below the rank of
          Group-A, working under his/her direct control.]
              [Provided further that in case of sanction           of
          provisional pension of a retired               Government
          servant as provided under Rule 65 and Rule 66 of these
          Rules, the „Pension Sanctioning Authority‟ means the
          Head of Office under whom the retiring Government
          servant worked last even if such Head of Office is not the
          appointing authority of the said Government servant.]”
              It is evident from the said provision that the pension
sanctioning authority means the appointing authority competent to make
appointment to the post held by the retiring Government servant. Provided
that   where the appointing authority is the Government or the Principal
Secretary, Commissioner-cum-Secretary or Secretary to Government or
Heads of Departments listed in Appendix-3 in the Orissa Service Code, may
delegate the power of authority to sanction pension to any subordinate
officer not below the rank of Group-A, working under his/her direct control,
further provided that in case of sanction of provisional pension of a retired
Government servant as provided under Rule 65 and Rule 66 of these Rules,
the „Pension Sanctioning Authority‟ means the Head of Office under whom
the retiring Government servant worked last even if such Head of Office is
not the appointing authority of the said Government servant.
              Thus, it is evident that the first proviso speaks regarding the
authority to sanction pension while the second proviso speaks regarding
the power conferred upon the authority so far as the provisional pension

                                   7
which is to be extended under the provision of Rule 65 and 66 is
concerned.
             Rule 7 conferred power upon the Government to withhold or
withdraw pension, which speaks as follows :-
      “7. Right of Government to Withhold or Withdraw
      Pension(1) The Government reserve to themselves the right
      of withholding a pension or gratuity, or both either in full or
      in part, or withdrawing a pension in full or in part. whether
      permanently or for specified period and of ordering recovery
      from a pension or gratuity of the whole or part of any
      pecuniary loss caused to the Government, if in any
      departmental or judicial proceedings, the pensioner is
      found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence in duty
      during the period of his service including service rendered
      on re-employment after retirement: Provided that the
      Odisha Public Service Commission shall be consulted before
      any final orders are passed: Provided further that when a
      part of pension is withheld / withdrawn, the amount of
      such pension shall not be reduced below the amount of
      minimum limit. (2) (a) Such departmental proceedings
      referred to in sub-rule (1), if instituted while the
      Government servant was in service, whether before his
      retirement or during his reemployment, shall, after the final
      retirement of the Government servant, be deemed to be a
      proceedings under this rule and shall be continued and
      concluded by the authority by which they were commenced
      in the same manner as if the Government servant had
      continued in service: Provided that when the departmental
      proceedings are instituted by an authority, subordinate to
      Government that authority shall submit a report recording
      its findings to the Government. (b) such departmental
      proceedings as referred to in sub-rule (1) if not instituted
      while the Government servant was in service, whether
      before his retirement or during his reemployment(i) shall
      not be instituted save with the sanction of Government; (ii)
      shall not be in respect of any event which took place more
      than four years before such institution ; and (iii) shall be
      conducted by such authority and in such place as the
      Government may, direct and in accordance with the
      procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which

                                     8
       an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation
       to the Government servant during his service; (c) [deleted]
       Vide Finance Department Notification              No.33464/F.,
       dtd.04.08.2006 (d) In the case of Government servant
       who has retired on attaining the age of superannuation or
       otherwise and against whom any departmental or judicial
       proceedings are instituted or where departmental
       proceeding are instituted or where departmental
       proceedings are continued under clauses (a) and (b), a
       provisional pension as provided in rule 66 shall be
       sanctioned. 8 (e) Where the Government decide not to
       withhold or withdraw pension but order recovery of
       pecuniary loss from pension, the recovery shall not
       ordinarily be made at a rate exceeding one-third of the
       pension admissible on the date of retirement of a
       Government servant. Explanation-For the purpose of this
       rule,- (a) Departmental proceedings shall be deemed to be
       instituted on the date on which the statement of charges
       are issued to the Government servant or pensioner, or if the
       Government servant has been placed under suspension
       from the date of his suspension; and (b) judicial
       proceedings shall be deemed to be instituted,- (i) in the case
       of criminal proceedings, on the date on which the complaint
       or report of a Police Officer, of which the Magistrate takes
       cognizance, is made; and (ii) in the case of civil proceedings,
       on the date of presentation of the plaint in the Court.”
              It is evident from the provision of Rule-7(1) which confers
power upon the Government right of withholding a pension or gratuity, or
both either in full or in part, or withdrawing a pension in full or in part,
whether permanently or for a specified period and of ordering recovery from
a pension or gratuity of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to
the Government, if in any departmental or judicial proceedings the
pensioner found guilty of grave misconduct or negligence in duty during the
period of his service including service rendered on re-employment after
retirement subject to certain conditions mentioned therein.

                                      9
              Provision of Rule-65 contains the power to sanction provisional
pension i.e., in the case where the appointing authority is facing difficulty
in forwarding the pension papers referred to in Rule 62 to the Accountant
General, Orissa within the prescribed period therein and as such in the
intervening period, the provisional pension is allowed to be extended in
favour of the retiring employee.
              Rule 66 speaks regarding grant of provisional pension where
departmental or judicial proceeding is pending, the same is being
reproduced herein below:-
      “66. Grant of provision pension where departmental or
      judicial proceeding is pending – (1) Where departmental or
      judicial proceedings are pending in respect of Government
      servant on the date of his retirement, referred to in, he shall
      be paid a provisional pension not exceeding the maximum
      pension which would have been admissible on the basis of
      qualifying service up to the date of retirement of the
      Government servant; or if he was under suspension on the
      date of retirement up to the date immediately preceding the
      date on which he was placed under suspension.
      (2) No gratuity shall be paid to the Government servant until
      the conclusion of the Departmental or judicial proceedings
      and issue of final order thereon.
       Provided that where departmental proceedings have been
      instituted under Rule 16 of the Orissa Civil Services
      (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1962 for imposing
      any of the penalties specified in Clauses (i), (ii) and (iii-A) if
      Rule 13 of the said rules, the payment of gratuity shall be
      authorized to be paid to the Government servant.
      (3) The provisional pension shall be authorized during the
      period commencing from the date of retirement up to and
      including the date on which, after the conclusion of
      departmental or judicial proceeding, final orders are passed
      by the competent authority.
      (4) The authority competent to sanction pension shall be the
      authority competent to sanction provisional pension.

                                       10
       (5) Payment of provisional pension made under Sub-rule(1)
       shall be adjusted against final retirement benefits sanctioned
       to such Government servant upon conclusion of such
       proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the
       pension finally-sanctioned is less than the provisional
       pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either
       permanently or for a specified period.”
              It is evident that the provisional pension is to be extended in
favour   of  such    employees    against  whom    departmental   or  judicial
proceedings are pending on the date of his retirement, referred to in, he
shall be paid a provisional pension not exceeding the maximum pension
which would have been admissible on the basis of qualifying service up to
the date of retirement of the Government servant.
              It is further evident from the said provision that the
provisional pension shall be authorized during the period commencing from
the date of retirement up to and including the date on which, after the
conclusion of departmental or judicial proceeding, final orders are passed
by the competent authority and the authority competent to sanction
pension shall be the authority competent to sanction provisional pension.
5.            It is not in dispute that the petitioner was implicated in a
criminal case related to trial for by the competent court of criminal
jurisdiction for an offence under Section 13(2) read with Section 13 (1)(d) of
Prevention of Corruption Act in which he has been convicted to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for 2 years and pay fine of Rs.1000/-. The order of

                                     11
conviction was passed on 23.12.2003, while the petitioner was in service,
but he was neither been dismissed nor removed from service on
account of conviction in a criminal case rather allowed to retire from service
w.e.f. 31.08.2004 and provisional pension was sanctioned on 5.4.2005.
6.           The petitioner contends that the date when the provisional
pension was sanctioned the authority who has sanctioned the pension was
knowing the fact very well regarding his conviction but instead of passing
order of dismissal, he has been allowed to continue in service and
thereafter the provisional pension has also been extended in his favour,
further reason that the criminal appeal has been preferred by the petitioner
before this Court which has been admitted for final hearing and as such
there was no new facts which led the authority to come out with the
decision dated 24.11.2017 by withholding the provisional pension by
exercising the power conferred under Rule-7(1) of the OCS (Pension) Rules,
1992.
             Thus, the petitioner is claiming that if any illegality has been
committed contrary to the statutory provision, the same may be allowed to
continue.
7.           There is no dispute in the legal position that the provisional
pension is to be extended against whom the departmental proceeding or
judicial proceeding is pending. The day when the order of conviction was

                                      12
passed i.e. on 23.12.2003, the petitioner was in service and he was allowed
to    superannuate      from    service    w.e.f. 31.08.2004 and thereafter
he has been granted provisional pension w.e.f. 5.04.2005 and how it has
been granted, it is not known to the Court since it is contrary to the
provision of Rule 66. This is the only provision to sanction provisional
pension and the situation to extend the said benefit is only in case of
pendency of departmental or judicial proceeding but admittedly on the day
when the provisional pension was extended, the order of conviction was
there, which was passed on 23.12.2003 but the authority who has
sanctioned the provisional pension on 05.04.2005, knowing this fact very
well has sanctioned the pension which will be said to be contrary to the
provision of Rule 66 of the OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 and it is settled if
any decision taken by the authority contrary to the rules will be said to be
void-ab-initio and it is the duty of the Court, if it come to notice, it has to
be struck down by following the principle that illegality, if committed,
should not be allowed to be perpetuated and as such following the settled
position of law, the sanction of provisional pension is declared to be illegal.
8.            The ground which has been taken by the petitioner is that the
order dated 24.11.2017 has been passed by the General Manager (HRD)
Pension, who is not the competent authority, as such the same is fit to be
quashed, but this argument is not sustainable in view of the specific
provision as contained in second proviso, the definition of “Pension
Sanctioning Authority” as contained under the provision of Rule 2(q) of the

                                      13
OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 as indicated herein above which stipulates that
the situations of extending the benefit of provisional          pension   and
even though it can be sanctioned by the authority who is not the
appointing authority.
9.            This Court, after taking into consideration the second proviso
to the provision of Rule 2(q) of the OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992, is of the view
that the action of the General Manager (HRD), Pension in coming out with
the office order dated 24.11.2017 cannot be struck down by accepting the
plea of the petitioner that the General Manager (HRD), Pension happens not
to be the appointing authority, accordingly, the said plea is rejected.
10.           The petitioner has produced the copy of the office order dated
5.4.2005, which is the pension sanctioning order, which has been issued
by the order under the signature of the Manager (HRD), PEN but it is
evident from the order dated 24.11.2017 that the same has been issued by
the General Manager (HRD), Pension, who happens to be the ultimate
authority so far as pension is concerned under the Corporation and the GM
(HRD), as such his jurisdiction either to sanction provisional pension or
withholding cannot be doubted.
11.           The petitioner also claims that the order of withholding the
pension has been passed under the provision of Rule 7(1) of the OCS
(Pension) Rules, 1992, which is only for the purpose of withholding the

                                     14
pension and not the provisional pension but it is settled that merely on
account of reference of wrong provision, the order cannot be said to be
illegal and the authority by referring to the provision of Rule 7(1) of OCS
(Pension) Rules, 1992 has not gone into the implication of the same since
the occasion to exercise the power under Rule 7(1) of the OCS (Pension)
Rules, 1992     has not yet come because the petitioner has not yet been
given the final pension and the implication of Rule 7(1) of the OCS (Pension)
Rules, 1992 is only in the case of final pension and not in the case of
provisional pension rather the provisional pension will automatically be
ceased in case of final order passed after conclusion of the departmental or
judicial proceeding as per the provision as contained under sub-rule 3 of
Rule 66 of the OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992 as quoted above and as such
even ignoring the said provision of Rule 7(1) of the OCS (Pension) Rules,
1992, no material change will come rather after conviction in a criminal
case, the provisional pension will be ceased under the provision of sub-rule
3 of Rule 66 of OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992, hence the argument advanced
by the learned counsel for the petitioner is not sustainable in the eye of
law.
12.          Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that since
against the order of conviction, the petitioner has filed an appeal, the
appeal having been admitted and the order of sentence has been kept in
abeyance, hence it will amount to continuation of the proceeding of the trial
court and as such it would be said to be pending proceeding, hence the

                                      15
provision of Rule 66 will be applicable, but this argument is not
sustainable, in view of the fact that the moment,            the   trial Court
passes an order of conviction and sentence, it will be said to be concluded
so far as criminal trial is concerned and if any appeal is preferred under the
provision of Section 374 of the Cr.P.C. it will not be said to be continuation
of the criminal proceeding rather the higher Court will exercise its power by
way of separate proceeding to test the finding of the said judgment. The
convicted person can get the benefit, only if in the appeal, the order of
conviction will be stayed.
13.           But here in the instant case, the order of conviction has not
been stayed rather the sentence has been stayed in exercise of power
conferred under Section 389 of the Cr.P.C. and there is no dispute in the
settled position of law that sentence is the consequence of conviction and in
case of suspension of the sentence, the convicted person may come out of
judicial custody during pendency of the appeal and the conviction will be
said to be operative till it be reversed by the appellate court, hence the
contention raised by the petitioner is not acceptable to this Court,
accordingly the same is rejected.
14.           Learned counsel for the petitioner at last submits that since
the authorities were knowing this fact that there is an order of conviction
and the provisional pension has been extended, as such it be allowed to
continue but the same is not acceptable to this Court for the reason that if

                                              16
there is no illegality in the process or decision making process which is
contrary to the statutory provision, it has to be rectified the moment it
came to the notice of the authority or the court of law and if it will not to be
done it will amount to allow the illegality to perpetuate.
15.                  This Court, after following the said legal position is of the view
that the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner in this
regard is having no force, accordingly the same is rejected.
                     In view of the discussions made hereinabove and in the
entirety facts and circumstances, the petitioner fails to make out a case for
issuance of positive order in his favour.
                     Accordingly, the writ petition fails and is dismissed.
                                                                 ….…………….….
                                                                S.N. Prasad, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 20th March, 2018/RRJena


