                                HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                        O.J.C. No.14349 of 1998
          In the matter of an application under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
                                                 ---------
          Prasant Kumar Rout                                  ……           Petitioner
                                              - Versus-
          Chairman-cum-Managing Director,
          Grid Corporation of Orissa Limited,
          Bhubaneswar, Khurda.                                ……           Opposite Parties
                 For Petitioner               :     M/s. S.S. Das, B.R. Das & P.K. Nayak.
                 For Opposite Parties         :     M/s. B. K. Nayak, J.K. Khuntia &
                                                            S.S. Patra.
                                                           (For opposite parties no.1 and 4)
                                                   M/s. B. K. Pattnaik & S.S. Parida &
                                                           Smt. K. Mohanty.
                                                           (For opposite party no.2)
                                              ---------
          PRESENT:
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE SUJIT NARAYAN PRASAD
          ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                            Date of hearing and judgment : 28.11.2017
          ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. N. Prasad, J.        This writ petition under Article 226 and 227 of the
          Constitution of India has been filed whereby and whereunder the
          direction upon the opposite party-GRID Corporation of Orissa Limited has
          been sought to appoint the petitioner under the Rehabilitation Assistance

                                      2
Scheme     i.e.  by  way   of   compassionate                   appointment
commensurate        with    his    educational qualification     within      a
stipulated time.
2.           The brief fact of the case as per the pleading made by the
petitioner is that the father of the petitioner, who was an employee of
erstwhile Orissa State Electricity Board, has joined his duty there, but
while serving has died on 23.6.1994. The petitioner, after death of his
father,  has    made    an  application   for consideration   his  case    for
appointment     on   compassionate      ground   under   the   provision    of
Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme in the year 1995 along with all
documents, but no effect.
3.           The opposite party no.4, however, has intimated the mother of
the petitioner vide communication contained in Letter No.7521 dated
27.11.1997 to apply for financial assistance to the tune of Rs.1,00,000/-
on the death of her husband under Rehabilitation Assistance Regulation-
1996 of GRIDCO Limited instead of claiming compassionate appointment
of her son.     Hence, the instant writ petition has been filed by the
petitioner in view of the provision of Orissa Civil Service (Rehabilitation
Assistance) Rules, 1990 which has been adopted in view of the provision
of Rule-11 of the Orissa Civil Service (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules,
1990 and under the provision of Orissa State Electricity Board Service
(Rehabilitation    Assistance)   Regulation,   1992   (hereinafter   referred

                                     3
“Regulation-1992”) he is entitled to get appointment                    on
compassionate    ground    under    the  said provision.
4.          Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has submitted
that the death of petitioner’s father occurred on 26.3.1994 and he has
made an application for appointment under the Rehabilitation Assistance
Scheme on 24.2.1997 and as such, he is entitled to get appointment on
compassionate ground either by the GRIDCO Limited or by the CESCO
reason being that at the time of death, the provision of Regulation, 1992
was in force having been repealed w.e.f. 29.3.1996 and as such, since the
death has occurred prior to repeal of Regulation,1992, hence it cannot be
denied with the benefit of providing appointment on compassionate
ground under the provision of Regulation, 1992.
            He has submitted by rebutting the stand taken by the
GRIDCO Limited or the CESCO in the counter affidavit that the provision
of Regulation, 1992 since been repealed w.e.f. 29.3.1996 and the GRIDCO
Limited has been formulated w.e.f. 1.4.1996 and as such, since the death
was prior to the promulgation of Regulation, 1992, hence even if the
GRIDCO Limited has been created, the entire pending liability of the
erstwhile Orissa State Electricity Board will automatically shift upon the
GRIDCO Limited and thereby GRIDCO is accountable to provide
appointment on the compassionate ground.

                                       4
             He has further submitted that subsequently                   the
distribution has been given to the subsidiary Unit and the place where
the father of the petitioner was posted now the CESCO/CESU is there
and as such, either the GRIDCO Limited or the CESCO (CESU) is liable to
appoint the petitioner on compassionate ground under the provision of
Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme or the Regulation, 1992.
5.           The opposite party-GRIDCO Limited has appeared and filed
detailed counter affidavit inter alia therein it has been stated that there is
no liability upon the GRIDCO Limited.
             In view of the fact that the GRIDCO Limited has been
constituted w.e.f. 1.4.1996 and prior to transfer of asset and liability, the
provision of Regulation, 1992 which contains the provision to provide
appointment to the bereaved family of the deceased has been repealed
w.e.f. 29.3.1996 and since the provision under which the petitioner is
claimed to be appointed was no more in existence the date when the asset
and liability has been transferred in favour of GRIDCO Limited. Hence,
GRIDCO Limited is not liable to provide appointment to the petitioner.
             Learned counsel appearing for the opposite party-GRIDCO
Limited has submitted that by relying upon the Grid Corporation of
Orissa Limited Rehabilitation Assistance Regulation, 1997 and the
communication dated 30.3.1996 speaks that all pending rehabilitation
cases will be dealt with under the revised GRIDCO procedure while the

                                     5
Grid Corporation of Orissa Rehabilitation Assistance           Regulation,
1997 speaks regarding definition of pending application       under     the
provision of 3(k) which speaks regarding definition of pending application
as any application for rehabilitation assistance in respect of any Eligible
Employee made prior to the Effective Date other than a Disposed
Application while under the provision of Regulation-9, the detail reference
of pending applications have been given, according to which, on the
Effective Date all Pending Applications shall be deemed to be applications
made under these Regulation and shall be passed to the Head of the
Office of the Eligible Employee in respect of whom the application is being
made. Subject to Regulations 9.3 and 9.4, each such application shall be
reviewed,    determined   and    processed    in accordance    with   these
Regulations.
             He has further submitted that Grid Corporation Limited has
formulated the Regulation, 1997 wherein it has been provided to give
financial benefit to the tune of Rs.1,00,000/- and no appointment to be
provided under such category, as would be evident from the provision of
Regulation 5.6 and as such, the petitioner has got no case to seek an
appointment on the compassionate ground under the Rehabilitation
Assistance Scheme, 1990 or the Regulation, 1992..
6.           The CESCO has appeared and filed counter affidavit wherein
it has been stated that after creation of the GRIDCO Limited, distribution

                                      6
has been handed over to CESCO and the CESCO                is not liable  to
provide    appointment     on   compassionate ground in view of the fact
that after repealment of the Regulation, 1992, the GRIDCO Limited has
formulated a new regulation in the year 1997 which contains the
provision to provide financial assistance to the dependent of the deceased
employee.
             The State Government, while taking the decision of the
dissolution of the Orissa State Electricity Board, has taken over the asset
and liability and thereafter, it has been handed over to the GRIDCO
Limited after its creation w.e.f. 1.4.1996 and it is then, the CESCO has
been created in the year 1998 and as such, the CESCO is not liable to
provide appointment on compassionate ground in view of the fact that
there is no provision to appoint the dependent of the bereaved family on
compassionate ground in view of the provision of Regulation, 1996 and
1997 formulated by the GRIDCO Limited.
             In view of such submission, learned counsel appearing for the
opposite parties has submitted that the petitioner has failed to make out
a case.
7.           Heard the learned counsel for the parties and on appreciation
of the rival submission, it is evident that the petitioner happens to be the
son of the deceased employee, who dies in harness on 23.6.1994 and
thereby an appointment under the Orissa State Electricity Board Service

                                     7
(Rehabilitation Assistance) Regulation,1992 by filing an application in
this regard on 24.2.1997.
8.           The opposite parties have denied the claim of the petitioner on
the basis of certain legal position and as such, the same needs to be
referred herein before coming into the factual aspect of this case.
             It is evident from the material available on record that in the
State of Orissa there was an Orissa State Electricity Board. The State
Government has come out with Orissa State Electricity Regulation, 1995
whereby and whereunder the Orissa State Electricity Board has been
ceased to existence and in its place the GRIDCO Limited has come into
existence w.e.f. 1.4.1996. The State of Orissa has formulated a provision
known as Orissa Civil Service (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules, 1990 to
provide appointment on compassionate ground to the dependent of the
deceased employee.        The said provision contains a provision under
Rule-11, according to which, the provision of providing appointment on
compassionate ground has been held applicable to the public sector
undertaking to the State of Orissa and in view of such provision, the
Orissa   State    Electricity  Board  Service   (Rehabilitation  Assistance)
Regulations, 1992 has been formulated to provide appointment on
compassionate ground under the said provision to the dependent of the
deceased employee. The provision of Regulation, 1992 has been repealed
w.e.f. 29.3.1996 and thereafter, the asset and liability of the Orissa State

                                    8
Electricity Board has been taken over by the State Government and then
it  has    been  transferred  to   the  Grid Corporation     of    Orissa
Limited which came into existence w.e.f. 1.4.1996. The Grid Corporation
of Orissa Limited has started functioning w.e.f. 1.4.1996.      The Grid
Corporation of Orissa Limited has formulated its own regulation in the
year 1997 known as the Grid Corporation of Orissa Limited Rehabilitation
Assistance Regulation, 1997 by which it was resolved to provide
assistance for its employees and their dependents in the shape of
financial assistance wherein the provision has been made under the
provision of Regulation 5.6 to provide rehabilitation assistance which
shall be Rs.1,00,000/- which shall be paid in accordance with
Regulation-13.    The said regulation contains the provision to consider
the pending application which was submitted prior to the effective date
other than the disposed of application. The pending application has been
defined under the provision of 3(k). The description of pending
applications have been given in Regulation 9 whereby and whereunder it
has been provided that on the Effective Date all the Pending Applications
shall be deemed to be the applications made under these Regulations and
shall be passed to the Head of the Office of the Eligible Employee in
respect of whom the application is being made. Subject to Regulations
9.3 and 9.4, each such application shall be reviewed, determined and
processed with these regulations.

                                      9
            It is further evident that the GRIDCO Limited has taken
such    decision    in   the    light   of  the communication            dated
30.3.1996 which speaks about dealing with the pending applications
under the rehabilitation cases under the revised GRIDCO procedure, i.e.,
the Regulation, 1997.
            It is further evident that the provision of Rule-11 of the
Rehabilitation Scheme has also been repealed w.e.f. 7.10.1998.
9.          The opposite party has annexed a Government Notification
published on 7.10.1998, i.e., related to the General Administration
Department of the State Government and as such, is of got no bearing
with respect to the case involved regarding the liability of the GRIDCO
Limited or the CESCO.        In the light of this legal as well as factual
position, the case of the petitioner needs to be considered.
10.         The admitted position in this case is that the father of the
petitioner has died on 26.3.1994 which is before the dissolution of the
Orissa State Electricity Board, before the repealment of Regulation, 1992
w.e.f. 29.3.1996 and before creation of the GRIDCO Limited w.e.f.
1.4.1996 and as such, admittedly the father of the petitioner was not an
employee at that time of death was of GRIDCO Limited and as such, this
Court is of the view that the GRIDCO Limited is not the competent
authority to take decision in this regard and in the light of this, it is to be

                                      10
scrutinized as to whether the action of the GRIDCO         Limited  in   not
providing appointment to the petitioner is proper or not?
11.          Admittedly, the CESCO has come into existence in the year
1998, i.e., after the death of the father of the petitioner.     Hence, the
CESCO cannot be held liable to consider the case of the petitioner to
provide appointment on compassionate ground reason being that the
death is prior to the creation of CESCO.
12.          It is evident that the provision of Regulation, 1992 has been
repealed w.e.f. 29.3.1996 and thereafter, the Company Secretary,
GRIDCO Limited has issued a communication under letter 8512 dated
30.3.1996 to consider all pending rehabilitation cases which was decided
to be dealt with under the revised GRIDCO procedure.
13.          The Grid Corporation of Orissa Limited has come out with a
regulation    as   Grid  Corporation   of   Orissa  Limited   Rehabilitation
Assistance     Regulations,   1997    which    has  been    made   effective
w.e.f.1.4.1996, as would be evident from the communication dated
16.3.2012 which has been produced by the learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner and while furnishing the information under the provision of
Right to Information Act, it has been said therein that the provision of
GRIDCO Rehabilitation Assistance Regulation, 1997 was approved by the
Board of Directors in its 21st meeting held on 23.10.1997 and came into
force w.e.f. 1.4.1996, in view thereof, there is no confusion and dispute

                                     11
with respect to the factual aspect that on or from 1.4.1996 the provision
of the Grid Corporation of Orissa Limited Rehabilitation          Assistance
Regulation, 1997 will be applicable.
14.          As has been stated hereinabove that the Grid Corporation has
decided to consider the pending rehabilitation cases under the provision
of revised grid procedure and the pending applications have been defined
under the provision of 3(k) of Grid Corporation of Orissa Limited
Rehabilitation Assistance Regulations, 1997, according to which, the
definition of pending applications is that any application for rehabilitation
assistance in respect of any eligible employee made prior to the effective
date other than the disposed of application.
             It is further evident from the provision as contained in
Regulation-9 of 1997 that on the Effective Date all the Pending
Applications shall be deemed to be applications made under these
Regulations and shall be passed to the Head of the Office of the Eligible
Employee in respect of whom the application is being made. Hence, it is
evident that since the father of the petitioner has died on 26.3.1994 and
the petitioner has made an application for appointment under the
Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme on 24.2.1997, the date when the
provision of Regulation, 1997 has came into force. As such, the case of
the petitioner is to be considered in the light of the provision of the
Regulation of 1997 of GRIDCO and not on the basis of the Regulation,

                                       12
1992 in view of the fact that the provision or Regulation, 1992 has been
repealed w.e.f. 29.3.1996, i.e., after the death of the father of the
petitioner since the death has occurred on 26.3.1994 while the provision
of Orissa State Electricity Board Service (Rehabilitation Assistance)
Regulation, 1992 was repealed w.e.f. 29.3.1996, but the date of death
would not be material date to consider the applicability of the provision of
law, rather the date of making an application for getting appointment on
compassionate ground would be the material date.
15.          In view of the definition of pending application as given under
the provision of Regulation 3(k) read with Regulation-9 of Regulation,
1997 and admittedly on that date, the provision of Regulation, 1997 was
in force wherein there is no provision to provide appointment on
compassionate ground, rather the provision has been made to extend
financial benefit.
16.          It is settled that the appointment on compassionate ground
cannot be held as matter of right, since it is exception of regular
procedure of appointment and as such, it is to be provided under the
provision of scheme and if there is no provision in the scheme to provide
appointment on compassionate ground, the appointment on that ground
cannot be claimed by the dependent of the deceased employee.
17.          Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon
a Government Resolution issued on 14.10.1998 by putting reliance upon

                                     13
the same, it has been stated that the provision of Rehabilitation
Assistance Scheme has been extended in favour of the employees of
the public sector undertakings w.e.f. 24.9.1990 and as such, it is
incorrect to say that the petitioner may be deprived from the said benefit,
but this argument is not sustainable in the eye of law in view of the fact
that the Government while repealing the provision of Rule-11 of the
Regulation, 1990 has exercised the power conferred under Article-309 of
the Constitution of India which has got a statutory force, but the
resolution dated 14.10.1998 is by way of resolution although in the name
of His Excellency, the Governor of the State, but there is no dispute about
the settled proposition of law that any decision taken by the State under
the provision of Article 309 of the Constitution of India has got its
statutory force over and above any decision taken by the State by way of
resolution since the resolution cannot override the statute rather, it is
only to supplement and not to supplant and if there is any inconsistency
in between the legislation promulgated by the State in exercise of power
conferred Article 309 of the Constitution of India and decision by way of
resolution, the statutory mandate taken under the provision of Article
309 of the Constitution will prevail upon the resolution.
18.         Here in the instant case, the deletion of provision of Rule-11
which contains the provision applicability of Rehabilitation Assistance
Scheme to all the public sector undertakings of the State Government has

                                        14
been deleted in exercise of power conferred Article             309    of    the
Constitution of India, but the resolution dated              14.10.1998   is  in
derogation to the provision of Article-309 and as such, this Court is of the
considered view that resolution dated 14.10.1998 will not prevail upon
the statutory provision enshrined under Article-309 whereby and
whereunder the provision of Rule-11 of the Regulation, 1990 has been
repealed.     As such, the petitioner cannot be derive any benefit on the
basis of resolution dated 14.10.1998, as claimed.
19.            In view of the entirety of the facts and circumstances as
narrated hereinabove, the petitioner cannot be held to be entitled to get
appointment on compassionate ground.
               Accordingly, the writ petition fails and it is dismissed.
                                            …...………………
                                              S.N. Prasad, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 28th November, 2017/D. Aech


