                        HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                      W.P.(C) No.19010 of 2011
            In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the
            Constitution of India.
                                                     ---------
                   M/s.Orissa Hydro Power Corporation Ltd.                      ……     Petitioner
                                       - Versus-
                   Asst. Provident Fund Commissioner &
                   OIC, SRO and another
                                                                        ……      Opposite Parties
            For Petitioner                :M/s. D. P. Nanda, R. K. Kanungo, S. Das and
                                          B. P. Panda, learned Advocates
            For Opp.Parties               :Mr. Mishra
            PRESENT:
                          THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE S.N.PRASAD
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Date of hearing and judgment: 31.03.2016
            ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. N. Prasad, J.           In this writ petition the order passed by the Appellate Tribunal
            as contained in Annexure-1 passed in ATA No.741(10) of 2005 as well as
            the order of assessment passed U/s.7-A of the Employees‟ Provident Fund
            and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 as contained in Annexure-3 are
            under challenge.
            2.             The brief facts of the case of the petitioner is that being an
            establishment in the name of Orissa Hydro Power Corporation Ltd. the workers
            working in Quality Control Assurance Division of the Quality Control Division,
            Mukhiguda        has been brought under the purview of determination of

                                        2
assessment by the authorities in exercise of power conferred U/s.7-A of the
Employees‟ Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provision Act, 1952 (herein
after referred to as „The Act, 1952‟) with respect to the period from 1/98 to
11/2001.
              The ground taken by the petitioner in challenging the proceeding
U/s.7-A is that the Quality Control Division was abolished w.e.f.31.3.2000 and
during its operation it was neither a factory till 23.9.1999 and as such will not
come within the meaning of Sec.2(g) of the Act, 1952, nor an establishment
having been notified by the Central Government by official Gazette by virtue of
power conferred u/s.1(3)(b) of the Act, 1952, the authorities without any
application of mind has brought the Quality Control Division of Orissa Hydro
Power Corporation under the purview of Sec.7-A of the Act, 1952, that to
without providing adequate and sufficient opportunity of being heard, against
which an appeal has been preferred before the EPF Appellate Tribunal raising
the grievance regarding applicability of the Act, but the Appellate authority has
not appreciated this aspect of the matter and affirmed the order passed by the
authorities passed U/s.7-A of the Act, 1952.
              The specific case of the petitioner is that in the Quality Control
Division not more than 20 workmen have ever worked regularly and that is the
requirement to bring an establishment under the purview of the Act, 1952. It
has been contended that the establishment is a factory and it was yet to be
commissioned for the manufacturing process and as such it cannot come
under the purview of the Act, 1952.
3.            Counter affidavit has been filed by the opposite parties, inter alia
therein it has been stated that the provision of the Act, 1952 is well applicable
and the authorities after going through the list of the employees working under
the Quality Control Division from which the authorities have found that 21
numbers of workers are working, hence there is no dispute about the fact
regarding applicability of the Act, 1952.
              It has been contended that the petitioner has been provided with
adequate and sufficient opportunity, the representative of the establishment

                                        3
put his appearance, relevant documents have been produced by him, like the
wages particulars of 11 DLR, casual NMR, details of VSS employees,
subsidiary    cash    book,   acquittance   roll or contingent Khalashi, salary
bill of work-change employees, Guard file of NMR vouchers, etc. and on the
basis of the above documents the authorities have came to conclusion that the
petitioner-establishment is coming under the definition of employer as per the
definition given U/s.2(f) of the Act, 1952.
               It has been contended that the work in question were related to
the work of the petitioner – establishment and as per definition of „employee‟ if
any body has participated in the work of the establishment directly or
indirectly such type of worker would be said to be employee of the said
establishment.
4.             It has been contended rebutting the argument by learned counsel
for the petitioner that since 20 workers have never performed their duties
regularly, hence the requirement given U/s.1(3)(b) has not been fulfilled. But it
has been contended by learned counsel representing the opposite party that it
is not that if a worker working under the establishment if renders service only
for one or two days will not get the coverage of the provision of the Act, 1952
and to substantiate his argument he has referred para 26 of the Act, 1952.
               He further submits that the petitioner has raised all his point
before the regional authority in course of hearing of the proceeding u/s.7-A of
the Act, 1952 and even before the appellate authority and thereafter the
concurrent finding has come and as such this court may not interfere in order
to reverse the fact finding given by the authorities concerned by assuming the
power of an appellate court.
               He contends that the purpose of the Act is to be seen which has
been meant for benefit of the poorer section of the workers for whom there is
no benefit to be given in course of service or after their retirement.
               In the light of this submission it has been submitted that the
order needs no interference by this court.

                                          4
5.             Heard the learned counsels for the parties and perused the
documents on record.
               The sole grievance raised by the petitioner in this writ petitioner
is that the petitioner – establishment is not coming under the purview of the
Act, 1952. In order to appreciate this argument it needs to refer Sec.1(3)(b) of
the Act, 1952, the definition of employee as given u/s.2(f) and para 26 of the
Act, 1952 which are reproduced herein below:-
       “2(f) “employee” means any person who is employed for wages in any
kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in connection with the work of an
establishment, and who gets his wages directly or indirectly from the employer,
and includes any person,-
       (i)     Employed by or through a contractor in or in connection with the
               work of the establishment;
       (ii)    Engaged as an apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged
               under the Apprentices Act, 1961 (52 of 1961), or under the
               standing orders of the establishment;”
               “1.(3)(a) To every establishment which is a factory engaged in any
       industry specified in Schedule I and in which twenty or more persons
       are employed, and
               (3)(b) to any other establishment employing twenty or more
       persons or class of such establishments which the Central Government
       may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:
               Provided that the Central Government may, after giving not less
       than two months‟ notice of its intention so to do, by notification in the
       Official Gazette, apply the provisions of this Act to any establishment
       employing such number of persons less than twenty as may be specified
       in the notification.”
               “[26. Classes of employees entitled and required to join the fund.-
       (1)(a) Every employee employed in or in connection with the work
       of a factory or other establishment to which this scheme applies,
       other than an excluded employee, shall be entitled and required to
       become a member of the Fund from the day this paragraph comes
       into force in such factory or other establishment.

                              5
       (b) Every employee employed in or in connection with the
work of a factory or other establishment to which this Scheme
applies, other than an excluded employee, shall also be
entitled and required to become a member of the fund from
the day this paragraph comes into force in such factory or other
establishment if on the date of such coming into force, such
employee is a subscriber to a provident fund maintained in
respect of the factory or other establishment or in respect of any
other factory or establishment (to which the Act applies) under the
same employer:
       Provided that where the Scheme applies to a factory or other
establishment on the expiry or cancellation of an order of
exemption under section 17 of the Act, every employee who but for
the exemption would have become and continued as a member of
the Fund, shall become a member of the fund forthwith.
       (2) After this paragraph comes into force in a factory or
other establishment, every employee employed in or in connection
with the work or that factory or establishment, other than an
excluded employee, who has not become a member already shall
also be entitled and required to become a member of the Fund
from the date of joining the factory or establishment.
       (3) An excluded employee employed in or in connection with
the work of a factory or other establishment, to which this Scheme
applies shall, on ceasing to be such an employee, be entitled and
required to become a member of the Fund from the date he ceased
to be such employee.
       (4) On re-election of an employee or a class of employees
exempted under paragraph 27 or paragraph 27-A to join the Fund
or on the expiry or cancellation of an order under that paragraph,
every employee shall forthwith become a member thereof.
       (5) Every employee who is a member of a private provident
fund maintained in respect of an exempted factory or other
establishment and who but for exemption would have become and
continued as a member of the fund shall, on joining a factory or
other establishment to which this Scheme applies, become a
member of the fund forthwith.
       (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this paragraph
[an officer not below the rank of an Assistant Provident Fund
Commissioner] may, on the joint request in writing, of any
employee of a factory or other establishment to which this Scheme

                                       6
       applies and his employer, enroll such employee as a member or
       allow him to contribute more than rupees [rupees six thousand
       and five hundred] of his pay per month if he is already a
       member of the Fund and thereupon such employee shall be
       entitled to the benefits and shall be subject to the conditions of
       the Fund, provided that the employer gives an undertaking in
       writing that he shall pay the administrative charges payable and
       shall comply with all statutory provisions in respect of such
       employee.]”
               From perusal of the provisions it is evident that in an
establishment if a factory engaged in any industry specified in Schedule I in
which twenty or more persons are employed and to any other establishment
employing twenty or more persons or class of such establishments which the
Central Government may by notification in the official gazette specified in its
behalf will come under the purview of the Act, 1952.
               From perusal of Annexure-A/1 which is the list of 21 employees
furnished by the representative of the petitioner- establishment duly been
signed by the concerned Executive Engineer and other documents reference of
which has been made in the order passed U/s.7-A of the Act like the wages
particulars of 11 DLR, casual NMR, details of VSS employees, subsidiary cash
book, acquittance roll or contingent Khalashi, salary bill of work-change
employees, Guard file of NMR vouchers, etc. it is evident that the authorities
have taken a conscious decision regarding applicability of the Act.
               The submission of learned counsel representing the petitioner
that the list as contained in Annexure-A/1 is not a list of the workers working
regularly under the establishment and if the workers are not working regularly
they cannot be taken into consideration as the strength of the worker cannot
be taken into consideration for bringing the establishment under the purview
of the Act. But this submission cannot be accepted for the reason of the
specific wording of Sec.1(3)(a) or (b) which stipulates that the establishment
will come under the purview of the Act if 20 or more persons are employed.
There is no reference regarding the period.

                                        7
              This has further been clarified from the definition of „employee‟ as
contained under Sec.2(f) which means any person who is employed for
wages in any kind of work manual or otherwise in or in connection with the
work of an establishment, and who gets his wages directly or indirectly from
the employer, even if employed by or through a contractor or in connection
with the work of the establishment.
              Thus if a worker will be engaged for the purpose of taking his
service for an establishment the worker will be said to be an employee within
the meaning of Sec.2(f) and after taking into consideration this definition of
employee the authorities on perusal of the list of the workers as contained in
Annexure-A/1 and other relevant documents as has been referred herein above
has come to a specific finding regarding applicability of the Act, 1952 to the
establishment.
              The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that it is
Quality Control Division and the work has not yet been commenced, but that
does not help the petitioner for the reason that the Quality Control Division is
also a division of the petitioner – establishment and the work of the workers
have been taken even for the construction work which has been found to be
substantiated by various documents as has been referred in the order passed
u/s.7-A.
              Even the manufacture process has been brought under the
purview of the Act, 1952 by virtue of the Government notification in exercise of
power conferred U/s.1(3)(b) of the Act as because building and construction
has also been brought under the purview of the Act by virtue of notification
issued by the Government of India dtd.31st October 1980.
              It has not been disputed by the petitioner that the Quality
Control Division is not a part of the petitioner – establishment, only dispute
raised that the manufacturing process or the function of the Quality Control
Division has not yet started but the same is immaterial for the purpose of
applicability of the Act, 1952 in view of the definition of „employee‟ as given
U/s.2(f) of the Act as referred herein above.

                                         8
               The contention of learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is
that the authorities while passing the order U/s.7-A or u/s.7-I has not
appreciated all these aspects of the matter, hence             the   matter  needs
hearing afresh.
               But this argument has got no force for the reason that the
authority in course of enquiry U/s.7-A and the Appellate Tribunal has taken
into consideration all the document which has been produced by the
representative of the establishment and after making reference of the same and
on application of the statutory provision finding has been given regarding
applicability of the Act, 1952 and thereafter assessment has been made.
               The order passed U/s.7-A has been affirmed by the Appellate
Tribunal after appreciating the submission advanced on behalf of learned
counsel for the petitioner – establishment and after taking into consideration
the judgments pronounced in this regard by the various High Courts and come
to the conclusion that no inconsistency noticed in the order passed by the
authority and in view of the fact that this court sitting under Art.226 of the
Constitution of India and in exercise of power of judicial review is only required
to see whether the decision making process is proper or not.
               In the light of the discussion made herein able, in my considered
view the authority and the Appellate Tribunal have passed a well reasoned
order based upon various documents placed before him after providing
sufficient opportunity which is in consonance with the rule and it would not be
proper for this Court to reverse the fact finding based upon the relevant
documents to reverse the fact finding sitting against an appellate Court.
               In view thereof there is no merit in this writ petition.
               Accordingly, the case is dismissed being devoid of merit.
                                                        ….…………………
                                                          S.N.Prasad, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 31st March, 2016/mkp


