                         HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                                         O.J.C. No.9308 of 1995
            In the matter of applications under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution
                                                     of India.
                                                    ---------
                          Amar Kumar Panigrahi                         ……      Petitioner
                                      - Versus-
                          State of Odisha and Others                   ……       Opposite Parties
           Counsel for Petitioner        : M/s. Manoj Kumar Mohanty, N. R. Rout, B. P.
                                         Routray, M/s. K. P. Mishra, J. P. Khandayat, S.
                                         Mohapatra and S. Mallick.
           Counsel for Opp.Parties : Mr. Nirod Kumar Sahoo, M/s. D. P. Dash, D. K.
                                         Swain and Standing Counsel for School and Mass
                                         Education Department.
           PRESENT:
                      THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE SUJIT NARAYAN PRASAD
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Date of hearing and judgment: 31.10.2017
           ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. N. Prasad, J.          This writ petition is under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution
           of India for quashing Annexure 13 and 14 dtd.25.01.1990 and dtd.04.03.1990
           respectively whereby and where under the opposite party no.6 has been
           appointed as Science teacher as also Annexure 15 dtd.20.11.1995 passed by
           the Director, Secondary Education, Orissa whereby and where under the
           appeal preferred by the petitioner has been found to be without merit and
           accordingly quashed.

                                           2
2.            The brief fact of the case is that the petitioner had been appointed
vide order dtd.25.06.1987 as Science Teacher, accordingly            he  joined in
service with effect from 02.07.1987. The petitioner was an untrained teacher
and as per the yardstick dtd.08.07.1981 he should be a trained teacher, he
made representation to the Secretary of the School on 24.07.1987 seeking
permission for making application to the Director of Correspondence Courses,
Utkal University for undergoing B.Ed. training, for making application,
experience certificate was required to be attached with the application form,
hence the Secretary had issued an experience certificate on 24.07.1989 which
has been forwarded by the Headmaster of the School vide his letter
dtd.24.07.1989 to the Inspector of Schools for his countersignature and on
26.07.1989 the Inspector of Schools countersigned the experience certificate
issued by the Secretary of the School. The petitioner, on this pretext had made
application to the Director of Correspondence Courses, Utkal University for
undergoing B.Ed. training and after duly been selected, he made a
representation before the Secretary on 09.11.1989 to permit him to take
admission    in  B.Ed.    correspondence     course   for   the  session  1989-90,
accordingly permission was granted, the petitioner has also made application
for getting experience certificate to be produced at the time of admission which
has been issued by the competent authority, but the petitioner, in the
meanwhile, has been terminated from service, that too without any show cause
notice on 25.01.1990. Accordingly he preferred an appeal before the Director,
Secondary Education, Odisha on 16.02.1990 and when the appeal was
pending, opposite party no.6 was appointed against the post which was

                                         3
occupied by him. The Director has heard the appeal at length and passed the
order, however, rejected the same by approving the order of termination.
3.            The petitioner, in this writ petition, has assailed the order of
termination as also the engagement of opposite party no.6 and the order
passed by the appellate authority on the ground that before terminating his
services no show cause notice has been issued. The managing committee has
taken a stand before the appellate authority that the show cause notices have
been issued repeatedly by way of certificate of posting, but according to the
petitioner, issuing notice under certificate of posting is not the accepted
method of service of notice rather it should have been personally served or sent
through registered post but only in order to make out a case and create a
document the certificate of posting has been fabricated by one of the members
of the managing committee who happens to be the post peon of the area, as
such the principle of natural justice has not been followed.
              Further ground has been taken that there is no unauthorized
absence by the petitioner rather, he, for shortly, was absent but on the ground
of medical illness and if an opportunity would have been provided to him, he
would have convinced the authority regarding his unauthorized absent but the
opportunity have not been provided to him, as such the order of termination is
absolutely illegal and not sustainable in the eye of law.
4.            Learned counsel for the petitioner, while arguing the case, has
vehemently submitted that the documents suggest that the petitioner has got

                                         4
permission to get B.Ed. training and absence has got no nexus with the period
of  training.   He   submits    that there  is   no unauthorized     absence   by
the petitioner and only in order to make out a room for opposite party no.6, he
has been terminated from service vide letter dtd.25.01.1990 by referring
therein that in spite of opportunity having been granted to him, he has not
responded to the same, hence terminated from service, while the fact is
otherwise that he has not been given any opportunity to defend himself, hence
the order of termination is in violation of the principle of natural justice, as
such not sustainable in the eye of law.
5.            Per contra, learned counsel appearing for opposite party – State as
well as opposite party no.6 have vehemently opposed the argument advanced
on behalf of the petitioner by submitting that the petitioner was unauthorizedly
absent for the period from 18.12.1989 to 18.01.1990 and to that effect three
show cause notices have been issued to him but he has not responded to the
same, accordingly the petitioner has been terminated from service for the
larger issue and in the public interest so that new appointment may be made
to impart teaching to the students studying in the school in question. It has
been contended by referring to the Attendance Register that he has been
shown to be absent for the said period, as such the Attendance Register cannot
be disputed by the petitioner since there is signature of the petitioner when he
has attended the office.
              It has been submitted that the petitioner has taken a ground of
medical ailment by submitting a certificate from the Doctor from 27.07.1989 to

                                         5
18.09.1989 and due to advice of the Doctor he was on complete bed rest since
he was suffering from Typhoid fever.
             It has further been submitted that the plea taken by the petitioner
that the show cause notice since been sent through certificate of posting is
fabricated one, is not true since the certificate of posting is also an acceptable
method of service of notice upon the party and accordingly the notice has been
served to be effected upon the petitioner, simultaneously by issuing three show
cause notices, but he has failed to respond to the same, as such the Managing
Committee, having no option but to terminate the petitioner from service.
             It has been submitted that the petitioner was already got his
admission for getting B.Ed. training, as would be evident from the Course
Leaving Certificate issued by the Director of Correspondence Courses, Utkal
University and from its perusal it is evident that he has taken admission on
16.8.1989 and it is admission on the part of the petitioner that he made an
application for getting sanction of the leave by making a representation on
9.11.1989 while the fact is that he has already taken admission on 16.8.1989
itself which also shows the conduct of the petitioner that after getting
admission he is making application for sanction of study leave.
             It has further been contended that the medical certificate
submitted by him is nothing but an afterthought to make out his defence to
substantiate the absent actually he was not ill during the relevant time as
because he has shown to suffering from Typhoid fever from 27.7.1989 to

                                          6
18.9.1989 but during that period he was also undergoing his correspondence
course in the Utkal University as would be evident            from  the  Course
Leaving Certificate dtd.9.10.1994 annexed as annexure-B/5 to the counter
affidavit filed by the opposite party nos.4 and 5.
               Learned counsel, on the strength of these submissions, has
submitted that the petitioner has failed to make out a case of making
interference with the order of the Director by seeking direction from this court
to issue a writ of certiorari because the director has taken into consideration
each and every aspect of the matter and after going into the same as also the
subsequent enquiry conducted by the Deputy Inspector of Schools who has
conducted the enquiry in order to get the matter enquired into so that the
veracity of the fact can be ascertained and the enquiry committee has found
the allegations leveled against the petitioner as true, the same has been taken
into consideration by the Director, Secondary Education while hearing the
appeal, hence there is no perversity in the finding, as such this court, sitting
under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India may not exercise the
power as an appellate court in order to reverse the fact finding.
6.             Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, in response, has
submitted that the Attendance Register which has been annexed in the
counter affidavit is fabricated one and the same has been fabricated only for
the purpose of creating defence by the management.

                                          7
              He has further submitted that even the enquiry committee has
conducted the enquiry prior to the order of termination, as such the
same has got no value in the eye of law.
7.            Heard the learned counsels for the parties and perused the
documents available on record.
              This court, after appreciating the rival submission of the parties,
has come across with the factual aspect of the case. The admitted position in
the instant case is that the petitioner was appointed as Science Teacher in the
School in question vide order dtd.25.06.1987 and accordingly joined the
service w.e.f. 02.07.1987. The petitioner was not a trained candidate at the
time of getting his engagement and as per the yardstick dtd.8.7.1981 the
requirement for being a teacher was of having training certificate or B.Ed.,
hence he made representation to the Secretary of the School seeking
permission to get B.Ed. training by way of correspondence course. The
petitioner has also made application for getting experience certificate which
was required for getting admission to get training under the correspondence
courses which has also been granted by the competent authority and
accordingly he has taken admission under the Directorate of Correspondence
Courses from 16.8.1989 to 31.5.1990. The petitioner, while working, has been
terminated from service w.e.f. 25.1.1990. The petitioner has assailed the order
of termination mainly on the ground of not following the principle of natural
justice since no show cause notice has ever been served upon him.

                                          8
             This court after appreciation of the factual aspects on the basis of
the material available on record, has found that the show cause notice has
been issued to the petitioner on 03.01.1990 thereafter one reminder was
issued on 11.01.1990 and then a fresh show cause notice was issued on
19.01.1990 asking the petitioner to give reply of continuous absence from
service for the period from 08.12.1989 to 18.01.1990. The management has
taken the plea that in spite of repeated show cause notices having been issued
upon the petitioner, he has not chosen to reply, hence terminated, while the
plea of the petitioner is that he has not received show cause notice since it has
been sent under certificate of posting which is not an acceptable method for
service of notice.
             It is not in dispute that while terminating the service of an
employee the principle of natural justice is to be followed by the employer since
it leads to civil consequence. It is evident from the pleading made in the
counter affidavit supported by documents that show cause notices have been
issued, however not under registered post, rather under certificate of posting.
The question of service of notice is under dispute.
             This court, in this situation, has considered the factual aspect as
to whether even if the petitioner would have given reply, is there any chance of
change in situation since the opposite parties have annexed the copy of the
Attendance Register showing the fact that the petitioner was absent for the
said period.

                                           9
             The considered view of this court is that the petitioner has been
shown to be absent, even accepting the dispute raised         by   the  petitioner
regarding service of notice, but the petitioner cannot improve his case even if
he would have been provided an opportunity of being heard by filing reply to
the show cause since the fact which is apparent on the face of Attendance
Register cannot be improved by the petitioner and if on the ground of not
following the principle of natural justice the order of termination would be
quashed by remitting the matter for following the principle of natural justice,
that will lead to empty formality and futile exercise, since the plea of
unauthorized absence cannot be improved by the petitioner.
             This reasoning is being given by this court also on taking into
consideration the fact that a committee was constituted consisting of seven
functionaries and whatever allegation has been leveled by the managing
committee regarding unauthorized absence which has been found to be true by
giving finding therein that the petitioner was irregular in his duty and could
not prove his ability, the finding of the said enquiry report has been taken into
consideration by the appellate authority while exercising the jurisdiction
conferred to it under the statute and the appellate authority has found that the
petitioner was irregular in discharging his duty, hence declined to interfere
with the order of termination.
8.           The learned counsel for the opposite parties have taken another
ground that the writ petition is after delay of three years in challenging the
order of termination since the order of termination is dtd.25.1.1990 but the

                                          10
appeal has been preferred before the Director, Secondary Education in the year
1993 while the circular provides to file an appeal within 30 days as per letter
No.13585 dtd.27.3.1983 and when the appeal has not been filed within the
stipulated period as provided under the circular dtd.27.3.1983, opposite party
no.6 has been appointed on 5.3.1990, hence the petitioner cannot have any
grievance that during pendency of the appeal the opposite party no.6 has been
appointed.
               Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently opposed the
submission by submitting that this point has never been raised before the
appellate authority and it is being taken for the first time, as such this may not
be taken into consideration.
               This court, after appreciating the rival submission of the parties
as aforesaid, is of the considered view that although this point has not been
raised before the appellate authority, since the appointment of o.p.6 is under
challenge, hence it is necessary to look into this aspect of the matter otherwise
also it is a question of law, as such it can be taken at any stage. The opposite
party no.6 since been appointed after lapse of period of limitation for filing an
appeal and not only that after three years from the date of termination this writ
petition is being filed, hence on this ground also the case of the petitioner is
not fit to be entertained.
9.             This court is conscious of the jurisdiction in issuing the writ of
certiorari sitting under Article 226 of the Constitution of India which is very

                                                 11
limited and the same can only be exercised if there is any perversity in the
finding or error apparent on the face of record, but                 according to the
considered view of this court there is no error on the face of the order or
perversity in the finding given by the Director, Secondary Education rather it is
based upon the evidence and finding given by the enquiry committee, as such
this court sitting under Article 226 of the constitution of India is not supposed
to reverse the fact finding by assuming the power of appellate court.
                   In view thereof this court refrains itself from exercising the
jurisdiction conferred to it under Article 226 of the constitution of India
accordingly refrains itself from entertaining the relief sought of by the
petitioner.
                   In the result the writ petition fails and it is dismissed.
                                                            ….…………………
                                                             S.N.Prasad, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 31st October, 2017 / Manas.


