                      ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
                                      CRA NO. 131 OF 1992
        From the judgment and order dated 25.03.1992 passed by Shri U.S.
        Mishra, Addl. Sessions Judge, Balasore in Sessions Trial No.12/81 of
        1991.
                                               --------
        Bhagaban Das                                     .....….          Appellant
                                        -Versus-
        State of Orissa                                  ………            Respondent
                           For appellant        -    M/s. D. Nayak, R. Ch. Swain,
                                                     A.K. Acharya & P.K. Mishra-2,
                                                           Advocates
                           For respondent -          Additional Standing Counsel
        PRESENT:-
                THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SATRUGHANA PUJAHARI
        -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                Date of Judgment: 04.05.2017
S.PUJAHARI, J.         The appellant has assailed the judgment of the
        learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Balasore, recorded in S.T.
        No.12/81 of 1991 holding the appellant guilty of charge under
        Section 326 of IPC simplicitor and sentencing him to undergo
        punishment of 6 years rigorous imprisonment on that count.
       2.          According to prosecution case, the appellant along with
       others formed an unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapons
       in the village- Kundisasan on 01.02.1990 at 3 p.m. and caused
       death of Babaji Das (hereinafter referred to as “the deceased”) by
       inflicting simple and grievous injuries. According to prosecution,

                             2
the offences under Sections 148, 302 read with Section 149 of
IPC were committed by the appellant and his associates. The
defence of the appellant and his associates was denial of the
occurrence in the manner as alleged by the prosecution.
According to the accused persons, the prosecution case was
false. They examined defence witnesses and also proved
documentary evidence. The defence witnesses were examined to
support of the defence that prosecution party was aggressor and
the appellant was assaulted by them. The injury sustained by
the appellant was proved by Dr. Srikanta Mohanty (D.W.1) as
Ext.G. The trial court while acquitting the appellant and his
associates of the charge under Sections 148, 149 and Section
302 of IPC, returned the judgment of conviction and order of
sentence against the appellant, as stated earlier.
3.        Analyzing the evidence brought on record, the learned
counsel for the appellant contended that the prosecution having
failed to explain the multiple injuries sustained by the appellant
where the genesis and origin of the occurrence shrouded in deep
mystery erroneously held the appellant guilty under Section 326
of IPC. The learned counsel also contended that once the learned
trial court observed that the appellant while wielding the stick in
course of that occurrence where he sustained multiple injuries
accidentally came in contact with the head of the deceased, but

                             3
unfortunately held him guilty under Section 326 of IPC for
voluntarily having caused grievous hurt which is neither
sustained in fact nor in law.
4.       Assailing the aforesaid contention, the learned counsel
for the State submitted that non-examination of the injuries on
the appellant was lost in wilderness when the prosecution
evidence about the participation of the appellant was clear,
cogent and credit worthy and where the learned trial court had
distinguished truth from falsehood and chaff from the grain.
5.       Before I delve into the question raised, I would like to
say that the effect of non-explanation of injuries on the person of
the appellant is a question of fact and not a question of law. In a
murder case, the non-explanation of the injuries sustained by
the appellant at about the time of occurrence or in course of
incident is very important circumstances from which the Court
can draw the following inferences;
         i)    that the prosecution has suppressed the
               genesis and origin of the occurrence and has
               thus not presented the true version of the
               prosecution;
         ii)   that the witnesses who have denied the
               presence of injuries on the person of the
               accused are lying on a most material point
               and, therefore, their evidence is unbelievable;

                               4
         iii)  that in case there is a defence version which
               explains the injuries on the person of the
               accused, it is rendered probable so as to
               throw doubt on the prosecution case ;
The omission on the part of the prosecution to explain the
injuries on the person of the accused assumes much greater
importance when the evidence consists of interested or inimical
witnesses or where the defence gives a version which competes
in probability with that of the prosecution case. Of course, there
may be cases where the non-explanation of the injuries by the
prosecution may not affect the prosecution case where the
injuries sustained by the accused are minor and superficial and
where the evidence is not only clear and cogent but also so
independent and disinterested, so probable, consistent and
creditworthy that the same out wits the effect of the omission on
the part of the prosecution to explain the injuries.
6.       Reverting back, Ext.G, the injury report of the appellant
reveals the followings as emanating from the evidence of D.W.1 –
Dr. Srikanta Mohanty.
         “3.   On that day I also examined Bhagaban Das,
         son of Gopal Das of Kundi and found as under :-
         (i)   One bleeding incised wound, 1” x ¼” x ¼” over
               the front surface of the scalp.
         (ii)  One incised wound with bleeding 1” x ¼” x ¼”,
               ½” lateral to the injury No.(i).
         (iii) One bleeding incised wound, 1.1/2” x ½” x ½”
               over the right side of the scalp.

                              5
         (iv)  One bruise red in colour, 1.1/2” x 1.1/2” over
               the back of the scalp.
         (v)   One abrasion, ½” x ¼” over front surface of left
               thigh.
         (vi)  One abrasion, ½” x ½” on the front surface of
               left knee.
         (vii) One bleeding incised wound with tail towards
               exilla, 2” x ½” x ¼” over the left side of the
               back, 6” below the shoulder.
         6.    Injured Bhagaban Das and Chakradhar Das
         were referred to Bhadrak hospital for better treatment
         and x-ray. I also received the discharge certificate of
         Chakradhar Das issued by the SCB Medical College,
         Cuttack.”
7.       In this backdrop, the evidence revealed that the parties
were under loggerheads over a disputed plot where one
Gajendra had erected a fence encroaching upon the disputed
land and there was case and counter case over the issue. The
learned trial court has dissected the evidence of 15 prosecution
witnesses and observed that the deceased had sustained one
lacerated injury on the right side of the head on the middle and
another lacerated injury having size of 1” x ½” x ½” on the left
side of the chin. Red bruise was present throughout the head
extending to both sides of the ears, in front to the hair line and
back up to occiput. In cross-examination, the Doctor, P.W.8 has
stated that injury no.(i) is possible if the head comes in contact
with electric pole and injury no.(ii) is also possible if the chin
comes in contact with stone by fall. The doctor has further
stated that by lathi blow ordinarily contusion and swelling are
caused. So far injury no.(iii) is concerned, the doctor has stated

                            6
that it was not possible by one single blow by hard and blunt
weapon. In this backdrop, the learned trial court in paragraph-8
of its judgment has observed that four witnesses, who are
independent of the two rival groups, had seen the occurrence,
they are Manoranjan Patri and Pramod Behari Patri, but none
of them have been examined by the prosecution. The I.O. had
also neither examined those four independent and disinterested
witnesses presented at the spot of occurrence and nor cited
them as prosecution witnesses. In paragraph-9 of the judgment
the trial court has held that all the witnesses chosen by the
prosecution are all interested witnesses having in one way or
the others inimically deposed towards the accused persons. The
matter does not end there. In the said paragraph of the
judgment the learned trial court has held that the prosecution
in this case has also suppressed material facts as apparent
from the record. In paragraph-10 it is also held that the name of
the principal witness (P.W.2) does not find place in the F.I.R.
(Ext.7) and while the name of such material witness was
omitted   from   the   F.I.R.  remained    unexplained    by the
prosecution. However, analyzing the merits of other prosecution
witnesses, the trial court in paragraph-15 of the judgment has
observed “the evidence of these witnesses, therefore, clearly
indicates that they have not only suppressed the truth but also

                             7
have exaggerated the fact by implicating the persons who were
not named by them before the I.O. in their statement under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. It is clearly apparent that they have
exaggerated their part of the case and suppressed the part
played by the villagers of Kundisasan in the assault.” Adding
the evidence of P.W.1, the learned trial court in paragraph-16 of
the judgment has further observed that evidence of P.W.1
clearly shows that all the witnesses were partisan witnesses and
their sole aim is not only to conceal their part in the occurrence
but also build up the case of the prosecution in an exaggerated
manner to show that the accused persons had a motive to kill
Babaji. In the said paragraph, the trial court has also taken
note that “No explanation is given as to how accused Bhagaban
and Chakradhar also received injuries though the I.O. has
started a counter case in that regard”. The judgment further
reveals in paragraph-16 that the injury reports of the accused
persons (Exts.F and G) show that Chakradhar and Bhagaban
(appellant) also received injuries and out of them, one of the
injuries of Chakradhar (accused) was grievous and cause by
sharp cutting weapon. Furthermore, in paragraph-18 of the
judgment the learned trial court has held that the I.O. in this
case has not fairly investigated into the case and even has not
examined the witnesses shown to be the eyewitnesses in Ext.7

                                8
(F.I.R.). Considering the nature of evidence brought on record
and where material witnesses have been withheld, the learned
trial court has observed that non-examination of Bhagaban
Barik has adversely affected the prosecution case. In such
premises, on considering the nature of the evidence adduced by
the prosecution, the learned trial court has observed that all the
prosecution witnesses are neither wholly reliable nor wholly
unreliable, particularly when the learned trial court disbelieved
the prosecution evidence that all the 7 accused persons had
assaulted the deceased. The finding of the learned trial court is
quoted hereunder :-
          “Though I disbelieve the fact that the other accused
          persons also assaulted Babaji, it being the emphatic
          evidence of them all that Bhagaban gave the only
          blow on the head of Babaji and this has also been
          supported by Bhagaban Barik whose non-
          examination is highly lamented by the defence, I fell
          that accused Bhagaban cannot escape the
          responsibility of being the assailant. Barring the
          written report (Ext.7), it is no where indicated that
          accused Bhagaban aimed the blow at the head of
          Babaji. While he himself was under assault, he could
          not have aimed the blow at the head of Babaji. So
          while taking part in the assault he used the stick and
          it accidentally came in contact with the head of
          Babaji. In the circumstances, therefore, it cannot be
          said that he had the intention to kill nor had the
          knowledge that his blow would hit the head of Babaji.
          In the circumstances, I can hold him guilty neither
          under Section 302 nor 304-Part-II of the Indian Penal
          Code. He cannot, however, escape the offence under
          Section 326 of I.P.C.
8.        Cumulatively, the findings of the learned trial court
revealed that prosecution witnesses suppressed the injuries

                            9
sustained by the appellant and one Chakradhar had sustained
a grievous injuries in course of the same occurrence, the
witnesses were neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable, all
the prosecution witnesses are highly partisan and interested
witnesses and prosecution is guilty of suppression of material
facts. In essence, the learned trial court has observed that
prosecution has suppressed the genesis and origin of the
occurrence and has not thus presented the true version which
resulted in the death of the deceased and where the appellant
had sustained multiple       injuries including three bleeding
wounds. It assumes much greater importance when the
evidence consists of interested or inimical witnesses where
material witnesses have been withheld. It is a case where a
defence presented a version which competes in probability to
show that the prosecution party are aggressor. That apart,
when the learned trial court was convinced from the proved fact
that the stick held by the appellant accidentally came in contact
with head of Babaji holding him guilty under Section 326 of IPC
is also unsustainable in law in view of the fact that the hurt
caused cannot said to be voluntarily.
9.       Section 326 of IPC provides as follows :-
         “Voluntarily causing grievous hurt by dangerous
         weapons or means.- Whoever, except in the case
         provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes
         grievous hurt by means of any instrument for

                               10
         shooting, stabbing or cutting, or any instrument
         which, used as a weapon of offence, is likely to cause
         death, or by means of fire or any heated substance,
         or by means of any poison or any corrosive
         substance, or by means of any explosive substance,
         or by means of any substance which it is deleterious
         to the human body to inhale, to swallow, or to receive
         into the blood, or by means of any animal, shall be
         punished with [imprisonment for life], or with
         imprisonment of either description for a term which
         may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
         fine.”
10.      The word “Voluntarily” has been defined in Section 39
of IPC which is as under :-
         “Voluntarily” – A person is said to cause an effect
         “voluntarily” when he causes it by means whereby he
         intended to cause it, or by means which, at the time
         of employing those means, he knew or had reason to
         believe to be likely to cause it.”
Unless the grievous injury is caused voluntarily, no conviction
under Section 326 of IPC is permissible. When the learned trial
court has held the stick held by the appellant accidentally came
in contact with the head of the deceased, his conviction under
Section 326 of IPC is fallacious. The golden thread which runs
through the web of administration of justice in criminal case is
that if two views are possible on the evidence adduced in a case,
one pointing to the guilt of the accused and the other to his
innocence, the view which is favourable to the accused should
be adopted.
11.      Cumulatively, the prosecution is required to explain the
injuries on the body of the accused persons when it is

                            11
established that the same were caused in that very incident,
injuries were large in number and one of them is superficial in
nature, it gives an impression that the true genesis of the
occurrence of the incident was devilishly suppressed. The
learned trial court once being of the considered opinion that the
prosecution witnesses are not deposing the truth the whole
truth   particularly   where   material   witnesses   have    been
deliberately withheld and where the principal witness (P.W.2)
was not named in the F.I.R., the learned trial court should not
have convicted the appellant inasmuch as the truth and
falsehood are so inextricably mingled together here in this case
where it is not possible to separate the chaff from the grain. It is
indeed difficult in fact to separate the truth from falsehood. If
an attempt is made to separate the same, the third case would
come out on the surface which it is not permissible in law.
Therefore, the benefit thereof is to be extended in favour of the
defence and against the prosecution for the reasons held by the
learned trial court in its judgment. Hence, I have no hesitation
in allowing the criminal appeal by acquitting the appellant of
the charge under Section 326 of IPC.
12.      Therefore, I would allow this criminal appeal and set-
aside the impugned judgment of conviction and order of
sentence passed against the appellant. Consequently, the

                              12
appellant is acquitted of the charge. The appellant being already
on bail, the bail bonds shall stand cancelled and surety
discharged.
          L.C.R. received be sent back forthwith along with a copy
of this Judgment.
                                            ……………………..…
                                               S.Pujahari, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 4th day of May, 2017 /MRS


