                     ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
                                     CRLA NO.569 OF 2013
       From the judgment dated 16.11.2013 passed by Shri L.M. Mishra,
       Addl. Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge (Vigilance), Bolangir in
       Sessions Case No.161/29/4 of 2010-2011.
                                              --------
       Nilambar Pradhan                                 .....….          Appellant
                                       -Versus-
       State of Orissa                                  ………            Respondent
                           For appellant        -    Mr. Manas Chand, Advocate
                          For respondent -          Mr. P.K. Pattnaik,
                                                     Additional Government Advocate
       PRESENT:-
               THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SATRUGHANA PUJAHARI
       -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Date of Hearing & Judgment: 06.01.2017
S.PUJAHARI, J.            The appellant herein calls in question the judgment
       of conviction and order of sentence passed against him in Sessions
       Case No.161/29/4 of 2010-2011 on the file of the Addl. Sessions
       Judge-cum-Special Judge (Vigilance), Bolangir. The learned Addl.
       Sessions Judge-cum-Special Judge (Vigilance), Bolangir vide the
       impugned judgment and order held the appellant (hereinafter
       referred to as “the accused”) guilty of the charge under Section
       376(1) of the Indian Penal Code (for short “I.P.C.”) and sentenced
       him to undergo R.I. for seven years and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/-,
       in default, to undergo R.I. for a further period of six months.

                              2
2.       The case of the prosecution as emanating from the first
information report is that the accused on 06.09.2007 on a false
pretext took the victim with him in a motorcycle assuring the
victim’s father that he would drop the victim in Block office at
Tarava where her elder sister recently got employed. However, the
accused took the victim on false pretext to Bargarh where he kept
her in a lodge and subjected her to sexual intercourse which was
without her consent and against her will. The matter was reported
at Bolangir Sadar Police Station whereafter she was subjected to
medical    examination,    accused   was   arrested,    incriminating
materials were seized and on completion of investigation, charge-
sheet was laid against the accused, he allegedly having committed
offence punishable under Section 363 of I.P.C. read with Section
376 of I.P.C. The plea of the accused before the trial court was one
of denial and false implication. Prosecution examined twelve
witnesses to bring home the charge against the accused and also
exhibited several documents. On the basis of evidence brought on
record, the learned trial court being satisfied that the victim was
above the age of eighteen years held the accused not guilty under
Section 363 of IPC, but held him guilty under Section 376(1) of IPC
and sentenced him as aforesaid.
3.       The accused assailed the judgment of conviction solely on
the plea that even if the case of sexual intercourse is upheld, but
that being not against the will and without the consent of the

                             3
victim, the judgment of conviction under Section 376 of IPC is
indefensible.
4.       The   learned   Addl.  Government    Advocate,   however,
defends the impugned judgment of conviction and order of
sentence, the victim having deposed incriminating the accused.
5.       What can be inferred from the materials on record the
victim appears to have attained the age of discretion for a
consensual sex at the relevant time, i.e., when she voluntarily
accompanied the accused in a motorcycle from village- Chhantala
on way to Tarva, but proceeded with the accused to Bargarh,
remained in a lodge and spent the night there where the accused
stated to have sexually assaulted her. The victim having attained
the age of discretion and quite a grown up girl, when the accused
was taking her on false pretext to Bargarh, but during travelling in
motorcycle though she had opportunity to raise alarm to attract
persons on the way, but neither did she shout for help from
passerby nor made any attempt to leave the company of the
accused. While she was put in the lodge, she also did not make
any allegation or express before any of the inmates of the lodge
about her being abducted. In such circumstances, it could be
inferred that she was a consenting party, is the submission of the
learned counsel for the accused.
6.       The word ‘consent’ has been explained as an act of reason
accompanied with deliberation, the mind weighing, as in a

                             4
balance, the good or evil on either side. It is further stated that
‘consent’ supposes three things- a physical power, a mental power
and free and serious use of them and if consent be obtained by
intimidation, force, meditated imposition, circumvention, surprise
or undue influence, it is to be treated as delusion, and not as
deliberate and free act of mind. Every ‘consent’ to an act, involves
a submission; but it by no means follows that a mere submission
involves a consent, e.g., the mere submission of a girl to a carnal
assault, she being in the power of a strong man, is not ‘consent’. A
woman’s consent to intercourse may be hesitant, reluctant or
grudging, but if she consciously permits it, there is ‘consent’.
Similarly, submission of body under the fear of terror cannot be
construed as a consented sexual act. ‘Consent’ for the purpose of
Section 375 of I.P.C. requires voluntary participation not only after
the exercise of intelligence based on the knowledge of the
significance and moral quality of the act, but after having fully
exercised the choice between resistance and assent- whether there
was consent or not, is to be ascertained only on careful study of all
relevant circumstances. In this regard, reliance can be placed on a
decision of the Apex Court in the case of State of H.P. vrs. Mango
Ram, (2000) 7 SCC 224.        ‘Consent’ is always a voluntary and
conscious acceptance of what is proposed to be done by another
and concurred in by the former. The act of helplessness in the face
of inevitable compulsions is not ‘consent’ in law. It is also not

                              5
necessary that there should be actual use of force, as mere a
threat of use of force is sufficient to come to a conclusion that
there was compulsion to obtain consent.
7.        Reverting back, the evidence of the victim would go to
show that she was taken by the accused on a false pretext from
her village in his motorcycle to Bargarh and then though she had
the opportunity to raise alarm and bring the notice of the people to
escape from the clutches of the accused. They passed through
many villages and towns and had enough opportunity to do the
same, still the victim did not do the same and rather went with the
accused to Bargarh in his motorcycle, stayed in a lodge in the
night along with the accused where the accused stated to have had
sexual intercourse with her. She also did not express before any of
the inmates or the staff of the lodge that the accused deceived her
and brought her forcibly to Bargarh. On the next day morning also
after the sexual assault though the accused was stated to have
taken him to one of his friend’s house she also did not disclose the
incident before any one, rather again she accompanied the
accused to the bus stand and she travelled in a bus to Bolangir
wherefrom her sister took her to the Police Station and lodged the
report. No doubt, the victim stated that as she was extended threat
by the accused while she was being taken in the motorcycle she
did not make protest, but the aforesaid inspires no confidence
inasmuch as nothing is there on record indicating the fact that the

                              6
accused was armed with any weapon of offence and also in the
road she did not make any protest and stayed in the lodge. Since
she did not protest at any time and also did not escape having the
opportunity to disclose and to choose to flee away but voluntarily
accompanied the accused, stayed in the lodge and also came back
in a bus, it can very well be inferred from the aforesaid
circumstances that the victim who had attained the age of
discretion    to   consent   for   sexual   intercourse    voluntarily
accompanied the accused and stayed with him in a lodge where
she consented for sexual intercourse. In such circumstances, it
would be unsafe to hold that the sexual assault, if any, was
committed against her will and without her consent of the victim
by the accused. Since the sexual intercourse was with the consent
of the victim, there was no ‘rape’ when attained the age of
discretion, the same does not attract the definition of ‘rape’ within
the meaning of Section 375 of I.P.C. and, therefore, does not
attract the penal provision of Section 376 of IPC. Therefore, the
trial court has committed gross error in appreciation of evidence in
holding that the sexual intercourse, as such, was a ‘rape’
punishable under Section 376 of IPC.
8.        So, on re-appraisal of the evidence on record, this Court is
of the view that no clear, cogent and convincing evidence is
available on record indicating that the accused had committed
rape on the victim against her will and without her consent in the

                                  7
lodge. The evidence of the victim is neither convincing nor there is
any substance of truth therein. She is not a truthful witness. Her
evidence is, therefore, not reliable and no absolute reliance can be
placed on such tainted evidence. Consequently, the impugned
judgment of conviction recorded under Section 376(1) of I.P.C.
against the accused is unsustainable in the eye of law.
 9.        Accordingly,     the   appeal is allowed. The   impugned
 judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 16.11.2013
 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge-cum-Special
 Judge (Vigilance), Bolangir in Sessions Case No.161/29/4 of
 2010-2011 convicting the appellant for commission of offence
 under Section 376 of the I.P.C. and sentencing him to undergo R.I.
 for seven years and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/-, in default, to
 undergo R.I. for six months, are set-aside. The appellant is
 acquitted of the said charge.
           Since the appellant, namely, Nilambar Pradhan is in jail
 custody, he be set at liberty forthwith, unless his detention is
 required in connection with any other case.
           L.C.R. received be sent back forthwith along with a copy
 of this Judgment.
                                               ……………………..…
                                                  S.Pujahari, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 6th January, 2017/B. Jhankar/MRS

8

