                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                   CRIMINAL APPEAL No.224 of 2003
    From the judgment and order dated 17.5.2003 passed by
    Sri      N.P.Rout,        Sessions         Judge,        Dhenkanal-Angul,
    Dhenkanal in S.T. No. 28-D of 1996/S.T. No. 49-D of 1998.
                                          ----------
    Lambodar @ Mahendra Sahoo …………                                    Appellant
                                        -versus-
    State of Orissa                     …………                  Respondent
                  For Appellant         : M/s. D.P.Dhal
                  For Respondent               :    Addl. Government
    Advocate
    P R E S E N T:
           THE HON’BLE KUMARI JUSTICE SANJU PANDA
                                                 AND
           THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE S.PUJAHARI
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                     Date of Judgment: 09.10.2017
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S.Panda, J.       This Criminal Appeal is directed against the
    judgment dated 17.5.2003 passed by the learned Sessions
    Judge, Dhenkanal-Angul, Dhenkanal in S.T. No. 28-D of
    1996/S.T. No. 49-D of 1998 in convicting the appellant for

                              2
commission of offence under Section 302 of the Indian
Penal Code and sentencing him to undergo imprisonment
for life and rigorous imprisonment for one year under
Section 323 of the I.P.C. The sentences are to run
concurrently subject to set off. Initially father and son faced
the trial, however court below acquitted his son from the
charges.
2.         The learned counsel for the appellant submits
that the court below has not considered the prosecution
case regarding sudden quarrel between the son of appellant
and the deceased while preparing to put temporary sheds
for Kartika Purnima in the village wherein the appellant
intervened and occurrence took place. Since the appellant
has no motive to kill the deceased the court below should
have considered the said fact along with the materials
available on record. Thus, the judgment and sentence
passed by the court below need be interfered with.
3.         The learned Addl. Government Advocate however
supported the prosecution case and submits that P.W.1

                             3
and P.W.4 are the two independent witnesses. They
supported the prosecution case. P.W.3 is the informant.
Even if he is the father of the deceased, he has
corroborated the fact narrated in the F.I.R. The trial court
considering the same passed a reasoned judgment and
sentence which need not be interfered with as there was no
serious discrepancy in the evidence of witnesses on
material facts.
4.         On the above submission of the learned counsel
for the appellant, we gone through the evidence on record
and the judgment and sentence passed by the trial court. It
reveals that P.W.3 is the informant and father of the
deceased who has lodged the F.I.R. One Baikuntha Behera
(P.W.6) at about 8 A.M. on 16.11.1994 while making hole
for temporary shed, accused Abhi came to the spot. He has
abused the deceased in filthy languages due to statement
made on previous day in presence of P.Ws. 3, 8 and P.W.6.
While the deceased explained regarding nothing told by
him, the appellant who is the father of accused Abhi

                              4
reached at the spot being armed with one sickle. Suddenly
Abhi snatched the sickle from the hand of appellant in
order to assault the deceased. However the informant
managed to snatch away the sickle from him. Then the
present appellant assaulted the deceased on his head and
other parts of the body by means of a crow-bar which was
lying there. Abhi give blows by means of a hammer to the
leg of the deceased. P.W.5, the mother of the deceased
came to the spot to rescue her son. The appellant pushed
her and she sustained injuries. P.Ws. 1 and 4 who were
present at the spot tried to intervene in the matter but the
appellant pushed P.W.1 as a result of which he fell down
on the ground. Thereafter accused persons left the spot.
5.         The deceased sustained bleeding injuries due to
such assault and shifted to local P.H.C. hospital by the
Sarpanch. The F.I.R. was lodged at about 11.30 A.M. in the
local Police Station and prosecution case set into motion.
The deceased was referred to S.C.B. Medical College &
Hospital, Cuttack as his condition was serious where he

                                5
succumbed to the injuries. U.D. Case No. 537 of 1994 was
registered    at  Mangalabag      Police Station,   Cuttack.
Thereafter the O.I.C. Parjang Police Station got information
about the death of the deceased and brought the U.D. case
record and report to the Court. Charge framed under
Sections 302/307 read with Section 34 of the I.P.C. against
the appellant and his son who have faced the trial.
6.          In order to bring home the charge, during trial
the prosecution examined as many as eleven witnesses
including the I.O. P.W.11 and the doctor P.W.7 who
conducted the post mortem examination and also the
doctor who has given treatment to the deceased at Parjang
Community Health Center who has referred the matter to
S.C.B. Medical College & Hospital, Cuttack when the
condition of the deceased was serious. Prosecution also
exhibited the documents i.e. exhibit 1 to exhibit 15. Ext. 5
is the F.I.R. and Ext.7 is the postmortem report.

                             6
7.         The defence plea is one of complete denial.
Accused Abhi take a plea of alibi while his statement
recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
8.         The trial Court taken into consideration the
evidence of P.Ws.1, 3 and 4 who are the eye witnesses to
the occurrence and the post mortem report which reveals
eight external injuries and twelve internal injuries on
dissection found by the doctor who conducted the autopsy
and his evidence regarding depressed fracture having the
entire skull contused. The Court below considering the
manner of assault, the weapon used, the circumstances
under    which  the  appellant  assaulted   the deceased,
recorded a conclusion that the appellant has the intention
to kill the deceased, while discarding the defence plea
regarding sudden quarrel. Deceased was unarmed and
appellant had not sustained any injury. So far as co-
accused is concerned there was no evidence that he has
assaulted P.W.5 or in furtherance of his common intention
he has assaulted the deceased. On such finding the trial

                              7
court acquitted the other accused person. So far as
appellant is concerned the trial Court convicted him for
commission of offence under Section 302 read with Section
323 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to
undergo imprisonment for life under Section 302 of I.P.C.
and rigorous imprisonment for one year under Section 323
of the I.P.C.
9.          In view of the above discussion of evidence on
record, prosecution relied on the evidence of P.Ws. 1, 3 and
4 who are the eye witnesses to the occurrence. The trial
Court has discussed the evidence of such witnesses and
also the exaggeration made by P.W.5 who has came to the
spot after the assault made by the appellant to the
deceased. The court below on threadbare discussion of
evidences on record convicted the appellant and passed the
sentence.     Prosecution  has  proved   its   case  beyond
reasonable doubt and there is nothing to interfere with the
judgment and sentence passed by the court below.
Accordingly, we confirm the same. It is submitted that in

                                    8
the meantime the State Government has remitted the
sentence of the appellant.
                  Lower Court records along with copy of judgment
be sent forthwith to the trial Court.
                                           ……………………….
                                                (S.Panda, J.)
S.Pujahari, J.             I agree.
                                         …………………..………..
                                             (S.Pujahari, J.)
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 9th October, 2017/Ks

9

