                      ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
                                      CRA NO. 162 OF 1992
        From the judgment dated 23.04.1992 passed by Shri S.K. Patel,
        Special Judge-cum-Sessions Judge, Balangir in II(C) C.C. No.5 of
        1990.
                                               --------
        Shankarlal Agrawala                      .....….          Appellant
                                        -Versus-
        State of Orissa                                  ………            Respondent
                            For appellants        -     Mr. N.C. Pati, Advocate
                                                          & His Associates.
                           For respondent -           Addl. Government Advocate
        PRESENT:-
                THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SATRUGHANA PUJAHARI
        -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Date of Hearing & Judgment :- 17.11.2016
S.PUJAHARI, J.             The     appellant      herein     calls    in   question       the
      judgment of conviction and order of sentence passed against him
      in II(C) C.C. No.5 of 1990 on the file of the Special Judge-cum-
      Sessions Judge, Balangir. The learned trial court vide the
      impugned judgment and order held the appellant (hereinafter
      referred to as “the accused”) guilty of the charge under Section
      7(1)(a)(ii) of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (hereinafter
      referred to as “the Act”) and sentenced him to undergo
      imprisonment for a period of three months for contravention of

                              2
Clause-3(ii) of the Orissa Food Grains Dealers’ Licensing Order,
1964 (hereinafter referred to as the “Licensing Order”).
2.          The accused allegedly being found in possession of
13.50 quintals of ‘Gurji’ without any licence, i.e., having stored
more than 10 quintals of ‘Gurji’ he deemed to be a dealer within
the meaning of the aforesaid Licensing Order. That being the
allegation, the accused was prosecuted. To substantiate the
allegation, prosecution had examined two witnesses, of whom,
P.W.1 is the then Marketing Intelligence Inspector. His evidence
reveals that on 06.09.1989 he had inspected the business
premises of the accused in the name and style “Balaji Trading”.
His evidence further reveals that he found stock of 13.50 quintals
of ‘Gurji’, but the accused could not produce any licence for doing
business of ‘Gurji’ in such quantity. Since the accused had no
dealership licence for doing business in ‘Gurji’, P.W.1 seized the
stock under seizure list (Ext.1). This witness denies suggestion
that on 18.08.1989 the accused had applied for licence, the
Collector being the Licensing authority. P.W.2, a Clerk attached
to the Office of P.W.1 had accompanied the P.W.1 to the business
premises of the accused on 06.09.1989 where they found the
accused had stored 13.50 quintals of ‘Gurji’ having no licence
required under Licensing Order. This witness was not subjected
to any cross-examination. P.Ws.1 and 2 having deposed that

                             3
accused was found transacting business in ‘Gurji’ in his business
premises on 06.09.1989 to an extent of 13.50 quintals, but could
not produce any licence on demand as required under the
aforesaid Licensing Order. Even there was no suggestion that the
accused is not related with the questioned business premises
searched on 06.09.1989 by P.W.1 nor there is even any
suggestion that he was not found in possession of ‘Gurji’ to an
extent of 13.450 quintals. This being the nature of the evidence,
there is overwhelming evidence on record that on 06.09.1989 the
accused was doing business in his firm “Balaji Trading” in ‘Gurji’
to an extent of 13.50 quintals having no licence. This is the
essence of the evidence brought on record.
3.        Assailing   the   conviction,  the    learned   counsel
representing the accused would contend that the accused by
18.08.1989 having applied for licence and no opportunity being
afforded to him to produce that licence, the accused was highly
prejudiced in his trial. To make it more explicit, the learned
counsel for the accused submits that no statement of the accused
under the mandatory provisions of Section 313 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short “Cr.P.C.”) being recorded, the
accused was prejudiced in his defence. Hence, he having given no
opportunity to know the incriminating circumstances brought

                               4
against him and to explain the same, the impugned judgment of
conviction and order of sentence are unsustainable.
4.        Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the State
would submit that no document being produced by the accused
in course of trial and when personal appearance of the accused
was dispensed with in such summery trial, his examination
under Section 313(1) of Cr.P.C. was dispensed with in terms of
proviso to Section 313(1)(b) of Cr.P.C.
5.        The moot question that needs decision is whether non-
examination of the accused under Section 313(1) of Cr.P.C. in the
facts and circumstances is fatal to the prosecution ?
6.        A scrutiny of lower Court records, Order No.13 dated
25.03.1992 reveals that since the personal appearance of the
accused was dispensed with for that date in terms of Section 317
of Cr.P.C. and when the accused remained absent on that date,
the learned lower Court dispensed with examination of accused
as required under the proviso to Section 313(1)(b) of Cr.P.C. At
this juncture, it is pertinent to quote the provisions of Section
313 of Cr.P.C. which reads as thus :-
          “313. Power to examine the accused – (1) In every
          inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling the
          accused personally to explain any circumstances
          appearing in the evidence against him, the Court –
                (a) may at any stage, without previously
                    warning the accused put such questions to
                    him as the Court considers necessary;

                                 5
                (b) Shall, after the witnesses for the prosecution
                    have been examined and before he is called
                    on for his defence, question him generally
                    on the case:
              Provided that in a summons-case, where the
          Court has dispensed with the personal attendance of
          the accused, it may also dispense with his
          examination under clause (b).”
7.        On the plain language of Section 313 of Cr.P.C., it is
evident that in a summons-case, when the personal appearance
of the accused has been dispensed with under Section 205 of
Cr.P.C. or Section 317 of Cr.P.C., the discretion is vested on the
Magistrate to dispense with the rigor of personal examination of
the accused under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. But, the examination of
accused under the aforesaid provisions is not a mere formality. It
aims at affording opportunity to the accused to explain the
incriminating circumstances brought out against him in the
prosecution evidence before he is called upon to enter his
defence. In this regard, reliance may be made in a decision of the
Apex Court in the case of Shivaji Saheb Rao vrs. State of
Maharashtra, AIR 1973 S.C. 2622 and in the case of Mazahar
Ali vrs. State, 1976 CRI.L.J. 1629. It is trite law, nevertheless
fundamental that the accused’s attention should be drawn to
every inculpating material so as to enable him to explain him,
where such an omission has occurred. It is also settled law that
when a circumstance was not put to the accused in examination

                                6
under Section 313 of Cr.P.C., the said circumstance could not be
used against him. It is also settled law that non-examination of
the accused under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. is not such an
irregularity which stood cured under Section 465 of Cr.P.C., but
it is illegality which went to the root of the case. By not examining
the accused under the aforesaid section, opportunity is not given
to the accused to explain the incriminating circumstances against
him. The accused has successfully established how he was
prejudiced for such non-examination. [See 1978 CRI.L.J. 544
(Ram Lochan vrs. State)]. In the instant case, accused remained
absent on that fateful day and a petition under Section 317 of
Cr.P.C. was filed on his behalf. The learned lower court without
assigning any reason whatsoever dispensed with examination of
the accused under Section 313(1) of Cr.P.C. It is not a case where
the personal appearance of the accused was dispensed with
either under Section 205 of Cr.P.C. or under Section 317 of
Cr.P.C. for a considerable period. Only because the accused
remained       absent on   that   particular   day,  dispensing  with
examination of the accused in a case of this nature has definitely
caused prejudice to him. Apparently, he being under impression
that he having applied for licence though to a wrong authority he
had no mens rea to commit the offence as held in the case of
Raghunatha Panigrahi vrs. State of Orissa, 71 (1991) C.L.T.

                                   7
 582. Consequently, when the accused was not provided with an
 opportunity to explain the circumstances in which he was
 indicted in the offence alleged against him, this Court is of the
 view that a prejudice was caused to the accused.
 8.           In view of the aforesaid, this Court is of the view that
 the conviction of the accused, as such, is indefensible and,
 accordingly, the same cannot be sustained. I would, therefore,
 allow this criminal appeal and set-aside the impugned judgment
 of conviction and order of sentence. Accordingly, the accused is
 acquitted of the offence charged.
              L.C.R. received be sent back forthwith along with a copy
 of this Judgment.
                                                ……………………..…
                                                   S.Pujahari, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 17th day of November, 2016 /SKG/MRS


