                  HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK.
                          CRLA Nos.551 and 472 of 2010
       From the judgment and order dated 15.09.2010 passed by Shri G.P.
       Sahoo, Special Judge, Keonjhar, in Special Case No.23 of 2007.
                                        ---------
       (in CRLA No.551 of 2010)
       Soumya Ranjan Pattanaik                             ……         Appellant.
                                     - Versus-
       State of Orissa                                     ……         Respondent.
                    For Appellant    :       M/s Manoj Ku.Pati, C.C. Nayak,
                                                    B.P. Satapathy & S.S. Routray
                    For Respondent   :      Addl. Government Advocate.
       (in CRLA No.472 of 2010)
       Subash Pattanaik                                    ……         Appellant.
                                     - Versus-
       State of Orissa                                     ……         Respondent.
                    For Appellant    :       M/s Manoj Ku.Pati, C.C. Nayak,
                                                    B.P. Satapathy
                    For Respondent   :      Addl. Government Advocate.
                                          ---------
       PRESENT:
                   THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE S. PUJAHARI
          Date of Hearing-21.12.2016    : Date of Judgment- 21.12.2016
S. PUJAHARI, J.     Since both these criminal appeals have been directed
       against the same impugned judgment of conviction and order of
       sentence dated 15.09.2010 rendered by the learned Special Judge,

                                 2
Keonjhar in Special Case No.23 of 2007, they are heard together
and are disposed of by this common judgment to avoid any
conflicting finding.
2.          By the impugned judgment, the learned Special Judge,
Keonjhar has convicted the appellant – Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik
under Sections 376 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code (for short
“I.P.C.”) and sentenced him to undergo R.I. for a period of ten years
and to pay a fine of Rs.50,000/-, in default, to undergo R.I. for a
further period of three years under Section 376 of IPC and R.I. for a
period of one year and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/-, in default, to
undergo R.I. for a further period of three months respectively. The
learned trial court has convicted the appellant – Subash Pattnaik
under Section 506 of I.P.C. and sentenced him to undergo R.I. for
one year and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/-, in default, to undergo R.I.
for a further period of three months with further direction to pay
the aforesaid fine amount, if realized from the appellants, to the
victim as compensation. The learned trial court, however, found the
appellants not guilty of the charge under Section 3(1)(x) of the S.C.
& S.T. (P.A.) Act.
3.          The facts of the case as disclosed by the prosecution are
that an F.I.R. was lodged on 26.03.2007 at Soso Police Station

                                 3
incorporating, inter-alia, that the victim is  a   rustic   illiterate
Harijan spinster, aged about fourteen years,          she         was
impregnated by appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik who finding
her alone in her house, committed sexual intercourse by force on a
day about five months preceding the date of filing of F.I.R. on
26.03.2007. It was under threat. Subsequently, thereafter on two
other subsequent occasions the said appellant also subjected the
victim to forcible sexual intercourse. Being under terrible fear, the
victim could not divulge such act before her parents. Once, the
local A.N.M. disclosed before the victim’s mother that her daughter
is impregnated, the crestfallen mother then confronted the victim
who divulged before her as to what had happened. The victim’s
mother immediately rushed to the house of the appellants and
when questioned the appellant – Subash Pattnaik as to why his son
committed such a barbarous sexual act against an innocent minor
girl, he threatened to torch the house and to drive out them from
the village. Notwithstanding such threat, the victim’s mother
immediately rushed to the Police Station and lodged the F.I.R.
Thereafter, investigation was taken up and on completion thereof,
charge-sheet was filed against the appellants before the S.D.J.M.,
Anandapur. In accordance with law the case was committed to the

                                 4
Special Court. After considering the materials          brought    on
record and hearing the parties, the appellants were charged
for the aforesaid offence. When the charge was read over and
explained, the appellants pleaded not guilty and claimed for trial.
The learned trial court after conclusion of the trial convicted the
appellants as aforesaid.
4.           Heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
5.           The learned counsel for the appellants would submit
that there being no substantial material to hold that the victim was
below sixteen years, there being inordinate delay of more than five
months in lodging of F.I.R. and the version of the victim being not
verses from bible, the conclusion of guilt recorded by the learned
trial court is unsustainable.
6.           Per contra, the learned counsel for the State submits
that there is overwhelming material on record to hold that the
victim is less than sixteen years of age where the consent being
immaterial, the judgment of conviction and order of sentence do
not call for any further consideration.
7.           Before dilating upon the question raised, at the outset, I
would like to examine the materials on record to ascertain whether

                                   5
finding of the learned lower Court that the victim was less than
sixteen years of age is correct ?
             It is not disputed before me that the victim and her
parents are illiterate rustic Harijans. The evidence of the victim’s
mother, P.W.4 would go to show that the victim was 14 years old
on the day when she was sexually assaulted by appellant - Soumya
Ranjan Pattnaik. She has given her age as “42 years” on the date of
her examination in Court on 17.12.2009. The victim who has been
examined as P.W.6 on 17.12.2009, has stated on oath that she was
17 years old on that date and at the time of occurrence she was 14
years old. P.W.8 is the Medical Officer who with reference to the X-
ray taken and ossification test of the victim by the Radiologist
opined that the age of the victim was in between 14 to 17 years on
the date of her examination. His report is admitted as Ext.3. In the
F.I.R. it is mentioned that the victim was 14 years old on the date
of first coitus. This is the gist of the evidence brought on record to
establish that the victim was less than sixteen years old on the date
of alleged occurrence when on the first occasion the appellant -
Soumya      Ranjan   Pattnaik    subjected   her  to  sexual  assault.
Admittedly, no birth certificate of the victim produced. It is to be
remembered that the victim belonged to a remote rural area. Her

                                 6
parents and she herself are illiterate rustic Harijans. Nothing
substantial being elicited to discard the age deposed by the victim
and her mother, it would not proper to reject their testimony as to
the age of the victim for non-submission of birth certificate or any
School admission register. There is absolutely no variation in the
age of the victim as given in the F.I.R. and deposed by the victim
and her mother in Court on oath. There is no pinpoint challenge to
their evidence relating to her age. Always mother is the best person
to say as to correct age of her child. No doubt, the victim was sent
for medical examination and her X-ray was conducted at Sub-
Divisional Hospital, Anandapur for the purpose of ossification test.
Unfortunately, neither the Radiologist who had taken X-ray nor the
X-ray reports produced and proved in this case, although the
doctor (P.W.9) with reference to the X-ray reports has stated that
the victim was in between 14 to 17 years. The lower age suggested
by the doctor tallies with the age given by the victim and her
mother. That being the nature of evidence, the learned trial court
held that the victim was less than sixteen years old. No other
contrary material when placed on record, I am of the considered
opinion that the victim was less than 16 years old. The inference

                                  7
drawn from the evidence brought on record              supports   such
conclusion.
8.          When it is brought on record that the victim was sixteen
years and less on the day when she was subjected to forcible
sexual intercourse by the appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik, her
evidence on oath is to be considered on such background keeping
in mind that she is an illiterate rustic Harijan girl. The learned trial
court had elaborately discussed the evidence of the victim and her
mother. When I sifted that evidence, I find that she has given a
vivid narration of the event notwithstanding that she is a rustic
Harijan. She has deposed that her parents being labourer by
profession, they usually remained absent from the home. On one
such occasion at about 11 a.m. she reached home from pond where
she had been to wash utensils, the appellant - Soumya Ranjan
Pattnaik who was concealed in the house, suddenly gagged her
mouth by a cloth, tied her hands by a rope, undressed her and
forcibly raped her. Since he threatened her to kill his younger
brother if she divulged such incident before her parents, out of fear,
she remained dumb. Her evidence further reveals that in two
subsequent events the said appellant also putting her under such
threat,   committed    sexual   intercourse    despite   her   repeated

                                  8
objection. She has also deposed that after            few    months
thereafter when she developed some symptoms,                      she
approached the local A.N.M. where she ascertained from her that
she was pregnant by five months. The A.N.M. also disclosed such
fact before her mother whereafter the victim divulged everything
before her mother explaining the reasons as to why she concealed
such fact before them. Though the victim was subjected to cross-
examination, but nothing elicited to discard her version outright.
She denied the defence suggestion that appellant - Soumya Ranjan
Pattnaik was not the author of that alleged pregnancy. Taking a
leaf out of the evidence of the victim, her mother, P.W.4 has given a
detail description of the events as to how she ascertained the
factum of pregnancy from the local A.N.M. around 3 p.m. when she
was coming from nearby forest with a bundle of firewood. She has
also stated that on arrival home, being questioned, the victim
narrated before her inculpating the appellant - Soumya Ranjan
Pattnaik as the person who subjected her to rape and as to the
circumstances in which she concealed the fact before them. Her
evidence further reveals that when she rushed to the house of the
appellants, the appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik denied his
involvement and appellant – Subash Pattnaik threatened her to

                                 9
burn her house and oust her from village. She has proved
the F.I.R. marked as Ext.1 and her signature therein marked
as Ext.1/1. This is the gist of evidence adduced to inculpate the
appellants with the offence charged.
9.          I have given my anxious consideration to the evidence of
P.Ws.4 and 6. Sifted the evidence with care and caution but did not
find any substantial material to disbelieve and discard them. The
witnesses are poorest of the poor Harijans having no axe to grind
against the appellants. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the appellants failed to convince this Court as to why such
witnesses would come forward to depose against the appellants.
Needless to say that in a case of this nature, particularly persons of
such conservative Harijan people does not come forward to divulge
such fact more so when the victim is a minor where sexual
intercourse appears to have been made under influence of threat.
That apart, since the victim is a minor, the question of ‘consent’ or
no ‘consent’ does not affect her credibility. One cannot lose sight of
the fact that no self-respect woman would put her honor at stake
and falsely allege commission of rape on her. That being so, the
testimony of the victim must be appreciated in the background of
the entire case. The human psychology and behavioural probability

                                 10
must be looked into while appreciating such          evidence.  The
inherent   bashfulness     and   feminine tendency to conceal the
outrage of masculine sexual aggression are factors which are
relevant to improbabilise the hypothesis of false implication. It is
also well settled law that testimony of an unsophisticated Harijan
woman can be accepted in spite of some minor and nominal
discrepancies. It is also settled law that a girl or a woman in the
tradition bound non-permissive society of India would be extremely
reluctant even to admit that any incident which is likely to reflect
on her chastity has ever occurred. She would be conscious of
danger of being ostracized by the society and being looked down by
the society including by her own family members, relatives, friends
and neighbours. She would face the risk of losing the love and
respect of her matrimonial home happiness being shattered. If she
is unmarried she would apprehend that it would be difficult to
secure an alliance with suitable match from a respectable or an
acceptable family. In view of these and similar factors, the victim
and their relatives are not too keen to bring the culprit to books.
And when in the face of these factors the crime is brought to light,
there is built-in assurance that the charge is genuine rather than
fabricated. It is also established law that a girl or woman of such

                                 11
non-permissive      society   would     be extremely reluctant even
to admit that any incident which is likely to reflect on her
chastity had ever occurred. Here, what the facts and circumstances
reveals the victim would not have divulged at the risk of her
chastity if she was not pregnated at the instance of appellant –
Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik. Once she found to be impregnated she
had no other option left but to divulge the name of the person who
caused such act. In such circumstances, when the victim inculpate
the appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik being conscious of the
danger of inculpating such influential persons like the appellants,
there is inbuilt assurance that charge is genuine rather than
fabricated. Just as a witness who has sustained an injury which is
not shown or believed to be self-inflicted, is the best witness in the
sense that he is least likely to exculpate the real offender, the
evidence of the victim of sex-offence is entitled to a great weight
notwithstanding delay in lodging information or absence of
corroboration. I find, as noticed by the learned trial court, there is
no basic infirmity or embellishment in the evidence of the victim
and her mother. Their testimony inspires confidence and is found
to be reliable. The learned trial court has discussed threadbare
such evidence which I noticed sieve through the judicial colander

                                 12
and passes through the gauges. In such scenario, I would like to
place absolute reliance on the testimony of the victim to hold that
on that fateful day which is about five months preceding
26.03.2007, the appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik subjected the
victim to sexual assault knowing that she was a minor and which
coitus possibly caused her pregnancy found by the A.N.M. and the
record reveals that she had given birth to a male child on
22.03.2009. Attending and the succeeding circumstances are
consistent   with  broad   human    probability  and   there  is  no
compelling reasons to differ from the conclusion arrived by the
learned trial court that the evidence of the victim is clear, cogent
and convincing and can be relied upon to hold that it was appellant
- Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik who had raped the minor victim girl
attracting the mischief of Section 376 of IPC. Therefore, this Court
is of the view that the finding of guilt under Section 376 of IPC
against appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik is unassailable and
cannot be interfered with.
10.         Now adverting to the conviction of the appellants under
Section 506 of IPC, I find there is absolutely no material to hold
that the appellants ever intimidated the victim’s mother within the
meaning of Section 503 of IPC. In the F.I.R. it is incorporated that

                                  13
once P.W.4 approached the appellants and questioned them as
to why appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik               raped     her
daughter, the appellant – Subash Pattnaik threatened to physically
assault her and also threatened to torch her house. However, as
P.W.4   she    has  deposed    that   appellant  –  Subash   Pattnaik
threatened her to burn her house and to drive them from village.
Except this bald version, there is nothing on record to support the
charge under Section 506 of IPC. To establish an offence of
“criminal intimidation” punishable under Section 506 of IPC, there
must be an ‘intent’ to cause alarm to the former by a threat to him
of injury to himself or to the latter. The ‘intent’ itself might be
complete, though it could not be affected. But, the existence of the
intent seems essential to the offence, as also and equally to the
attempt to commit the offence, since otherwise the attempt would
be to do something not constituting the offence. Section 506 of IPC
relates to punishment for “criminal intimidation”. The gist of the
offence is effect which the threat is intended to have upon the mind
of the person threatened. To bring an offence within such
parameter, the threat should be a real one and not just a mere
word. When the person uttering it does not exactly mean what he
says and also when the person at whom threat is launched does

                                14
not feel threatened actually the offence of criminal intimidation
punishable under Section 506 of IPC goes out of the way. [See
1989 CRI.L.J. 669 (Mad.), (Noble Mohandass vrs. State of
Tamilnadu)]. I would repeat a threat, in order to be indictable,
must be made with intent to cause alarm to the victim. Mere vague
allegation by the accused that he is going to torch the house or to
drive them from village cannot amount to criminal intimidation. To
answer “criminal intimidation” the threat must cause, inter-alia,
alarm in the mind of the victim. It must be shown in order to prove
“criminal intimidation” that threat was with intent to cause alarm
to that person. Unless that intent is proved, the charge must fail.
11.         Reverting back to the evidence of P.W.4, that sworn
testimony does not show that she was ever felt alarmed from the
word uttered by the appellant – Subash Pattnaik. I do not find any
clear and cogent materials from such evidence of P.W.4 to hold the
appellants guilty of the charge under Section 506 of IPC. The
learned trial court, as it appears, erred in law while holding the
appellant guilty of the charge under Section 506 of IPC. The
conviction of the appellants under Section 506 of IPC is, therefore,
unsustainable and liable to be set-aside.

                                         15
12.            Now coming to the extent of sentence imposed under
Section 376 of IPC against the appellant -            Soumya       Ranjan
Pattnaik, I am of the considered opinion that in the peculiar facts
and circumstances, if the substantive sentence of imprisonment is
reduced to seven years maintaining the fine amount of Rs.50,000/-
that would meet the ends of justice.
13.            Resultantly, CRLA No.472 of 2010 filed by the appellant
– Subash Pattnaik is allowed. However, CRLA No.551 of 2010 filed
by the appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik is allowed in part. The
substantive sentence imposed under Section 376 of IPC against the
appellant - Soumya Ranjan Pattnaik is reduced to seven years R.I.
and fine amount of Rs.50,000/- with default sentence are
maintained.        The    fine     amount   of Rs.50,000/-   (rupees  fifty
thousand), if realized, shall be paid to the victim as compensation.
                L.C.R. received be sent back forthwith along with a
copy of this Judgment.
                                               ……………………..…
                                                 S.Pujahari, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
Dated the 21st Dec., 2016/B. Jhankar/MRS


