                   ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
W.P.(C) Nos. 3033 & 4005 of 2009 & 16706 & 16707 of 2008
(In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
India)
                                 ------------------------
In W.P.(C) No.3033 of 2009
Sri Balaram Dhal                                                  ……… Petitioner
                                          -Vs-
Union of India, represented through its Secretary                 ……… Opp. Parties
Railway Board, New-Delhi & others.
                               -----------------------------
        For Petitioner                :    M/s. J.M.Mohanty, K.C.Mishra, P.C.Moharana,
                                            M.Pani & R.K.Ray.
       For Opp. Parties                :    M/s. A.K.Misra, S.K.Ojha, N.R.Pandit,
                                            H.M.Das & A.K.Sahoo.
                                            (For opposite parties).
In W.P.(C) No.4005 of 2009
Sri Saroj Kumar Das                                                 ……… Petitioner
                                          -Vs-
Union of India, represented through its Secretary                 ……… Opp. Parties
Railway Board, New-Delhi & others.
                               -----------------------------
        For Petitioner                :    M/s. J.M.Mohanty, K.C.Mishra, P.C.Moharana,
                                            M.Pani & R.K.Ray.
       For Opp. Parties                :    M/s. A.K.Misra, S.K.Ojha, N.R.Pandit,
                                            H.M.Das & A.K.Sahoo.
                                            (For opposite parties).

                                                      2
    In W.P.(C) No.16706 of 2008
    Sri Lokanath Mishra                                                ……… Petitioner
                                                -Vs-
    Union of India, represented through its Secretary                     ……… Opp. Parties
    Railway Board, New-Delhi & others.
                                     -----------------------------
             For Petitioner                 :    M/s. J.M.Mohanty, K.C.Mishra, P.C.Moharana,
                                                  M.Pani & R.K.Ray.
            For Opp. Parties                 :    M/s. A.K.Misra, S.K.Ojha, N.R.Pandit,
                                                  H.M.Das & A.K.Sahoo.
                                                  (For opposite parties).
    In W.P.(C) No.16707 of 2008
    Sri Kailash Chandra Behera                                             ……… Petitioner
                                                -Vs-
    Union of India, represented through its Secretary                     ……… Opp. Parties
    Railway Board, New-Delhi & others.
                                     -----------------------------
             For Petitioner                 :    M/s. J.M.Mohanty, K.C.Mishra, P.C.Moharana,
                                                  M.Pani & R.K.Ray.
            For Opp. Parties                 :    M/s. A.K.Misra, S.K.Ojha, N.R.Pandit,
                                                  H.M.Das & A.K.Sahoo.
                                                  (For opposite parties).
                                ------------------------------
    PRESENT:
                        THE HONOURABLE KUMARI JUSTICE S.PANDA
                                 Date of Judgment :            22.01.2014
S.Panda, J.         In W.P.(C) Nos. 3033 and 4005 of 2009 and in W.P.(C) Nos. 16706 and
    16707 of 2008 petitioners have prayed to quash the departmental proceedings under

                                               3
Annexures-7, 11, 5 dated 22.5.2008 respectively and under Annexure-5 dated
17.7.2008.
                 Since common question of law and facts involved in all these writ petitions
is one and same, they are heard together and disposed of by this common order.
                 Petitioners in the aforesaid writ petitions have challenged the initiation of
the departmental proceedings and its continuation after closure of the criminal
proceedings as illegal and seek to quash the same.
2.               It is contended in the writ petitions that F.I.R. was drawn up by one
S.K.Biswal, Superintendent of Police, C.I.D., C.B., Orissa, Cuttack on 22.4.2008 basing
upon the news published in a daily newspaper dated 14.4.2008 regarding death of a
Judo coach at Bhubaneswar. The coach was shot dead on apprehension that he was
about to disclose the name of the officials, who had nexus with pilferaging iron scraps
from Mancheswar coach repairing shop. The said incident was investigated into as per
the direction of D.G. Police. The Senior Divisional Security Commissioner-opposite
party- No.3 also caused a joint fact finding enquiry through Sri S.N.Das, Inspector, Sri
P.S.Biswas, Inspector Crime Reader and Sri S.K.Das, Inspector R.P.F., Mancheswar
workshop, who went to Mancheswar workshop along with the custodian of the scrap iron
of the workshop Sri B.Verkatiya, Asst. Chief Manager(I)/CRW/Mancheswar. After due
verification, it was found that there was no disturbance in the stacks of the earmark
location in the scrap dumping area of the workshop and accordingly they submitted a
report on 14.4.2008 vide Annexure-2. It reveals from the said report that no stack was on
distenbes State/condition in the earmarked locations in the suap dewfing area of the
workshop. Basing upon the F.I.R., C.I.D., C.B. Case No. 20 of 2008 was registered
under Sections 120-B/379/201/411 & 414 of the I.P.C. against the petitioners-Constable.
The custodian of Mancheswar stock yard has not lodged any F.I.R. with regard to any
pilferage of any iron scrap or involvement of any of the constables on dereliction of duty.

                                              4
                The Deputy Chief Commissioner, East Coast Railway, Senior Security
Commissioner, R.P.F. Khurda Road, CCB, Railway Board, New Delhi also enquired into
the mater and they submitted a reported on 25.4.2008 vide Annexure-3. The matter was
again enquired into by Sri A.K.Jena, OI/CIB Waltire, Sri P.S.Biswas, OC/RPF Waltire
and Sri R.K.Narendra, OIC/RPF Bhubaneswar and they also submitted a report on
5.5.2008 vide Annexure-4. From those two reports it reveals that they could not find any
incriminating materials in support of the paper publication and ‘Y’ form has not been
issued and no report has been given by the OC/RPF/MCS to Senior DSC/RPF/Khurda in
that regard. ‘Y’ form stands for lodging of theft report in the Railway by the custodian of
the property.
3.              Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that in view of non-issuance
of ‘Y’ form clearly reveals that there was no pilferage of any scrap iron from Mancheswar
repairing workshop and the news was only based on wrong information. Neither any
railway property has been seized by the Crime Branch nor the driver or the helper of the
seized truck was arrested in pursuance of the lodging of the said F.I.R. The C.I.D., C.B.
Case No. 20 of 2008 corresponding to G.R. Case No. 1722 of 2008 was pending before
the learned S.D.J.M., Bhubaneswar and no case was made out against the petitioners
under the Indian Penal Code and a communication has been made to the Railway
Authority for registration of a case. Accordingly, the O.I.C. Mancheswar R.P.F. has re-
registered a case under Section 3(a) RP(UP) Act and thereafter has moved an
application before the court. The afore-stated fact reveals that C.I.D., C.B. failed to get
any materials against the petitioners in any manner with regard to theft of any alleged
iron scrap and accordingly, requested the Railway Authority to re-register a case under
the R.P.F. Act, therefore, there is no material before the authority to proceed with the
departmental proceeding. The departmental proceeding was initiated on the basis of
statement recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C. in the C.I.D., C.B. case and a charge

                                               5
memo was submitted. Charge memo was based on the basis of 161 statement recorded.
As the G.R. case is pending, the said 161 statement is only for the purpose of
contradiction during the trial, therefore the departmental proceeding initiated against the
petitioners along with the charge memo are liable to be quashed. The charge memo was
submitted suspecting involvement of the petitioners with regard to theft of railway
property but no F.I.R. was filed by the Railway Authority till date and therefore, on mere
suspicion no departmental proceeding should be initiated which needs to be interfered
with. In support of his contention he has cited the decisions reported in (2006) 5 SCC
446, G.M.Tank V. State of Gujarat, (1999) 3 SCC 679, Capt. M.Paul Anthony V.
Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. and (1996) 9 SCC 1, P.S.Rajya V. State of Bihar.
4.               A counter affidavit has been filed by the opposite parties and they have
taken a stand that Railway Protection Force is an Armed Force of the Union and strict
service discipline is required in respect of a member of the force under the Railway
Protection Force Act, 1957. The said act governing the appointment and powers of the
members of the force also deals with discipline and conduct as well as discipline and
appeal of the member of the said force. The force was created to protect the properties
of the Railways. The scrap materials of the Railway constitute the properties of the
Railway. A joint enquiry was made by the Assistant Security Commissioner, Railway
Protection Force and it was found that in the night of 13.4.2008 two trucks loaded with
scrap materials were intercepted by local police being escorted by the RPF staff on duty
with others for safe passage to their destination and a Crime Branch Case was
registered under Sections 379/120(B)/411/414 I.P.C. The enquiry report reveals that
large number of scrap dealers of Bhubaneswar, Cuttack and nearby area in connivance
with officials of various Government Department including Railways etc. organizing theft
of scrap materials and removing the same in various trucks. Therefore, the authority
decided to initiate a departmental proceeding. Accordingly, a Departmental Proceeding

                                              6
was initiated by the authority and the delinquents were charge sheeted under Rule 153
of the Railway Protection Force Rules (in short, “RPF Rules”). The competent authority
has appointed the enquiry officer. The enquiry officer has already furnished the enquiry
report to the disciplinary authority and they have categorically denied that the charges
framed in the Departmental Proceedings are not based on the statement recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. Pursuant to the direction of the Court on 26.11.2009, C.B.I. has also
enquired into the matter. C.B.I. has submitted charge sheet against other persons where
the petitioners are not accused. The C.B.I. enquiry was made during pendency of the
writ petitions and it is open to the petitioners to take those stands in the Departmental
Proceeding as those facts were not before the enquiry officer while Departmental
Proceeding was initiated. Rule provided that an enquiry is to be conducted before taking
any action against the delinquent officer under Rule 153 of the Railway Protection Force
Rules and affording opportunity to the petitioners to put forth all the grievances by way of
defence and they can canvass before the authority all the pleas by way of show cause
for appropriate decision. In support of its contention, learned counsel for the opposite
parties cited the decisions reported in (2012) 11 S.C.C. 565, Secretary, Ministry of
Defence and Others V. Prabhash Chandra Mirdha and (2007) 10 S.C.C. 385, Noida
Enterpreneurs Association V. Noida and Others.
5.              Considering the rival submission of the parties and after going through the
record, it reveals that a joint enquiry was made by the Railway Authorities. From enquiry
report as per Annexures-3 and 4 it was found that large number of scrap dealers of
Bhubaneswar, Cuttack and nearby area in connivance with officials of various
Government Department including Railways etc. organizing theft of scrap materials and
removing the same in various trucks. The reports under Annexures-3 and 4 also reveal
that in spite of repeated letters to CWM Mancheswar workshop as well as to Works
Manager, Mancheswar workshop regarding theft/shortage/missing of scrap iron in the

                                              7
month of March & April by the enquiry committee but no reply obtained from the said
persons in-charge of the workshop. The staff deployed in the said stack yard was not
being done on rotation basis. Ratification slips issued by the Accounts Department in
respect of challan were not taken note of and scrap materials issued without verifying the
said correction was a gross mistake. Further from the record, it also reveals that C.I.D.,
C.B. Case No. 20 of 2008 was re-registered and the same is pending and there is non-
cooperation of persons in-charge of Mancheswar stack yard and they have not furnished
information in spite of repeated requests made by the authority while making joint
enquiry. The Disciplinary Authority initiated Departmental Proceeding as they have found
that two trucks loaded with scrap materials were intercepted by the local police.
Accordingly, the authority framed charges which are subject to enquiry as stipulated
under Rule 153 of the aforesaid Rules. Law is well settled that the purpose of
departmental enquiry and criminal prosecutions are two different and distinct aspects.
Criminal prosecution is for an offence against the offender for breach of law and the
crime is an act of commission in violation of law. In a criminal proceeding the prosecution
has to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. But in a Departmental Proceeding the
standard of proof based on preponderance of probability. Therefore, departmental
proceeding may continue even though in the criminal proceeding no case was made out
against the delinquent.
6.             The Apex Court in the case of Secretary, Ministry of Defence and
Others V. Prabhash Chandra Mirdha, reported in (2012) 11 S.C.C. 565 held that:-
               “Charge-sheet/Show-cause notice-when can be quashed by
          court/tribunal-normally not liable to be quashed as it does not
          adversely affect rights of delinquent employee and does not give rise
          to any cause of action. However, it can be quashed on ground of
          issuing authority being not competent to issue the same.
               The law does not permit quashing of charge-sheet in a routine
          manner. In case the delinquent employee has any grievance in
          respect of the charge-sheet he must raise the issue by filing a
          representation and wait for the decision of the disciplinary authority
          thereon. Neither the disciplinary proceedings nor the charge-sheet be

                                              8
           quashed at an initial stage as it would be a premature stage to deal
           with the issues.”
                The Apex Court further in the case of Noida Enterpreneurs Association
V. Noida and Others, reported in (2007) 10 S.C.C. 385 held that:-
                “Departmental enquiry is distinct from criminal proceeding-
           Standard of proof required in departmental enquiry is not the same
           as required to prove a criminal charge-Even acquittal in criminal case
           does not bar departmental enquiry.”
7.              In the case of G.M.Tank and Capt. M.Paul (supra) where the Apex Court
held that in case the criminal proceedings and departmental proceedings are based on
similar and identical set of facts and evidence and the charges before the criminal court
and departmental proceedings are one and the same and if the appellant has been
honourably acquitted in the criminal proceedings punishment in the departmental
proceedings is unjust and unfair. The aforesaid decisions are not applicable in the
present case in view of the reasons stated in the above paragraphs.
                In the case of P.S.Rajya (supra) where the Apex Court held that charge
in the departmental proceedings and criminal proceedings are one and the same,
charge could not be established in the departmental proceedings. Hence there is no
further necessity to proceed in criminal proceedings if the charge is same. The said
decision is also not applicable to the present case.
                 In view of the above position of law, this Court is not inclined to interfere
with the Departmental Proceedings initiated against the petitioners. Accordingly, the writ
petitions are dismissed.
                                                         …………..……….
                                                           S.Panda, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
   22nd January, 2014/ K.K.Sahoo


