$~15
*        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                           DECIDED ON : APRIL 03, 2018
+              CRL.REV.P. 141/2018 & Crl.M.B.292/2018
        TARIF
                                                         ..... Petitioner
               Through :  Mr.Ravindra Narayan with Mr.Afzal Khan
                          and Mr.Raghav Narayan, Advocates.
                          versus
        THE STATE GOVT OF NCT OF DELHI
                                                       ..... Respondent
               Through :  Mr.Tarang Srivastava, APP.
                          SI Deepak Kumar, PS Sunlight Colony.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.P.GARG
S.P.GARG, J. (ORAL)
1.      Present revision petition has been preferred by the petitioner-
Tarif to challenge the legality and correctness of a judgment dated
2.2.2018 of learned Additional Sessions Judge in CA No.279/2017 by
which conviction and sentence recorded by the learned trial court by
orders dated 29.05.2017 and 30.05.2017 respectively under Section
279/304-A IPC were upheld. The petitioner was convicted by the trial
court by a judgment dated 29.05.2017 for commission of offences
Crl.Rev.P.141/2018                                             Page 1 of 6

punishable under Sections 279/304-A IPC. By an order dated
30.05.2017, he was sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for one
year with fine `5,000/- under Section 304-A IPC and simple
imprisonment for three months for offence under Section 279 IPC.
Both the sentences were to operate concurrently.
2.      I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have
examined the file. Petitioner’s counsel urged that the trial court did not
appreciate the evidence in true and proper perspective and based
conviction on the sole testimony of police official HC Sanjeev Kumar
whose presence at the spot could not be established. The prosecution
was unable to establish beyond doubt that the petitioner was rash or
negligent in driving the vehicle. Material discrepancies and
inconsistencies were overlooked by the trial court without cogent
reasons. Learned Additional Public Prosecutor urged that no valid
reasons exist to disbelieve the testimony of HC Sanjeev Kumar who
categorically implicated the petitioner for driving the offending vehicle
in rash and negligent manner.
3.      The occurrence took place at around 4.30 a.m. on 16.08.2010.
DD No.25-A (Ex.PW-6/A) came to be recorded at 4.35 a.m. at Police
Station Sun Light Colony. The investigation was assigned to SI Prafful
Kumar who along with Const.Praveen reached the spot without delay.
They were informed that the injured had already been taken to AIIMS
Trauma Centre. The Investigating Officer after recording the statement
of HC Sanjeev Kumar (Ex.PW-1/A) lodged First Information Report. In
the complaint HC Sanjeev Kumar gave detailed account as to how and
in what manner, the petitioner while driving the offending vehicle i.e.
Crl.Rev.P.141/2018                                             Page 2 of 6

truck No.HR-55H-2434 in a rash and negligent manner caused the death
of the pedestrian, aged around 25 years. The petitioner was named in
the FIR and specific role was assigned to him in the incident. The
Investigating Officer sent the rukka promptly at 6.45 a.m. Since the
petitioner’s involvement emerged soon after the incident, there was
least possibility of the police official to concoct a false story in such a
short period.
4.      In his testimony as PW-5 HC Sanjeev Kumar reiterated the
version given to the police without any variation. He deposed that on
the night intervening 15/16.8.2010, he was on picket duty near Shiv
Mandir Maharani Bagh and was standing there. At about 4.30 a.m. he
saw an individual aged around 25/26 years coming from Ashram and
going towards Sarai Kale Khan. The said individual was wearing a pant
only. He was going on his own side i.e. left side of the road. When the
said individual covered 10/12 paces from picket where he was standing,
the truck bearing No.HR-55-A-2434 coming from the same direction at
a speed of 70/80 Kmph hit the said individual from behind; the driver of
the said vehicle was rash and negligent. Due to the impact, the said
individual fell down on the left side and sustained injuries. On his
shouting, the driver stopped the truck and got down; he apprehended the
accused who was driving the said vehicle and informed the PCR. The
PCR reached the spot and took the victim to AIIMS Trauma Centre.
His statement came to be recorded as Ex.PW-5/A.              In the cross-
examination, he informed that he was deputed on the picket on the oral
directions of the senior officers. On the day of incident, Ct.Sumit was
also deputed along with him on the said picket duty. He clarified that
Crl.Rev.P.141/2018                                              Page 3 of 6

the driver of the vehicle was seen by him when he stopped the vehicle
and came down from the truck. He denied that the accused was ‘helper’
in the offending vehicle. The witness volunteered to add that only the
accused was present in the said vehicle.
5.      On scanning the testimony of this official witness, it reveals that
despite searching cross-examination, no infirmity could be extracted to
disbelieve his version. His presence at the spot being on duty cannot be
suspected. On his information about the incident, the PCR arrived at the
spot and had taken the victim to the hospital. It has come on record that
the victim was a ‘stranger’ and his identity was unknown to the
complainant. Apparently, the witness had no ulterior motive to favour
the victim with whom he had no prior acquaintance and to falsely
implicate the petitioner against whom he did not nurture any grievance.
This witness gave detailed account as to how the individual who was
wearing only pant and was without shirt was hit from behind by the
accused who was driving the truck in a rash and negligent manner. The
petitioner has taken conflicting and inconsistent defence. At one stage
he suggested that the accident was not caused by him; he being ‘helper’
in the offending vehicle. The petitioner, however, did not elaborate as
to who else was the driver. Another defence was taken that the accident
had taken place by some other vehicle. Again nothing was suggested as
to which other vehicle was the offending one.
6.      PW-1 (Ct.Praveen), who reached the spot along with SI Prafful
Kumar fully supported the prosecution and deposed about the presence
of the accused person at the spot. His testimony remained unchallenged.
Crl.Rev.P.141/2018                                              Page 4 of 6

Testimony of PW-7 (SI P.K.Jha) remained uncontroverted on material
facts.
7.      In 313 statement, the petitioner did not give plausible explanation
to the incriminating circumstances proved against him. He claimed that
when on the day of incident, he was going to unload the vehicle, the
police official stopped him and asked for the documents. Thereafter,
the owner of the vehicle was called and he was falsely implicated in this
case; the accident had already taken place with some other vehicle.
This defence was never put to the prosecution witnesses. The petitioner
did not examine the owner of the vehicle who was allegedly called at
the spot.
8.      Both the courts below have given cogent reasons whereby the
petitioner has been held guilty for commission of offence under
Sections 279/304-A IPC. Impact was so forcible that the victim, a
young man, suffered fatal injuries and was declared ‘brought dead’ at
the hospital. It was the morning time and no crowd was there at the
spot. Apparently, the petitioner was unable to control the vehicle being
at a high speed and hit the individual from behind. The circumstances
show that the accident had taken place due to rash and negligent driving
by the petitioner.     The conviction based upon fair appreciation of
evidence warrants no interference.
9.      The trial court had already taken lenient view while awarding the
sentence. Mitigating circumstances have already been considered and
no further modification in sentence is called for.
10.     The revision petition lacks merits and is dismissed. The pending
application also stands disposed of.
Crl.Rev.P.141/2018                                               Page 5 of 6

11.     Trial court record be sent back forthwith with copy of the order.
12.      Copy of the order be sent to the Superintendent Jail for
information.
                                                               S.P.GARG
                                                                 (JUDGE)
APRIL 03, 2018/sa
Crl.Rev.P.141/2018                                              Page 6 of 6


