*        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                            RESERVED ON : 20th SEPTEMBER, 2017
                              DECIDED ON : 17th OCTOBER, 2017
+                       CS(OS) 900/2002 & CC 26/03
        M/S.R.J.COMPONENTS AND SHAFTS                             ..... Plaintiff
                Through : Mr.Sandeep Bhalla & Ms.Isha Bhalla, Advs.
                              versus
        M/S.DEEPAK INDUSTRIES LIMITED & ORS..... Defendants
                Through : Mr.R.K.Jain, Advocate.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.P.GARG
S.P.GARG, J.
1.              Present suit CS(OS) 900/2002 has been preferred by
Rajeev Kumar, proprietor trading under the name and style of
M/s.R.J.Components & Shafts (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
plaintiff’) against M/s.Deepak Industries Limited (hereinafter referred
to as ‘first defendant’) and M/s.Gear Components & Shafts (India)
Pvt.Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as ‘second defendant’) to restrain
them from selling, offering, exposing of advertising for sale or
procuring to be sold any such products which might be similar in
nature and description of goods of the plaintiff under the trademark
NAW or any other trademark identical with and / or deceptively
similar to the plaintiff’s registered trademark NAW.
2.              It is averred by the plaintiff in the plaint that he is the sole
proprietor of its concern M/s.R.J.Components & Shafts carrying on
well established and well-reputed business of manufacturing and
marketing of interlia ‘gears’ being tractor parts included in class 12.
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                      Page 1 of 15

Initially, Ramji Das - his grandfather was the sole proprietor of
M/s.R.J.Enterprises.       By a deed of assignment dated 14.01.2000,
Ramji Das assigned all rights, title and interest in the assignor of well-
known trademark NAW along with its goodwill.              The trademark
NAW was registered in the name of Ramji Das as proprietor of
M/s.R.J.Enterprises      being   registration   mark   No.407439      dated
01.07.1983.       After the assignment dated 14.01.2000, the plaintiff
became the registered proprietor of the mark NAW. The necessary
application for transfer has already been made to the concerned
authorities.     It is further averred that Ramji Das had been using
trademark NAW in relation to his products since 1983 and after his
death in April, 2000, the said trademark NAW is being used by the
plaintiff.    The trademark registered in the plaintiff’s name gives
exclusive right to him. It is renewed from time to time and is still
valid up to 30.06.2004. During the past many years, the plaintiff has
established large extensive sale of its products under the registered
trademark NAW throughout the country and he has also spent
substantial amount on its publicity and advertisement through various
modes of advertisement and publicity; it has acquired great reputation
and goodwill amongst the minds of public and the trade.                 The
trademark NAW has come to be exclusively identified and associated
with the plaintiff alone in the public and the trade.
3.              It is averred that the first defendant is engaged in the
business of manufacturing and marketing of gears and selling its
products through its distributor i.e. second defendant.          The first
defendant who has recently started manufacturing gears has adopted
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                Page 2 of 15

an exactly similar trademark NAW and has copied, imitated and
pirated the registered trademark NAW of the plaintiff.                   The
defendant’s trademark NAW is total identical and / or deceptively
similar to the registered trademark NAW; the products manufactured
by both the plaintiff and the defendants are the same. Adoption and
use of the said trademark on the part of the defendants amounts to
infringement of the plaintiff’s aforesaid registered and reputed
trademark NAW. The infringement has been done in order to cause
confusion and deception in the minds of unwary purchasers. The
defendant is guilty of passing off their inferior quality of goods as the
goods manufactured by the plaintiff. On account of the defendants’
deliberate unlawful and unjust trade activities, the plaintiff has
suffered in the well known and well established trade, reputation and
goodwill.
4.              The suit is contested by the defendants. In the written
statement filed jointly by the defendants it is stated that the suit is not
maintainable under Section 44 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks
Act, 1958 as the name of the plaintiff has not been entered as
‘subsequent proprietor’ in the records of the Trade Marks Registry.
On merits, it is denied if Rajeev Kumar is the sole proprietor of the
firm trading as M/s.R.J.Components & Shafts, New Delhi. No valid
assignment has been made in favour of the plaintiff by Ramji Das vide
alleged deed of assignment dated 14.01.2000; the plaintiff thus does
not acquire any right in the said trademark NAW.
5.              It is further averred that the registered trademark NAW
has been obtained by fraud as Ramji Das and the plaintiff was well
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                 Page 3 of 15

aware that the said trademark NAW belonged to the first defendant
who was using the said trademark in respect of gears being tractor
parts since 1971 through their manufacturing unit M/s.New Allenberry
Works, Faridabad. The said unit was established under the name and
style of New Allenberry Works in the year 1971 at Faridabad from
which the trademark NAW was derived by taking the first letter of the
trading style i.e. New Allenberry Works. The said trademark NAW
has been used by the first defendant and its manufacturing unit at
Faridabad since 1971 without any interruption. It is further claimed
that Ramji Das used to sell ‘gears’ being tractor parts manufactured by
the first defendant under the trademark NAW and had also let out
some premises to the defendants for storing gears being tractor parts
under the trade name NAW to the defendants. The documents filed by
the plaintiff are absolutely forged and fabricated.
6.              It is averred that Rajeev Kumar was also a director of
second defendant and as such, had knowledge about the proprietorship
of the trademark NAW with the first defendant as second defendant
had been selling gears being tractor parts under the trademark NAW
manufactured by first defendant through its Faridabad unit i.e. New
Allenberry Works.
7.              In the replication while controverting the assertions of the
defendants in the written statement, the plaintiff reiterated his version
raised in the plaint.
8.              The first defendant filed Counter Claim No.26/03 against
the plaintiff.     In the Counter Claim, it was averred that the first
defendant was a body incorporated and duly registered under the
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                  Page 4 of 15

Indian Companies Act under the name and style of M/s.Deepak
Industries Limited. The first defendant was engaged in the business of
manufacturing and selling “automobile parts including the tractor parts
since 1957”. The first defendant had two manufacturing units by the
name of New Allenberry Works at Kolkata and Faridabad. The unit at
Faridabad under the name and style of New Allenberry Works is
engaged in the business of manufacturing and selling “tractor and
automobile gears and shafts” under the trademark NAW since the year
1971. The trademark NAW has been derived by the defendant from
their trading style New Allenberry Works. By virtue of long,
continuous, extensive and exclusive use for last thirty years, the
trademark NAW in respect of the aforesaid goods has become
distinctive and associated with the name of the defendant alone. The
word NAW is being represented in a special and artistic manner. The
first defendant is the sole and exclusive owner and proprietor of the
trade mark NAW in respect of automobile parts including tractor parts
falling in class 12 of the Trademark and Merchandise Marks Act,
1958. The goods of the defendants are being supplied to the various
Government departments and semi Government departments on
contract basis besides sale to the general public. The first defendant is
also registered with the Director General of Technical Department,
Udyog Bhawan in the capacity of manufacturer of auto parts including
gears and shafts etc.    The goods of the first defendant under the
trademark NAW are being sold in the territory of Delhi through
defendant No.2. The trademark NAW had been extensively used
CS(OS) 900/2002                                               Page 5 of 15

through different media of advertisement and publicity and lacs of
rupees have been spent on such advertisement.
9.              It is further pleaded that the plaintiff – Rajeev Kumar was
a director of second defendant in the year 1997 and was aware about
the business activities of first defendant and second defendant. It is
alleged that Ramji Das has obtained the registration of trademark
NAW by concealment of material facts and playing fraud on
Trademark Registry for which separate proceedings are being initiated
for removal/rectification of the registered trademark.             The first
defendant is a lawful owner of the proprietor of the trademark NAW
for the last thirty years. Deed of assignment dated 14.01.2000 is not a
legal defence and is not permissible before the Court. It is alleged that
not only the plaintiff has copied the trademark of the first defendant
but has also infringed the copyright of the first defendant in its artistic
style of writing.
10.             The averments in the Counter Claim were denied by the
plaintiff in the written statement dated 31.10.2002. It is the first
defendant who has violated the plaintiff’s right under Section 28 of the
Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958. The defendants did not take
any steps for registration of the trademark any time.
11.             In the replication to the written statement, the first
defendant reiterated his claim.
12.             On the basis of pleadings of the parties and the
documents on record, following issues were framed for determination
vide order dated 28.04.2005 :
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                   Page 6 of 15

                “1. Whether the suit is maintainable in its
                present form? OPP
                2.     Whether the plaintiff is the registered
                proprietor of the trade mark “NAW” under
                No.407039 on the basis of an assignment deed
                dated 14th January, 2000 executed in its favour
                by the registered proprietor of the said mark?
                OPP
                3.     Whether the defendants are infringing the
                trade mark in question? OPP
                4.     Whether the defendants are the prior
                adopter, users and proprietors of the trade mark
                “NAW” derived from the trading style of their
                manufacturing        unit    “NEW     ALIENBURY
                WORKS”? OPD
                5.     In case issue No.4 is proved in the
                negative, whether the plaintiff is entitled to a
                decree for permanent injunction against the
                defendants, as prayed for? OPP
                6.     Whether the defendants are entitled to a
                decree for permanent injunction against the
                plaintiff, restraining it from passing off its goods
                as those of the defendants? OPD
                7.     Whether the plaintiff or the defendants are
                entitled to a decree for rendition of accounts and
                a decree for any sum found due from such
                account? OPP/OPD
                8.     Whether the defendants have not paid
                proper Court Fee on the counter claim made by
                it? If so, what is its effect? OPP
                9.     Relief.”
13.             The plaintiff failed to produce any evidence despite
availing various opportunities. Finally, the evidence of the plaintiff
came to be closed. The defendants examined DW-1 (G.Jayaraman)
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                   Page 7 of 15

and DW-2 (Kailash Chandra) to prove their claim in the Counter
Claim.
14.             I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have
examined the file. Issue-wise findings are as under :
Issues No.2, 3 & 5
15.             All the issues are taken together as these are ‘inter’
related.
16.             As observed above, the plaintiff failed to produce any
witness to prove the averments in the plaint. It is not in dispute that
the trademark NAW was registered vide registration mark No.407439
dated 01.07.1983 in the name of plaintiff’s grandfather Ramji Das.
However, there is no credible evidence on record to infer if the
trademark NAW registered in the name of Ramji Lal as proprietor of
M/s.R.J.Enterprises was ever used by him or that it was assigned to
the plaintiff vide assignment deed dated 14.01.2000. Again there is no
evidence on record if after the alleged assignment on 14.01.2000 the
registered trademark NAW was ever used by the plaintiff in respect of
manufacturing or marketing of gears being tractor parts included in
class 12. No evidence has been produced by the plaintiff to controvert
the defendants’ assertion that they were prior user of the mark NAW
since 1971. It is not clear as to when the plaintiff came to know about
the alleged infringement of the registered trademark NAW in the name
of Ramji Das. It is not in dispute that Ramji Das had let out a portion
of the premises to the defendants for storing gears being tractor parts
under the trademark NAW. Apparently, Ramji Das was aware of the
use of mark NAW by the defendants but at no stage he lodged any
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                Page 8 of 15

complaint for its user in violation of the trademark registered in his
name. It is also not in dispute that the plaintiff Rajeev Kumar was
also a director of second defendant and thus had the knowledge about
the proprietorship of the trademark NAW with the first defendant as
second defendant used to sell gears being tractor parts under the
trademark NAW manufactured by the first defendant through its
Faridabad unit i.e. New Allenberry Works.          The plaintiff Rajeev
Kumar being the director of second defendant never protested any
time about their use of the trademark NAW belonging to his
grandfather any time and did not initiate proceedings to restrain the
defendants for infringement. Since there is no evidence worth the
name on record, mere pleadings without proof are of no substance.
The plaintiff has thus failed to prove all these issues and these are
decided against him and in favour of defendants.
17.             The plaintiff has not produced on record any application
filed before the Trademark Registry for registration of the trade name
on the basis of assignment deed 14.01.2000 in his favour. During the
course of arguments it was not informed it the application (if any)
filed by the plaintiff has been allowed. I have examined the deed of
assignment dated 14.01.2000. In this deed of assignment, Rajeev
Kumar has not shown to be the proprietor of M/s.R.J.Enterprises. It
appears that the deed of assignment has been executed in favour of
Rajeev Kumar in his individual capacity.            Ramji Das put his
signatures on the deed of assignment as sole proprietor of
M/s.R.J.Enterprises. It is unclear as to when the plaintiff Rajeev
Kumar started running M/s.R.J.Enterprises as its sole proprietor. The
CS(OS) 900/2002                                              Page 9 of 15

documents placed on record by the plaintiff do not reflect him to be
the sole proprietor of M/s.R.J.Components & Shafts. The invoice /
cash memo dated 31.03.2002 has been issued on behalf of Gear
Components and Shafts (India) Private Ltd. In this cash memo, there
is no mention of the trademark NAW being used by the plaintiff for
the sale of speed gears. Photocopies of various invoices on behalf of
M/s.R.J. Enterprises on record do not reveal Rajeev Kumar to be the
sole proprietor. These do not show if the plaintiff is the manufacturer
of the gears of specific marks. The cash memos reflect M/s.R.J.
Enterprises to be ‘stockists’ of tractor spare parts and accessories and
not manufacturers.
18.             These are decided in favour of the defendants and against
the plaintiff.
19.             Issue Nos.4 & 6
20.             Both these issues are taken together being inter
connected. As discussed above, the plaintiff has failed to prove its
case that the defendants were at fault in infringement of his registered
trademark NAW.
21.             Learned counsel for the plaintiff urged that Counter
Claim filed by the defendants cannot be allowed as no credible
evidence has emerged to infer if he is the prior user of the mark NAW
since 1971 as claimed. Relying upon the authorities ‘Mahendra &
Mahendra Paper Mills Ltd. vs. Mahindra & Manhindra Ltd.’, 2001
Supp(5) SCR 225; ‘Krishika Lulla & Ors. vs. Shyam Vithalrao
Devkatta & Anr.’ in Crl.A.No. 258/2013, and ‘Century Traders vs.
Roshan Lal Duggar & Co.’ in FAO(OS) 46/1976, learned counsel for
CS(OS) 900/2002                                               Page 10 of 15

the plaintiff urged that there is no evidence to show as to how much
expenditure was incurred by the first defendant in advertising the mark
NAW. No evidence has emerged on record to show if the products of
the defendants have goodwill or are associated with the trademark
NAW. Basic ingredients required to be infer for ‘prior user’ are
lacking. Learned counsel for the defendants urged that the plaintiff
was aware the use of mark NAW by the defendants since 1971. The
plaintiff himself was director for some duration in second defendant
and his grandfather had let out certain portion of the premises to
second defendant to carry on the business. Various documents have
been placed on record by the defendants on record to show user of the
trademark NAW since 1971.
22.             The defendants filed evidence of DW-1 G.Jayaraman
(Ex.DW-1/A). In the affidavit by way of evidence, the defendants
proved the version stated in the written statement and claimed that the
trademark NAW was used continuously for the last more than 37
years. The said trademark was represented in a special and artistic
manner. First defendant was the proprietor of the trademark NAW in
respect of automobile parts including tractor parts falling in class 12 of
the trademark Act.       The goods of the first defendant under the
trademark NAW were sold in the State of Delhi through second
defendant. The sale figures of the first defendant at Faridabad unit
M/s.New Allenberry Works from the year 1975 have been detailed in
paragraph 10 of the counter claim. The total sale in the year 2001 –
2002 was `3279.78 lacs. The trademark NAW has been advertised
through different modes of advertisement and lacs of rupees has been
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                Page 11 of 15

spent on such advertisement.         DW-1 (G.Jayaraman) also proved
various documents (Ex.D-1 to D-19 and Ex.DW-1/3 to DW-1/59). In
the cross-examination, DW-1 (G.Jayaraman) disclosed that he joined
M/s.New Allenberry Works, Faridabad in February, 1998. The first
defendant started manufacturing automobile parts from Faridabad in
the year 1971. He fairly admitted that first defendant did not have any
registered trademark in the year 1971. He further admitted that the
first defendant was aware of the trademark NAW being registered in
favour of the plaintiff. He was, however, unable to tell if it has been
renewed till 2014. He was unaware if the record of the advertisement
of the products manufactured by first defendant was placed on record.
However, he claimed to produce the bills of amount spent on
advertisement. He further reiterated that trademark NAW was used by
first defendant from 1971 till 2002.
23.             On scanning the testimony of the witness, it reveals that
material facts proved by him in the examination-in-chief have
remained unchallenged and uncontroverted.          Various documents
placed on record by the plaintiff showing the sale of goods under the
trademark NAW have not been disputed or challenged.                I have
examined various cash memos and other documents pertaining to the
period 1971 onwards on the letterheads of first defendant where the
trademark NAW finds prominent place. Some of the documents are
various correspondences with the Government departments.             Their
genuineness and authenticity cannot be suspected. These documents
establish beyond doubt that the mark NAW was being used
extensively by the first defendant since 1971. At no stage, the plaintiff
CS(OS) 900/2002                                               Page 12 of 15

objected to the use of the mark NAW. As discussed above, plaintiff
himself was director in second defendant for some duration. He did
not object to the use of the mark NAW of the goods being sold by
second defendant. Apparently, the first defendant is a prior user of the
trademark NAW. The defendants have placed on record several sale
figures from different periods showing the sale of the goods under the
mark NAW. No evidence to the contrary has been produced by the
plaintiff. Despite filing evidence by way of affidavits, the plaintiff
and the witnesses to be produced by him did not turn up for evidence
before the Court.       Adverse inference is to be drawn against the
plaintiff for not appearing in the witness box.
24.             Similar is the testimony of DW-2 (Kailash Chandra) by
way of affidavit (Ex.DW-2/A).           He also deposed that second
defendant use to sell the goods manufactured by M/s.Deepak
Industries Limited under the trademark NAW in the Union Territory
of Delhi. Various invoices regarding the sale of the said goods to the
second defendant are Ex.D-5 to D-19. It was further informed that
Rajeev Kumar - the plaintiff was one of the directors of second
defendant and was in that capacity fully aware about the business
transactions in between first defendant and second defendant. The
said plaintiff being one of the directors of second defendant was also
aware about the trademark of the first defendant and regarding the
goodwill and reputation of the trademark NAW of the first defendant
as Rajeev Kumar was himself dealing with first defendant on behalf of
the second defendant. The plaintiff himself was having dealings with
defendants in respect of the aforesaid goods having the trademark
CS(OS) 900/2002                                              Page 13 of 15

NAW.        In the cross-examination, the witness disclosed that the
plaintiff joined as director on 01.08.1996; he was removed from the
directorship on 15.09.1998. He was, however, not aware as to for
what reasons the plaintiff was removed as director. He denied the
suggestion that the plaintiff was removed due to his raising objection
about the use of trademark NAW by the defendants. Apparently, the
plaintiff was aware of the use of the trademark NAW by the
defendants in 1997- 1998. The witness further stated that the second
defendant was having dealings with first defendant since 1993.
25.             The documents proved on record by the defendants prove
that the defendants are prior user since 1971. The year-wise sale
figures have been given by the defendants to show their goodwill and
reputation in the mark.
26.             It is well settled that prior use of the goods will override
the subsequent user, even though subsequent user has a registered
trademark (“first in the market test”).           In ‘S.Syed Mohideen vs.
P.Sulochana Bai’, MANU/SC/0576/2015, it was held that the scheme
of the Act is such where rights of the prior user are recognised
superior than that of the registration and even the registered proprietor
cannot disturb interfere with the rights of the prior user.
27.             Needless to say, the defendants are entitled for the
injunction prayed for.         The issues are decided in favour of the
defendants and against the plaintiff.
28.             Issues No.1 & 8
29.             These issues have not been pressed. Accordingly, these
are decided in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants.
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                 Page 14 of 15

30.             Issue No.7
31.             This issue has not been pressed by the defendants.
Moreover, there is no evidence on record if the mark NAW was used
by the plaintiff for the sale of its goods for any particular duration and
if so, for what period and to what extent. In the absence of any
evidence on this issue, the decree for rendition of accounts cannot be
issued either in favour of the plaintiff or the defendants. The issue is
disposed of accordingly.
32.             Relief
33.             In view of the findings on the issues above, the suit filed
by the plaintiff is dismissed with costs.
34.             Counter Claim filed by the first defendant is allowed with
costs. The plaintiff and any other person / persons acting on his behalf
are restrained from manufacturing, selling, offering for sale or
otherwise dealing in automobile parts including tractor parts under the
trademark NAW or any other trademark which may be identical with
and /or deceptively similar to the trademark NAW of the first
defendant.
35.             The existing stock (if any) having the trademark NAW
shall be disposed of within two months by the plaintiff.
36.             Decree-sheet be prepared accordingly.
                                                       (S.P.GARG)
                                                         JUDGE
OCTOBER 17, 2017 / tr
CS(OS) 900/2002                                                 Page 15 of 15


