*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                     RESERVED ON : 2nd JULY, 2015
                                      DECIDED ON : 22nd JULY, 2015
+                         CRL.A. 1107/2011
       RAM CHANDER                                      ..... Appellant
                          Through :   Mr.Biswajit Kumar Patra,
                                      Advocate.
                          versus
       STATE (NCT OF DELHI)                             ..... Respondent
                          Through :   Mr.Navin K.Jha, APP.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.P.GARG
S.P.GARG, J.
1.            Aggrieved by a judgment dated 23.12.2010 of learned Addl.
Sessions Judge in Sessions Case No. 11/2008 arising out of FIR No.
111/2007 PS Gokalpuri, Delhi, by which the appellant – Ram Chander
was convicted under Sections 376(2)(g)/380/506 IPC, the instant appeal
has been preferred by him. By an order dated 06.01.2011, he was awarded
RI for ten years with fine ` 50,000/- under Section 376(2)(g) IPC; RI for
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                            Page 1 of 13

three years with fine ` 10,000/- under Section 380 IPC and RI for three
years with fine ` 5,000/- under Section 506 IPC. The substantive
sentences were to operate concurrently.
2.            The prosecution case as set up in the charge-sheet was that on
15.02.2007 at about 11.00 a.m. at A-98, gali No.2, Bhagirathi Vihar,
Delhi, the appellant – Ram Chander @ Kanhaya along with his associate
Vashisht @ Thekedar (since PO) committed gang rape upon „X‟ (assumed
name) aged 28 years. They also committed theft of ` 28,000/-, ear-rings
and gold chain belonging to the complainant besides criminally
intimidating her. Police machinery was came into motion on receipt of an
information about a „quarrel‟ and Daily Diary (DD) No.6A (mark „4-A‟)
came into existence at PS Gokalpuri, Delhi at 11.18 hours. The
investigation was assigned to HC Chanderveer Singh who with Const.
Rambhaj went to the spot. The investigation was taken over by W/ ASI
Nirmala who lodged First Information Report after recording victim‟s
statement (Ex.PW-1/A). „X‟ was medically examined. Statements of
various witnesses conversant with the facts were recorded. Efforts were
made to locate the perpetrators of the crime. The appellant could be
arrested on 22.03.2007 whereas his associate Vashisht @ Thekedar
remained untraced and was finally declared Proclaimed Offender. Upon
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                              Page 2 of 13

completion of investigation, a charge-sheet was laid before the Court
against the appellant. The prosecution examined nine witnesses to
substantiate its case. In 313 Cr.P.C. statement, the appellant denied his
involvement in the crime and pleaded false implication without producing
any defence evidence. The trial resulted in his conviction as aforesaid.
Being aggrieved and dissatisfied, the instant appeal has been preferred.
3.            I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have
examined the file. Appellant‟s counsel urged that the Trial Court did not
appreciate the evidence in its true and proper perspective and fell in grave
error to base conviction on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix without
any independent corroboration. Material discrepancies and contradictions
emerging in the statements of the prosecution witnesses were
conveniently ignored and overlooked by the Trial Court. No visible
injuries were found on X‟s body at the time of her medical examination.
Articles allegedly stolen from the house were not recovered. The appellant
was wrongly named in the FIR as „Kanhaya‟ whereas his real name is
Ram Chander. Admittedly, the appellant did not establish physical
relation with „X‟. There is no evidence if he participated or facilitated the
offence of rape by his associate Vashisht @ Thekedar in any manner. The
prosecution was unable to establish if the appellant shared common
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                              Page 3 of 13

intention with co-accused to commit rape. Learned Addl. Public
Prosecutor urged that no valid reasons prevail to disbelieve the prosecutrix
who was ravished by the appellant‟s associate in his presence.
4.            The occurrence that took place on 15.02.2007 at around
11.00 a.m. was promptly reported to the police and Daily Diary (DD)
No.6A (mark „4-A‟) came into existence at PS Gokalpuri, Delhi at 11.18
hours. HC Chanderveer Singh with Const. Rambhaj immediately rushed
to the spot where „X‟ apprised them about commission of rape. PW-5 (HC
Chanderveer Singh), on getting information about commission of rape by
Vashisht @ Thekedar and Kanhaya, requested the Duty Officer to depute
senior officer. Subsequently, the investigation was undertaken by W/ASI
Nirmala who with SI Prakash Roy reached the spot. She recorded victim‟s
statement (Ex.PW-1/A) and sent rukka by making endorsement (Ex.PW-
4/A) over it at 04.15 P.M. Prior to that at 02.10 p.m. „X‟ was medically
examined at Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, Shahdara vide MLC (Ex.PW-
8/A). In her statement (Ex.PW-1/A), „X‟ gave detailed account of the
incident and attributed specific role to the appellant and his associate in
the commission of crime. While appearing as PW-1, she proved the
version given initially to the police without any variation. In her
deposition before the Court, she disclosed that on 15.02.2007 at around
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                              Page 4 of 13

11.00 a.m. she was alone in the house as her husband was away to his
place of work. At that time, the appellant who lived on the third floor of
the house as „tenant‟ along with his associate Vashisht @ Thekedar, came;
tapped her door and enquired whereabouts of her husband. When she
apprised him that her husband was away at his work, he put the latch of
the door from outside. After a while, the appellant and his associate came
inside her room and put the latch of both the doors of the room. Vashisht
@ Thekedar removed her salwar. Attributing specific role, she disclosed
that the appellant caught hold of her; whereas Vashisht @ Thekedar
closed her mouth. The accused removed her ear-rings, chain and cash `
28,000/-. Vashisht @ Thekedar committed rape upon her in his presence.
The accused held her while Vashisht @ Thekedar put knife on her chest.
She could not raise alarm due to fear. Both of them tied her hands and
legs, put her on the bed and threatened to kill if she raised alarm. In the
cross-examination, she informed that she had three children and the eldest
one was aged about 11 years. Her two children used to go to school. She
fairly admitted that the appellant had not removed her jewellery forcibly.
She was tied with the clothes of her husband. She knew the appellant by
the name of Kanhaya.
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                             Page 5 of 13

5.            On analysing the testimony of the prosecutrix in its entirety,
it reveals that material facts deposed in her examination-in-chief have
remained unchallenged and uncontroverted. The appellant did not deny
his presence inside X‟s room along with his associate at the relevant time.
No suggestion was put if co-accused Vashisht @ Thekedar had not
sexually assaulted the prosecutrix to his view. No ulterior motive was
assigned or attributed to the prosecutrix for falsely implicating the
appellant in the heinous crime. Nothing has emerged if there was any
previous animosity on any cause with the prosecutrix prompting her to
falsely implicate her neighbour. In the absence of prior ill-will or enmity,
the prosecutrix, a married lady, aged around 28 years, mother of three
children was not expected to level serious allegations of rape. No valid
reasons exist to disbelieve the statement of the prosecutrix, particularly
when she stood the lengthy cross-examination without any material
damage to the case of the prosecution. She is a victim of the crime. She
does not have a strong motive to falsely involve the appellant. Specific
role was attributed to the appellant and his associate in the crime. „X‟
assigned a definite role to Vashisht @ Thekedar whereby he alone
ravished her. She was fair enough to state that she was not sexually
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                              Page 6 of 13

assaulted by the appellant. She accused him of committing theft of her
jewellery, cash and other articles that time.
6.            Undoubtedly, the appellant and his associate Vashisht @
Thekedar used to stay in a room on the third floor on the day of incident.
PW-2 (Roopwati), landlady, emphatically deposed that she had rented out
the room on the third floor to Ram Chander (the appellant) and Vashisht
@ Thekedar. She identified the appellant to be the individual who was
also known by the name of Kanhaya. In the cross-examination, she
elaborated that the accused was inducted as a tenant on 07.02.2007. In 313
Cr.P.C. statement, the appellant admitted that he and Vashisht @
Thekedar used to live as tenant on the third floor of the premises in
question. Earlier, the appellant had declined to have occupied any room as
a tenant. The appellant was missing from the tenanted accommodation
soon after the occurrence and could be arrested after a gap of about one
month on 22.03.2007 only. Various attempts were made by the police to
apprehend him at his place of work in Delhi and at his native place;
however, he was untraceable. The circumstance of abscondance soon after
the incident points an accusing finger against the appellant. He did not
explain or give any reason for abscondance for so long and for not going
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                             Page 7 of 13

to his place of work to earn his livelihood as usual. As observed above,
Vashisht @ Thekedar could not be found till date.
7.            Soon after the incident, „X‟ was medically examined vide
MLC (Ex.PW-8/A) at Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital proved by PW-8
(Dr.Ria). MLC records the alleged history of rape at 11.00 a.m. FSL
report reveals that „human semen‟ was detected on Ex.„1‟ (Bed-sheet); Ex.
„3A‟ & „3B‟ (micro slides described as vaginal swab slides of the
prosecutrix); Ex. „5a‟ (kurta) and Ex. „5b‟ (salwar). Detection of „human
semen‟ on the bed-sheet and other pieces of clothes of the prosecutrix
lends-credence to her version that sexual intercourse had taken place. In
313 Cr.P.C. statement, the appellant did not deny physical relation by
Vashisht @ Thekedar with the prosecutrix. He merely stated that Vashisht
@ Thekedar, the real culprit succeeded to flee whereas he was falsely
implicated by the police.
8.            The prosecution has produced clinching evidence to prove
that the appellant had accompanied his associate Vashisht @ Thekedar to
the residence of the prosecutrix at 11.00 a.m. where she was sexually
assaulted by Vashisht @ Thekedar. The appellant did not offer any
reasons as to why and for what purpose, he along with his associate had
gone inside the prosecutrix‟s residence in the absence of her husband
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                            Page 8 of 13

skipping his duty at his place of work. He also did not give any reason as
to what forced him to abandon his work for one month after the
occurrence when he went in hiding. Nothing has come on record to
ascertain as to where and at which particular place, the appellant stayed
during this period to avoid arrest. Appellant‟s name had emerged soon
after the incident in X‟s statement (Ex.PW-1/A). She was not even aware
of his real name as Ram Chander and referred him by the name of
Kanhaya. She identified him to be one of the perpetrators of the crime in
the Court. Minor discrepancies, contradictions and improvements
highlighted by the appellant‟s counsel are not material to throw away the
prosecution case overboard. „X‟ was not going to be benefitted in any
manner by levelling serious allegations of rape against the appellant and
his associate. Taking advantage of absence of her husband, the appellant
and his associate committed the crime when landlady living on the ground
floor had gone to her native village on 12.02.2007 to attend a marriage
function. Finding the prosecutrix alone, the appellant and his associate
Vashisht @ Thekedar not only sexually assaulted her but also deprived
her of valuable articles and cash. Adverse inference is to be drawn against
co-accused Vashisht @ Thekedar          to avoid arrest to face criminal
proceedings initiated against him.
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                              Page 9 of 13

9.            The prosecutrix has categorically alleged commission of rape
by Vashisht @ Thekedar in the presence of the appellant. She also
assigned specific role to the accused / appellant whereby he caught hold of
her and also tied her along with his associate. The appellant did not
intervene to prevent Vashisht @ Thekedar from establishing physical
relations with „X‟. Rather he facilitated him and removed her gold chain,
ear-rings and cash. Both the assailants had gained entry inside the house
after ensuring that „X‟ was alone in the house. They had apparently, no
reasonable excuse to visit „X‟ at that point of time when her husband and
children were away. After the crime, they both fled the spot together.
From the facts and circumstances of the case, common intention is
reflected by the participation of both the accused persons in the crime. All
these circumstances indicate beyond doubt that the appellant and Vashisht
@ Thekedar were acting in concert and shared common intention to
commit the crime. It is settled law that common intention or intention of
the individual concerned in furtherance of the common intention could be
proved either from direct evidence or by inference from the acts or
attending circumstances of the case and conduct of the parties. Direct
proof of common intention is seldom available and, therefore, such
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                             Page 10 of 13

intention can only be inferred from the circumstances appearing from the
proved facts of the case and the proved circumstances.
10.            In cases of gang rape, it is not necessary that the prosecution
should adduce clinching proof of a completed act of rape by each one of
the accused on the victim. In „Ashok Kumar vs. State of Haryana‟, 2003
Cri.L.J. 4932, Supreme Court held :
           “....In order to establish an offence under Section 376
           (2)(g) IPC, read with Explanation I thereto, the
           prosecution must adduce evidence to indicate that
           more than one accused had acted in concert and in
           such an event, if rape had been committed by even one,
           all the accused will be guilty irrespective of the fact
           that she had been raped by one or more of them and it
           is not necessary for the prosecution to adduce evidence
           of a completed act of rape by each one of the accused.
           In other words, this provision embodies a principle of
           joint liability and the essence of that liability is the
           existence of common intention; that common intention
           presupposes prior concert which may be determined
           from the conduct of offenders revealed during the
           course of action and it could arise and be formed
           suddenly, but, there must be meeting of minds. It is not
           enough to have the same intention independently of
           each of the offenders. In such cases, there must be
           criminal sharing marking out a certain measure of
           jointness in the commission of offence”.
11.            In 313 Cr.P.C. statement, the appellant did not give plausible
reason for false implication. He attempted to divert the entire blame upon
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                               Page 11 of 13

his associate and stated that the real culprit i.e. Thekedar succeeded to
decamp the spot. He admitted that he was working with Thekedar for the
last 3 – 4 months before the incident. There is no denial that the appellant
did not live with co-accused Thekedar in the premises in question. No
evidence in defence was filed to falsify the incriminating circumstances
proved on record by the prosecution. He even did not bother to examine
any witness from his family to prove if during the relevant period, he was
present at his specific place of work.
12.           Certain deficiencies and discrepancies pointed out by the
appellant‟s counsel are inconsequential to dislodge the prosecutrix‟ cogent
and reliable version.
13.           In the light of above discussion, conviction recorded by the
Trial Court cannot be faulted and is affirmed. Minimum sentence
prescribed under Section 376 (2)(g) IPC i.e. RI for ten years cannot be
modified or reduced in the absence of adequate or specific reasons.
Sentence order requires modification to the extent that default sentence for
non-payment of fine would be two months in all. Other terms and
conditions of the Sentence Order are left undisturbed.
14.           The appeal stands disposed of in the above terms.
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                             Page 12 of 13

15.           Trial Court record be sent back forthwith with the copy of the
order. A copy of the order be sent to the Superintendent Jail for
information.
                                                    (S.P.GARG)
                                                       JUDGE
JULY 22, 2015 / tr
Crl.A.No. 1107/2011                                             Page 13 of 13


