*               IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                                   W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006
                                                                    Reserved on 22 November,2007
                                                             Date of decision : 28th January , 2008
Ms.X                                                                    .... Petitioner
(Substituted as per directions in para 26 of this judgment)
                                                           Through: Mr.Mukesh Anand, Advocate
                :: VERSUS ::
STATE OF NCT & Another                                                       ..... Respondents
                                                          Through : Mr.Digit Saikia, Advocate for
                                                              Mr. Rajeev Mehra, Advocate for R-2
                                                          Mr. Amitabh Marwah, Advocate for R-1
CORAM:
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat
1.      Whether reporters of local papers may be
        allowed to see the judgment.?                         Yes
2.      To be referred to the Reporter or not?                Yes
3.      Whether the judgment should be reported
        in the Digest?                                        Yes
Mr. Justice S. Ravindra Bhat:
1.      The Petitioner in this writ proceeding seeks directions and also claims compensation from
the respondents for its failure to protect her fundamental rights, for the delay in investigating the
 W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                          1

crime committed on her and in bringing the perpetrator to justice.
2.       The Petitioner avers that, on 14th September 2005 she went to Safdarjang Hospital, New
Delhi along with her sister-in-law for the latter’s medical treatment. After leaving the patient, her
sister-in-law at room No.555 on 5th floor for a blood test, the petitioner went to the toilet on the
same floor at about 1130 hrs. She went inside the toilet hall and while approaching the toilet
room inside, the perpetrator aged about 28-30 years wearing red shirt, dark blue jeans and sport
shoes pushed the Petitioner towards the wall and threatened her with dire consequences if she
opposed him. It is averred that the petitioner was nervous and scared after she was trapped inside
the toilet and threatened using a knife. The accused then took away her gold chain and thereafter
forcibly disrobed and raped the Petitioner. After sexually assaulting her, the accused bolted the
toilet room from outside and fled. She avers that after regaining composure, she wore her clothes
and raised an alarm by banging the toilet door. Someone heard her cries and opened the door.
The petitioner narrated the whole episode to a person, whom she thought was a hospital staff
member posted on the first floor, and he claimed that he had seen a person in red shirt and blue
jeans, but thereafter he did nothing to help her.
3.       It is averred that the petitioner narrated to her sister in law about the incident and also
informed the police. On the basis of the petitioner’s statement, a First Information Report (FIR)
was registered being No.480/2005 on 14th September 2005 that is the same day, under Sections

376/392/397/342/506 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. On the same day her medical examination
was conducted in the same hospital, which was a traumatic experience by itself. She avers that
the during the examination the doctor kept telling her that there was no injury mark on her body,
thus implying that she had consented to the sexual assault. She also avers that the police
investigation was a farce and no sincere efforts were made by them to nab the culprit. Further,
she alleges that she was harassed several times by the Police and forced to admit that the person
arrested by the police was the accused, though the reality was otherwise.
4.      The Petitioner thereafter, represented repeatedly to various authorities, including National
Human Rights Commission, Chief Minister of Delhi, etc. In the representations she had stated
that the case was not being investigated properly and that her report was not properly recorded. It
was also stated that no medical report was given to the Petitioner, nor was she informed about
the developments in the case and that a lady constable of the Sarojini Nagar Police Station went
to meet her and posed as Member of the National Commission for Women. The petitioner also
alleges that the wrong person was arrested, despite her protestations and that the overall conduct
of the investigations by the second respondent is indifferent and apathetic. She claims to be
suffering from trauma arising out of the incident, even now. It is further averred that the
petitioner was not provided with any legal assistance, and that this was is in violation of the
orders of the Supreme Court. She alleges to suffering from severe depression and is under a lot
 W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                         3

of mental stress.
5.      The Petitioner, troubled by absence of legal assistance, laxity in investigation and
psychological trauma, claims an order directing the Respondents to pay compensation of Rs.15
Lakhs or any other appropriate amount, direct the Respondents to provide appropriate legal
assistance to the petitioner as early as possible, as well as direct the first Respondent to take
suitable measures to set up institutions such as Criminal Injuries Compensation Board for
providing relief to the victims of the cases like sexual assault, rape etc.
6.      Mr. Mukesh Anand, learned counsel for the Petitioner contended that the respondents did
not discharge their duty and diligently investigate the matter, thereby violating her right to lead a
dignified life. Further, no legal assistance whatsoever was provided to the petitioner as per the
decision of the Supreme Court in Delhi Domestic Working Women's Forum v. Union of India,
(1995) 1 SCC 14 and Bodhisattwa Gautam v. Shubra Chakraborty (1996) 1 SCC 490. Placing
reliance on Chairman Railway Board v. Chandrima Das, (2000) 2 SCC 465, it was contended
that the Petitioner was entitled to compensation because the rape perpetrated upon her, took
place in a public hospital which is under the control and supervision of the first Respondent, due
to inadequate safety measures.
7.      The first Respondent avers that on 15th September 2005, the Police arrested one Mr.
Sanjay at the Safdarjung Bus Stop, for assaulting a lady and a FIR was duly registered. He was

sent to Safdarjung Hospital for Medical Examination and the Petitioner who was present in the
Hospital, identified him as the accused-rapist. Consequently, he was arrested for the offence and
the Petitioner and the former signed the arrest memo on 16th September 2005. The accused also
made a disclosure statement stating he had raped the petitioner and he sold her gold ornaments to
one Mr. Hari Om, which was recovered. They also aver that when Smt. Nirmala Venkatesh,
Member of National Commission for Women, visited the Police Station and questioned the
accused and Petitioner, the latter admitted that she was raped by Sanjay. The accused
subsequently retracted his admission of rape, was sent to judicial custody and the case
transferred to Crime Branch.
8.      The first respondent also avers that when the petitioner’s clothes and blood samples of
the accused were sent for examination to CFSL, Rohini, it was found that the DNA samples did
not match. After receipt of the reports from CFSL, Rohini, the Police moved an application for
discharge of accused. The Petitioner retracted her statement of 16th September 2005 before
Sessions Court at Patiala House and stated that the accused had not raped her. The samples were
again sent for confirmation to CDFD, Hyderabad whose report discloses that the samples did not
match. The accused was released on bail in June 2006 but was however not discharged from the
case against him. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the first Respondent that the
investigation was carried out properly, and with diligence; no attempt what so ever was made to
subvert the due process. Since the matter is pending trial, the petitioner’s grievances are
  W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                      5

premature and that she was not entitled to the relief claimed.
9.      The second Respondent submits that the Police were informed immediately after the
incident took place and that they fully co-operated with the investigation. The Police conducted
an identification parade on the staff of the Safdarjung Hospital and some of them were taken to
the Police Station for purpose of interrogation. They also submit that pursuant to a meeting of the
Chief Medical Officer (Security), Safdarjung Hospital and the Deputy Commissioner of Police
(South), held on 13th September 2005, the following measures for augmenting security were
initiated;
“(a) Sensitizing the police staff to improve the presence and visibility in and
around Safdarjung Hospital Complex;
(b)     Deputing police personal in OPD & Motor Cycle and PCR for effective
patrolling outside the Hospital;
(c)     ACP Vasant Vihar and SHO Sarojini Nagar to keep liaison with CMO
(Security) for effective co-ordination;
(d)     Two Security Guards deputed at Gate NO.1 and 7, so that visitors to the
Hospitals are properly regulated with a view to keep an eye on anti social
elements;
(e)     The Hospital authority had issued stickers for hospital/staff vehicles to
ensure that only authorized vehicles enter the hospital and more parking places be
identified for safeguarding the vehicles;
(f)     All the officials have been directed to display their identify Cards
prominently. Further, processes for new Identity Cards (Smart Cards) to all
officials have been initiated.
(g)     All the contractors have been directed to get verified the antecedent of the
persons posted as security guards, canteen employees and Sulabh employees;

(h)     Separate Registration counters are running for males and females in the
OPD; and
(i)     A proposal for installation of CCTVs with a centralized control room has
been initiated.
10.     The occurrence of the incident is not disputed. Though the first respondent, in its
pleadings insinuated that the petitioner had made out a false case, during hearing its counsel, Shri
Marwah, did not pursue that argument. The police records, including the medico-legal
documents were produced. They reveal that the petitioner’s statement under Section 161, Code
of Criminal Procedure, was recorded two days after the event. The medical report shows that the
petitioner was examined; according to the doctor who saw her, the examination revealed that her
allegation of sexual assault was positive. He also recorded that swabs were not taken, due to the
petitioner undergoing her menstrual cycle at that time. These establish that the petitioner’s
allegations about rape stand established. The petitioner has alleged that despite her repeated
requests, the second respondent wrongly implicated someone who was not the perpetrator of the
attack; she explains that despite protests, her signatures were taken at the time of his arrest.
11.     The State and its agencies are under a duty to protect the rights of all persons to
meaningful life; dignity is an inalienable part of that right, guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution. The second respondent, as a public hospital, established and administered by the
Government and maintained out of public funds, was and is always under a duty to ensure that
those who visit it as patients or employees are adequately protected. The building and precincts
 W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                          7

of the hospital, though public property, by their nature, cast an almost fiduciary obligation on the
hospital authorities to ensure safety and security of individuals in it. This court is therefore of the
opinion that the respondents, particularly the second respondent had a positive obligation to
ensure the safety and security of the patients visiting it. The affidavit filed on its behalf does not
dispute the incident; it also does not dispute the lack of any effective measures to prevent the
occurrence of such incidents, at the time when the petitioner was assaulted. Its averments show
that some action has been taken, too late; for the petitioner it is of no use – it cannot even afford
her cold comfort.
12.     In the judgment reported as Bodhisattwa Gautam v. Subhra Chakraborty 1996 (1) SCC
490 the Supreme Court held that rape as an offence violates the fundamental right of a woman,
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution. The Court held that:
                “Rape is a crime not only against the person of a woman, it is a crime
                against the entire society. It destroys the entire psychology of a woman
                and pushes her into deep emotional crisis. Rape is, therefore, the most
                hated crime. It is a crime against basic human rights and is violative of
                the victim's most cherished right, namely, right to life which includes right
                to live with human dignity contained in Article 21.”
13.     The concept of compensation under public law, for injuries caused due to the negligence
inaction or indifference of public functionaries or for the violation of fundamental rights is not a
novelty in Indian jurisprudence. The power of the High Courts and the Supreme Court under
Article 226 and Article 32 respectively, to mould the relief so as to compensate the victim has

been affirmed by the Supreme Court on numerous occasions including Common Cause, A
Registered Society v. Union of India, (1999) 6 SCC 667, Chairman Railway Board v.
Chandrima Das, (2000) 2 SCC 465, Delhi Domestic Working Women's Forum v. Union of India,
(1995) 1 SCC 14, D.K. Basu v. State of W.B, (1997) 1 SCC 416, Rudul Shah v. State of Bihar,
(1983) 4 SCC 141. The concept of compensation under public law must be understood as being
different from the concept of damages under private law. Compensation under public law must
not be merely seen as the moneyed equivalent of the injury caused, but must be understood in the
context of the failure of the State to protect the valuable rights of the citizens, more so in the case
of the marginalized and the oppressed.
14.      It has long been established that the right to life enshrined in Article 21 is not a right to
mere vegetative (“animal”) existence, but to a life with dignity and a decent standard of living.
Rape is criminalized not just because it violates the bodily integrity of a woman, but also because
it is an affront to her dignity as well. The physical scars may over a time, heal; the scars on the
pschye and the trauma caused by the assault may well alter the personality of the woman. The
road from being a victim suffering paying for what is not her doing, to a survivor awakening to a
new existence is long; many seldom cover it fully, if at all. In this background the failure of the
State to prevent the occurrence of such crime within premises under its control and the
subsequent indifference as well as insensitivity displayed in bringing the perpetrator to justice,
  W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                           9

strikes at the very root of the right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
15.     In Chandrima Das (supra) the Supreme Court, noticing that the General Assembly of the
United Nations, while adopting the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women,
by its resolution dated 20-12-1993, mentioned about obligation of the States to ensure that
women are not victims of violence, including rape (Article 2) held that this right is consistent
with the right to life under Article 21, of all who are protected by our Constitution. In that case,
the aggrieved was a victim of rape committed upon her in a railway compartment. The court
brushed aside the Central Government’s disclaimer of liability, and declared that the right of the
victim under Article 21 had been violated. It awarded Rs. 10 lakhs as public law damages.
16.     The Supreme Court, in Delhi Domestic Working Women’s Forum (supra) laid down the
following guidelines in relation to legal assistance for rape victims:
                1) The complainants of sexual assault cases should be provided
                     with legal representation. It is important to have someone who
                     is well- acquainted with the criminal justice system. The role of
                     the victim’s advocate would not only be to explain to the victim
                     the nature of the proceedings, to prepare her for the case and
                     to assist her in the police station and in court but to provide
                     her with guidance as to how she might obtain help of a
                     different nature from other agencies, for example, mind
                     counseling or medical assistance. It is important to secure
                     continuity of assistance by ensuring that the same person who
                     looked after the complainant’s interests in the police station
                     represents her till the end of the case.
                2) Legal assistance will have to be provided at the police station
                     since the victim of sexual assault might very well be in a

                   distressed state upon arrival at the police station, the guidance
                   and support of a lawyer at this stage and whilst she was being
                   questioned would be of great assistance to her.
               3) The police should be under a duty to inform the victim of her
                   right to representation before any questions were asked of her
                   and that the police report should state that the victim was so
                   informed.
               4) A list of advocates willing to act in these cases should be kept
                   at the police station for victims who did not have a particular
                   lawyer in mind or whose own lawyer was unavailable.
               5) The advocate shall be appointed by the court, upon application
                   by the police at the earliest convenient moment, but in order to
                   ensure that victims were questioned without undue delay,
                   advocates would be authorized to act at the police station
                   before leave of the court was sought or obtained.
               6) In all rape trials anonymity of the victim must be maintained,
                   as far as necessary.
               7) It is necessary, having regard to the Directive Principles
                   contained under Article 38(1) of the Constitution of India to
                   set up Criminal Injuries Compensation Board. Rape victims
                   frequently incur substantial financial loss. Some, for example,
                   are too traumatized to continue in employment.
               8) Compensation for victims shall be awarded by the court on
                   conviction of the offender and by the Criminal Injuries
                   Compensation Board whether or not a conviction has taken
                   place. The Board will take into account pain, suffering and
                   shock as well as loss of earnings due to pregnancy and the
                   expenses of child birth if this occurred as a result of the rape.
17.    Criminal jurisprudence has moved beyond the traditional domains of retributive and
deterrent values. The shift is increasingly towards victim centric compensatory models of justice.
Many societies have forged mechanisms to address these issues. The idea underlying
 W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                       11

compensatory justice is not merely to rehabilitate the victim, but also leads to a regime where
societal values in seeing such crimes as aberrations, entitling the victim to some form of
compensation due to the stark intensity of the crime. Therefore, the concept of a publicly funded
and administered body to compensate victims of violent crime has been in practice in many
countries across the world for quite a while. Compensation is granted not merely when the State
is at fault but also when the crime is violent and serious; and thus the role of the State assumes
the welfare hue. It would not be inappropriate to mention the characteristics of some such
initiatives.
18.      Set up in 1964 the Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority is responsible for
administering the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme throughout England, Wales and
Scotland. Under the scheme victims of violent crime are awarded compensation, according to
what they would be entitled to in a successful civil action. From 1996 each injury was awarded a
specific fixed compensation ranging from 1000 UK Pounds to 250000 UK Pounds. Apart from
these; the applicants are also eligible to get compensation for earnings and special expenses for
up to UK 250000 Pounds. The Ministry of Justice now funds the entire scheme; it was formerly
funded by the Home Office. Victims as well as their relatives/dependants are entitled for
compensation for personal injuries as well fatal injuries. Compensation is awarded to cover costs
of medical expenses, funeral expenses, and loss of earnings, mental stress and trauma, medical

expenses for special care and also for loss of reputation. While arriving at the decision to award
compensation the Authority looks into the previous criminal record of the applicant, the relevant
police reports, and medical reports among other criteria. A right to appeal against the decision of
the Authority is also provided.
19.     Several provinces in Canada have enacted laws ensuring victims of crimes are
compensated. The Ontario Compensation for Victims of Crime Act, 1990 provides for the
establishment of a Criminal Injuries Compensation Board. In its terms, victims their dependants
or by persons looking after them can claim compensation. Heads of compensation cover
expenses actually and reasonably incurred or to be incurred as a result of the victim's injury or
death; pecuniary loss incurred by the victim as a result of total or partial disability affecting the
victim's capacity for work; pecuniary loss incurred by dependants as a result of the victim's
death; pain and suffering; support of a child born as a result of rape and other pecuniary loss
resulting from the victim's injury and any expense that, in the opinion of the Board, it is
reasonable to incur. Apart from these, the Board is also entitled to award compensation in lieu of
any common law rights accruing to the victim. Interestingly, under this enactment, compensation
can be awarded irrespective of the factum of conviction, thereby signaling the change from a
deterrent/retributive model to a rehabilitative one. The compensation can be administered
through a lump sum payment or installments or under directions of the Board; thus, giving the
 W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                          13

Board sufficient leeway to ensure that no misappropriation of the compensation takes place.
20.     A similar regime is prevalent though state legislations in the United States and Australia
as well, where several states have enacted legislations and through their respective budget
allocations ensured that victims of crimes are compensated accordingly. In Western Australia for
example, under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Act 2003, compensation can be sought for
an incident reported to the police regardless of whether a person has been identified, charged or
convicted of the offence. An application can be lodged by a victim of an offence where they
were injured and/or experienced financial loss as a result or a close relative of a person killed as
the result of an offence. Compensation can be awarded for suffering bodily harm, mental or
nervous shock, or pregnancy, resulting from an offence. Compensation may cover: pain and
suffering; loss of enjoyment of life; loss of income; medical expenses and other incidental
expenses, such as travel for medical treatment or damage of clothing.
21.     In India, pursuant to the Supreme Court directive in the Delhi Domestic Working
Women’s Forum case (supra), the National Commission for Women drafted the Scheme for the
Rehabilitation for Victims of Rape, 2005. The scheme provided for the setting up of Criminal
Injuries and Rehabilitation Board at the District and State level and a National Criminal Injuries
and Rehabilitation Board. The scheme gives details about the constitution, functions and the
budgetary allocation of the Authorities constituted under it. It provides for compensating rape

victims, irrespective of whether the perpetrator has been brought to justice. It provides for legal
aid and other measures that will help such victims. However, there is nothing suggestive of any
further thinking on these issues, or executive will to take the thought further.
22.     Crime statistics in the recent past have shown that 22% of all the crime against women is
rape; in absolute terms, the figure reported for the year 2005 for India was 18,359; 34,175 cases
of molestation were reported and 9,984 incidents of sexual harassment were reported. There is an
upward trend in the reporting of these crimes, which poses a serious challenge to our boast of
achieving a safe and secure society, committed to securing justice and equality.
23.     In view of the above discussion, there cannot be any doubt that the petitioner’s right to
life and dignity were violated in the second respondent’s premises. The latter failed to ensure a
safe and secure environment; it is also evident that the directions in the Delhi Domestic Working
Women’s Forum were not observed. The liability of the first respondent to therefore, compensate
the petitioner stands established.
24.     As observed in this judgment, the impact of a complex offence such as rape upon its
victim is not merely physical; in effect it robs and violates the personality, undermining her
confidence and affronting her dignity, even self esteem. Any quantification of damages as
compensation would be a peripheral attempt. At best it can have only a palliative effect.
Nevertheless, in the absence of any other mechanism or judging in any empirical or actuarial
  W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                       15

manner, the extent of damages, the court has to fall back on an attempt to approximating the
measure of damages. Having seen the facts of this case, and the circumstance that the criminal
trial has not concluded as yet, this court is of opinion that the petitioner should be compensated
by the second respondent, to an extent of Rs.5,50,000/-. She should also be paid costs.
25.     As far as the larger question of implementation of the Delhi Domestic Working Women’s
Forum judgment is concerned, a direction is issued to the first respondent to prepare and
implement a scheme in line with the directions of the Supreme Court. The first respondent shall
prepare the guidelines and file an affidavit in this regard within two months, indicating
compliance. The first Respondent is also directed to prepare a scheme/ blueprint towards
ensuring compensation for victims of violent crimes, in consultation with the National Human
Rights Commission. An affidavit disclosing compliance and the steps to effectuate the measures
recommended by the National Human Rights Commission shall be filed within six months.
26.     In accordance with the spirit of the Supreme Court guidelines, The Registry of the High
Court is directed to substitute the name of the petitioner in the cause title with “Ms. X”, and carry
out the necessary corrections in the relevant records also. Certified copies of this judgment shall
also reflect this direction and the identity of the petitioner shall not be revealed under any
circumstances whatsoever.
27.     The writ petition has to succeed. The second respondent, is, therefore directed to pay

Rs.5,50,000/- as compensation to the petitioner. In addition, it shall also bear the costs of this
petition, quantified at Rs.30,000/-. Both these amounts shall be paid within 6 weeks. The
petitioner’s right to claim and recover further, additional damages or compensation from the
perpetrator of the crime, in accordance with law, is also expressly reserved. The writ petition is
allowed in these terms.
DATED:                                                             (S. RAVINDRA BHAT)
28th January, 2008                                                         JUDGE
 W.P. (C) NO. 2738/2006                                                                       17


