*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                                   Reserved on: 11.07.2017
                                                Pronounced on: 31.07.2017
+       W.P.(C) 4393/2017, C.M. APPL.19189-90/2017
        M/S. TOSHNIWAL ENTERPRISES CONTROLS LIMITED
                                                                  ..... Petitioner
                    Through: Sh. Arvind Nigam, Sr. Advocate with Sh.
                    Gaurav Kejriwal, Sh. Sujit Keshri, Sh. Mikhil Sharda and
                    Sh. Akshay Bhandari, Advocates.
                           Versus
        UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS                         ..... Respondents
                    Through : Sh. Sarfaraz Ahmad, Advocate with Sh. Birbal
                    Prasad, Director, USOF, for Respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
                    Sh. Dinesh Agnani, Sr. Advocate with Ms. Leena Tuteja
                    and Sh. Ishaan Chawla, Advocates, for Respondent No.3.
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.P. GARG
MR. JUSTICE S. RAVINDRA BHAT
%
Facts
1.      The present Writ Petitioner challenges the declaration of its bid as
non-responsive by Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (hereafter “BSNL” or
“Respondent No. 3”) in these proceedings, under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
2.      The facts are that BSNL on 08.04.2016 issued a Notice Inviting e-
Tender (“NIT”) calling for sealed online bids (tenders) for survey, planning,
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                       Page 1 of 19

supply, installation, testing, commissioning, integration with existing core
network and operations and maintenance for five years of 2G GSM BSS
network along with VSAT, HUB and radio backhaul to provide coverage in
uncovered villages of Arunachal Pradesh and Karbi Anglong and Dima Haso
Districts of Assam. The eligibility criteria for participation was laid down in
the NIT and the entire tender document could be obtained on payment of
₹10,000.
3.      The petitioner, an Indian Company, is engaged inter alia in the
business of manufacturing, sale and supply of 2G BSS compliant equipment
along with other allied products. The petitioner paid the requisite amount of
₹10,000 and obtained the complete set of tender documents. Clause 11 of
Section 4B of the said Tender stipulated that the bidder should clearly
specify ownership, IPRs and certain other rights with respect to
Technology/Design(s) of GSM BSS and if such technology/design was not
developed by the bidder, the bidder was required to submit MOU Agreement
with the technology provider as per the pro-forma in Section 7G and Board
Resolution of the Technology Providing Company as per the pro-forma in
Section 7H notarized or attested by the Indian Embassy/High Commission in
the country where such foreign origin company is situated. The Petitioner
wrote to BSNL seeking certain clarifications regarding this Clause, which
among other queries, were answered by BSNL by letter, dated 25.07.2016.
4.      In terms of the said Tender documents, the bidder had to submit its
techno-commercial bid along with the documents regarding its complying
with the eligibility- i.e. technical and commercial conditions, and a financial
bid in two separate envelopes within 150 days from the tender opening date.
The Petitioner submitted its bid on 10.08.2016 and also submitted a Bank
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                      Page 2 of 19

Guarantee for ₹2,00,00,000/- paid as security deposit. A Committee for
Evaluating the Techno-Commercial bids (“CET”) was formed by BSNL to
evaluate the bids and the Petitioner along with four others (namely M/s ITI,
M/s VNL, M/s HFCL and M/s Fibcom) were invited to offer their
equipments for field-testing in Arunachal Pradesh. Of the five, M/s Fibcom
did not submit its equipment for the field test. The Petitioner received a test
schedule for conducting the field test of its equipment, from BSNL, dated
27.08.2016. Accordingly, field tests were conducted for the Petitioner and
three others, after which the equipments of two bidders- M/s VNL and M/s
HFCL were considered to have qualified. The equipments of the other two,
which included the Petitioner, were considered by BSNL to have failed the
test.
5.      Thereafter, a number of representations were made by the Petitioner
and the other unsuccessful bidders regarding the method of field testing of
the equipment as well as the subsequent evaluation of the bids. Considering
these representations, BSNL at its meeting dated 16.01.2017 decided to give
another opportunity to all the bidders to re-submit their tenders and furnish
their equipment for re-testing, and decided that it would call for clarifications
from the bidders who had submitted incomplete/not submitted required
documents as per the terms and conditions of the tender documents.
Thereafter, BSNL retested the equipment of the four bidders who offered
their equipment for testing and concluded that all four had passed in the re-
test conducted in Arunachal Pradesh. After retests were conducted, BSNL
(through the CET) requested clarifications from all the bidders and re-
evaluated their bids. The bids of M/s HFCL and M/s VNL were considered
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                      Page 3 of 19

techno-commercially responsive, while the rest of the bids, including that of
the Petitioner, were considered to be non-responsive.
6.      Several complaints were received by BSNL regarding the retesting
and the subsequent re-evaluation of the bids. BSNL, therefore, decided to
obtain legal opinion from the Attorney General for India on the correctness
of the process followed in the tender. By letter dated 20.04.2017, the
Attorney General opined that the process followed by BSNL was without
flaw. Thereafter, the financial bids of the two tenderers whose bids were
found techno-commercially responsive, i.e. M/s. HFCL and M/s. VNL were
opened online on 25.04.2017.
7.      The petitioner complains that the declaration of its bid as non-
responsive by BSNL was illegal, arbitrary and reeks of its mala fides. It was
submitted that the rejection of the bid for not having submitted the required
documentation was clearly an afterthought, designed to frustrate the
petitioner’s bid. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted, that once
the petitioner was invited to offer its equipment for field-testing, and it tested
successfully, its bid could not then be rejected for failure to submit required
documentation. It was argued that the terms of the tender made it clear that
only those bidders would be called upon to offer their equipment for field
testing, whose bids were found otherwise complete with respect to
documentation and other eligibility conditions. Therefore, the fact that the
petitioner was asked to offer its equipment for field testing, that too twice,
ipso facto meant that it had satisfied the other eligibility requirements with
respect to documentation. Specifically, with respect to clause 11.1(a) of
Section 4 Part B of the Tender document, the petitioner contended that it
had sought clarifications from BSNL and subsequent to the replies received,
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                       Page 4 of 19

it had submitted all relevant documents in accordance with the latter’s
replies. The petitioner further argued that having offered its equipment for
field testing twice, and the same having passed the test (as declared by
BSNL itself in the second round), and having regard to the fact that it had
already incurred expenditure of nearly ₹1 crore, it had a legitimate
expectation that its bid would be opened.
8.      The petitioner also alleged that BSNL had an inherent and evident bias
against it and proceeded in a manner that demonstrated this bias. BSNL did
not provide the petitioner with a hearing nor did it specify the reasons for
declaring the petitioner’s bid as non-responsive. Rather, BSNL proceeded
with haste in opening the financial bids of the rest of the tenderers. On the
other hand, in relation to M/s. HFCL, although it had not submitted the
Consolidated Unpriced Bill of Material (BOM) according to clause 12 of the
Tender document, its bid was declared by BSNL to be techno-commercially
responsive. This differentiation of treatment, urged the petitioner, was
manifestly unreasonable and evidenced the discriminatory intent of BSNL.
9.      It is argued by Mr. Nigam, learned senior counsel, that the ground
which BSNL stresses in these proceedings, i.e the IPRs for the technology
provided or used under the tender conditions, had not been obtained, is
without foundation. It is submitted that M/S TECL was owner of the
technology that was to be used, under the contract. M/s Altobridge had
entered      into  an   agreement     to  provide  all  necessary    technical
information/know-how (hardware and software of GSM BSS) as to enable
the petitioner to manufacture the GSM BSS solutions with TEC
specification. Later, Altobridge went into liquidation and its successor, VT-
iDirect bought the technology through the receiver. It was submitted that VT
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                    Page 5 of 19

iDirect’s affidavit in this regard was furnished to BSNL; furthermore, the
technology was transferred from "source code" level from VTiDirect to
TECL. It was submitted that each of these facts were supported by
documentary material and evidence. Despite these, BSNL, in an arbitrary
manner has proceeded to say that the IPR ownership was not established.
Counsel relied upon the petitioner’s letters dated 17.02.2017 and 21.04.2017
to BSNL, to say that there was sufficient clarification to the queries made
and that there was no rationale for concluding that the eligibility terms
Clause11 (1) (a) and 11 (2) of Section 4B had not been complied with. It was
argued that the petitioner had clarified that in fact it had ownership of the
Intellectual Property rights in respect of the technology associated with the
subject matter of the tender.
10.     Mr. Nigam also submitted that the so-called non-compliance for
reason of not furnishing an undertaking in format 7H is not correct. He said
that the forms, including Form 7H were in order. It was also argued that the
format of 7G/7H given in the tender document software does not envisage a
situation where it involves complete technology transfer. Therefore, it had to
be modified suitably to meet the situation where only transfer of technology
with respect to IPR is involved.
11.     Learned senior counsel argued that the grounds taken by BSNL to
reject the petitioner’s bid were specious. It was submitted that BSNL has
favored another bidder, HFCL, though its tender had deficiencies. It was
submitted that in the name of seeking clarifications, BSNL allowed changes
in the documents submitted by HFCL, which was arbitrary as well as
discriminatory.
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                   Page 6 of 19

12.     BSNL urges, and its senior counsel, Mr. Dinesh Agnani, submits that
all due procedures and processes in evaluating the bids of the tenderers were
followed. It was urged that BSNL fairly conducted the entire process by first
inviting all the bidders to submit their equipment for field testing, in which
the petitioner’s equipment failed to clear the test. Nonetheless, in view of the
representations received from the unsuccessful bidders, BSNL in its meeting
decided to offer another chance to all the bidders to submit their equipment
for re-testing, along with deciding to call for clarifications from bidders who
had submitted incomplete documents or not submitted relevant documents.
Retests were conducted by BSNL thereafter and it was found that all four
bidders who had offered their equipment for field-testing had passed.
However, in terms of what was decided in its meeting on 11.01.2017, BSNL
also decided to call for clarifications from bidders who had not submitted the
entire documentation required. Accordingly, the CET called for clarifications
from the bidders, including the petitioner and thereafter, after receiving
responses to these clarifications, the CET evaluated all the bids.
13.     Reliance is placed upon the fact that BSNL had also sought legal
opinion from the Attorney General as to the effect of the process followed by
it and the legal opinion given was that the process followed by BSNL in
evaluating the tenders could not be faulted. It is urged that despite the
petitioner admittedly not having furnished the required documentation as per
Clause 11 of the Tender document, instead of rejecting the bid outright, the
CET asked for clarifications from the petitioner. It is only after receiving
responses from the petitioner, that the CET proceeded to evaluate its bid and
found the same to be techno-commercially non-responsive. In such
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                      Page 7 of 19

circumstances, the Court should be loath and circumspect in exercising its
power of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution.
14.     Mr. Agnani points out that the issue of IPR ownership is not as clear
or unambiguous as the petitioner makes it to be. It is submitted that the
agreement evidencing that technology was transferred from "source code"
level from VT iDirect to TECL and that Altobridge had no right or interest in
the IPR rights was unclear. Moreover, the agreement and other documents
relied on by the petitioner showed that the conditions therein had not been
performed, which meant that there was no transfer of technology.
Furthermore, the petitioner could not argue that any change in the prescribed
format, was inconsequential. Indeed, if it felt any difficulty in complying
with any prescribed condition because of peculiar circumstances, it could not
have unilaterally altered the format; rather it should have sought specific
clarifications or made queries at the pre-tender stage. Not having done so, on
the one hand, and in proceeding to furnish its bid, on the basis of altered
formats, including alteration in the undertaking, the petitioner’s bid was
rendered non-compliant. This led to BSNL rejecting the bid. Lastly, it was
argued that after tests were carried out, the battery capacity for C-2 sites was
determined to be 414H. However, the petitioner’s bid offered only 400AH
batteries. This clearly disentitled it to award of the contract in question. The
stipulations clearly stated that the battery capacity had to be 414 H.
Decision and Reasoning
15.     The petitioner here calls into question the decision of the CET to
declare its bid as techno-commercially non-responsive. Before proceeding to
consider the merits of the rival contentions, it would be pertinent to revisit
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                      Page 8 of 19

the established principles in relation to judicial review in matters concerning
tender invitations by public authorities. In Michigan Rubber (India) Ltd. v.
State of Karnataka, (2012) 8 SCC 216, after reviewing a number of its
previous decisions, the Supreme Court noted:
        “Therefore, a Court before interfering in tender or contractual
        matters, in exercise of power of judicial review, should pose to
        itself the following questions:
        (i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by the
        authority is mala fide or intended to favour someone; or
        whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary
        and irrational that the court can say:
        “the decision is such that no responsible authority acting
        reasonably and in accordance with relevant law could have
        reached”; and
        (ii) Whether the public interest is affected. If the answers to the
        above questions are in negative, then there should be no
        interference under Article 226.”
16.     In the seminal case of Tata Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) 6 SCC
651, the law on this point was exhaustively reviewed and the Supreme Court
noted that in relation to public contracts and tenders, the following principles
are discernible from the plethora of decisions:
        1)      “The modern trend points to judicial restraint in
        administrative action.
        2)      The Court does no sit as a court of appeal but merely
        reviews the manner in which the decision was made.
        3)      The Court does not have the expertise to correct the
        administrative decision. If a review of the administrative
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                        Page 9 of 19

        decision is permitted it will be substituting its own decision,
        without the necessary expertise which itself may be fallible.
        4)      The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to
        judicial scrutiny because the invitation to tender is in the realm
        of contract. Normally speaking, the decision to accept the
        tender or award the contract is reached by process of
        negotiations through several tiers. More often than not, such
        decisions are made qualitatively by experts.
        5)      The Government must have freedom of contract. In
        other words, a fairplay in the joints is a necessary
        concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an
        administrative sphere or quasi-administrative sphere.
        However, the decision must not only be tested by the
        application of Wednesbury principle of reasonableness
        (including its other facts pointed out above) but must be free
        arbitrariness not affected by bias or actuated by mala fides.
        6)      Quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative
        burden on the administration and lead to increased and
        unbudgeted expenditure.”
17.     In Air India Ltd. v. Cochin International Airport, (2000) 2 SCC 617,
the Supreme Court held:
        “The award of a contract, whether it is by a private party or by
        a public body or the State, is essentially a commercial
        transaction. In arriving at a commercial decision
        considerations which are of paramount are commercial
        considerations. The State can choose its own method to arrive
        at a decision. It can fix its own terms of invitation to tender and
        that is not open to judicial scrutiny. It can enter into
        negotiations before finally deciding to accept one of the offers
        made to it. Price need not always be the sole criterion for
        awarding a contract. It is free to grant any relaxation, for bona
        fide reasons, if the tender conditions permit such a relaxation.
        It may not accept the offer even though it happens to be the
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                       Page 10 of 19

        highest or the lowest. But the State, its corporations,
        instrumentalities and agencies are bound to adhere to the
        norms, standards and procedures laid down by them and
        cannot depart from them arbitrarily. Though that decision is
        not amenable to judicial review, the Court can examine the
        decision making process and interfere if it is found vitiated by
        mala fides, unreasonableness and arbitrariness. The State, its
        corporations, instrumentalities and agencies have the public
        duty to be fair to all concerned. Even when some defect is found
        in the decision making process the Court must exercise its
        discretionary power under Article 226 with great caution and
        should exercise it only in furtherance of public interest and not
        merely on the making out of a legal point. The Court should
        always keep the larger public interest in mind in order to
        decide whether its intervention is called for or not. Only when it
        comes to a conclusion that overwhelming public interest
        requires interference, the Court should intervene.”
18.     In Master Marine Services (P) Ltd v Metcalfe Hodgkinson (P) Ltd &
Anr (2005) 6 SCC 138 the position was reiterated in the following words:
        "12. After an exhaustive consideration of a large number of
        decisions and standard books on administrative law, the Court
        enunciated the principle that the modern trend points to judicial
        restraint in administrative action. The court does not sit as a
        court of appeal but merely reviews the manner in which the
        decision was made.
        The court does not have the expertise to correct the
        administrative      decision.     If    a     review     of   the
        administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting its
        own decision, without the necessary expertise, which itself may
        be fallible. The Government must have freedom of contract.
        In other words, fair play in the joints is a necessary
        concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an
        administrative sphere or quasi- administrative sphere.
        However, the decision must not only be tested by the
        application of Wednesbury principles of reasonableness but
        also must be free from arbitrariness not affected by bias or
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                     Page 11 of 19

        actuated by mala fides. It was also pointed out that quashing
        decisions may impose heavy administrative burden on the
        administration and lead to increased and unbudgeted
        expenditure."
19.       In Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. Vs. Nagpur Metro Rail Corporation
Ltd. & Anr. 2016 SCC Online SC 940 the Supreme Court held as follows:-
        “14.....a mere disagreement with the decision making process
        or the decision of the administrative authority is no reason for a
        constitutional Court to interfere. The threshold of mala fides,
        intention to favour someone or arbitrariness, irrationality or
        perversity must be met before the constitutional Court
        interferes with the decision making process or the decision.”
20.     The above decisions are clear authority for the proposition that
ordinarily, the Court should not interfere with the decision making process
for award of tenders. The Government and the public authorities should have
freedom of contract and even if the Court finds some infirmity in the
decision      making     process,   unless   there   is    patent  arbitrariness,
unreasonableness or established mala fides from the record, the Court should
in the larger public interest, not interfere with the process. Moreover, it is
open to the tenderer to grant relaxation for bona fide purposes, or to insist on
strict compliance of certain tender conditions, as long as the same is not done
with a mala fide or discriminatory intent. Therefore, it is the decision making
process, and not the decision itself that can be looked into by the courts in
exercise of their power of judicial review.
21.     Keeping the above principles in mind, this court now proceeds to
examine the tender process conducted by BSNL in the present case. It would
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                      Page 12 of 19

be relevant, at this stage to reproduce the material terms of the tender
document:
        “Section 4-Part A
        14.0 Format and Signing of Bid
        14.1 The bidder shall submit his bid, online (in case of e-
        tendering) & through sealed envelopes physically (in case of
        tenders with manual bidding process),complying all eligibility
        conditions, other terms and conditions of tender document to be
        read along with the clarifications and amendments issued in
        this respect. All the documents must be authenticated, using
        Digital Signature (in case of e-tendering) & by hand signatures
        (for manual bidding process), by the authorized person. The
        letter of authorization shall be indicated by written power-of-
        attorney accompanying the bid.
        Section 4- Part B
        1. Eligibility Conditions-
        (e) Vendor quoting 20/30 Meter Guyed, Wired Mast as per
        design approved from Structural Engineering Research Centre
        (SERC)/ IITs, is required to submit design approval of
        20/30Meter Guyed Wired Mast from SERC/IIT within five
        weeks of Opening of Techno Commercial Bid. If bidder fails to
        submit these documents within the specified time, such bid shall
        be treated as substantially non and shall be rejected without
        detailed evaluation pursuant to Clause 22, Section 4A.
            ***************                      *****************
        11.1 The bidder shall furnish, as part of the bid documents
        establishing the bidder's eligibility, the following documents or
        whichever is required as per terms and conditions of the Bid
        Documents:
        (a) The vendor should clearly specify ownership, IPRs and
        certain other rights with respect to Technology/ Design(s) of
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                     Page 13 of 19

        GSM BSS. If offered technology/design of BSS is not developed
        by the vendor, the vendor is required to submit MOU
        Agreement with the technology provider as per Performa given
        in Section 7G and Board Resolution of the Technology
        providing company as per Performa given in Section 7H .
        These documents are required to be duly notarized. In case the
        company is of foreign origin, the notary has to be from the
        country from where technology provider is, alternatively, it
        should be attested by the Indian Embassy/ High Commission in
        that country.
        (b) The bidder should clearly specify OEM/Principal
        Manufacturer of Satellite HUB &VSAT equipments. If bidder is
        not OEM/Principal Manufacturer of Satellite HUB & VSAT
        equipments, it should have a back-to-back support agreement
        with OEM/Principal Manufacturer for support of offered
        product for tendered period duly approved by Board as per
        Performa given in Section 7l.
22.     It is contended by BSNL that the petitioner did not fulfill the above
mentioned eligibility conditions and hence its bid was declared non-
responsive. However, instead of rejecting the petitioner’s bid outright, BSNL
sought clarifications from it. Both in the written pleadings as well as in the
hearing before the Court, the parties placed significant emphasis on Clause
11 of Section 4B, and raised arguments regarding the petitioner’s
compliance or otherwise with this Clause of the tender document.
Admittedly, in terms of Clause 11.1 (a) of Section 4B, the petitioner had not
submitted an undertaking in the form of the pro-forma format 7G and 7H
that was specified in the tender document. In the petitioner’s case, the
technology it offered was not owned by it but was transferred to it by an
agreement signed with M/s Altobridge. It seems that sometime thereafter,
M/s. Altobridge went into liquidation and was acquired by VT-iDirect. In
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                    Page 14 of 19

this case, an undertaking from the service provider (VT-iDirect) was
admittedly not provided to BSNL in terms of the format prescribed in the
tender document. Moreover, the MoU provided initially was neither
notarized nor attested by the Indian Embassy/High Commission as per the
tender requirements. Subsequently, BSNL sought for clarifications with
respect to the petitioner’s non-compliance with Clause 11.1 as well as other
clauses. BSNL states that in the clarification submitted, the petitioner merely
reiterated its previous position and as such, the clarification provided did not
constitute compliance with Clause 11 of the tender document.
23.     The Court considers that it is undisputed that the petitioner did not
submit an undertaking in the required format in terms of Clause 11 in the
first instance and even the agreement submitted was not duly notarized or
stamped. It is important to note that instead of summarily rejecting the
petitioner’s bid, BSNL asked for clarifications from it, offering it a chance to
remedy its non-compliance. While the petitioner contends that seeking such
clarifications was belated and mala fide, the Court notices that in its meeting
of 11.01.2017 while deciding to conduct re-tests of the equipment of all the
tenderers, BSNL also decided to call for clarifications from the bidders who
had not submitted the required documents as per the conditions of the tender.
Thereafter, clarifications were sought by the CET from all the bidders,
including the petitioner. In the petitioner’s case, the CET was of the view,
that the clarifications provided by the petitioner were not sufficient to
remedy its non-compliance with the tender conditions. What emerges from
the CET’s 3rd Report (Technical Evaluation), is that the clarifications
provided by the petitioner were considered by the CET in detail and it
concluded       that despite   the  clarifications   provided,    the   required
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                     Page 15 of 19

documentation was incomplete and the bid was, therefore, found to be
techno-commercially non-responsive.
24.     The petitioner, no doubt, contends that it had substantially and
sufficiently complied with Clause 11; however, this Court considers that it
would be the discretion of the public authority which issues the tender to
evaluate the bid and the level of compliance it expects with particular
conditions of the tender document. In fact, the CET’s insistence of requiring
strict compliance with Clause 11 also seems to be based on reason; this
would be essential to ensure that subsequent to the grant of the tender, there
arise no issues with respect to IPR and other rights relating to the technology
of the service provider, especially in cases where the technology is not
owned by the tenderer.
25.     In the circumstances, the Court considers that the decision-making
process of the CET cannot be faulted. Concededly too, in terms of Clause
1(e) of Section 4B, the approved design was not submitted within the
prescribed time. The Court, taking into account the entirety of the factual
matrix, cannot discern any irregularity in the process adopted by the CET, or
find evidence of any mala fide on its part.
26.     The petitioner also alleges that BSNL has treated it in a discriminatory
manner by insisting on strict compliance with Clause 11, whereas in the case
of M/s. HFCL it had relaxed compliance with Clause 12 of Section 5B,
which requires the tenderer to submit a detailed unpriced Bill of Material.
Clause 12 reads:
        “12. Detailed Unpriced BoM:
        a. DTR provides a detailed requirement of the Purchaser. The
        Bidders shall provide along with the techno-commercial Bid,
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                      Page 16 of 19

        detailed Un-priced BoM as per the SoR line item indicating
        break up for each of the SOR line item with their quantity
        required to meet the performance requirement sought for in the
        GR and DTR. A detailed specification of generic items such as
        laptop and desktop computers, Printers, inverters etc shall form
        part of tile technical Bid and shall be of latest versions in the
        market.
        b. The price of each of the discrete items in Detailed BOM
        should also be quoted upto two decimal point as d percentage
        of the Quoted Price of concerned SbR line item in financial bid
        While apportioning the percentage price of a main item for
        which price has been explicitly quoted in the financial Bid, care
        should be exercised to ensure that the total of all the sub-items
        forming part of the main item shall be equal to 100 %. Care
        should be taken that absolute price value of the SOR line item
        or subitems should not be mentioned in Detailed Unpriced
        BOM, Make and model of the each of the discrete should also
        be mentioned Detailed Unpriced BOM,
        c. A Bid without the detailed BoM/BoQ may be rejected as
        substantively non responsive.
27.     In M/s. HFCL’s case, the CET was of the view that the information
required in the unpriced BOM was available in other documents submitted
by the tenderer and since the bidder had submitted all the information and
documents pertaining to the unpriced BOM, hence Clause 12 was deemed to
have been complied with. The Court does not find any irregularity in the
CET’s actions on this count. Since the CET was of the opinion that the
information required in the unpriced BOM was satisfactorily found in the
other documents submitted M/s. HFCL, it was open to it to find the bid as
techno-commercially        responsive.  The    Court    further   discerns      no
discriminatory intent on the part of BSNL, having regard to the fact that the
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                      Page 17 of 19

two clauses in question are different-in the petitioner’s case, compliance
with Clause 11 of Section 4B was in issue and in case of M/s. HFCL it was
Clause 12 of Section 5B. It would tantamount to either comparing apples and
oranges, or stepping into the shoes of the public authority to determine
whether the requirements imposed by these two clauses are to be given equal
weight, if the Court were to find discriminatory intent on the part of BSNL
in such a situation. As noted in a number of decisions, including Michigan
Rubber (supra), Afcons (supra), etc., the public authority issuing the tender
has the discretion in deciding whether certain conditions of the tender
document need to be strictly enforced and whether relaxation can be granted
with respect to certain other requirements. The Court has neither the
expertise nor the competence to undertake such an analysis-as to whether the
public authority must insist on the same level of compliance for different
conditions of the tender. In the circumstances, the Court does not find that
the actions of BSNL are either procedurally irregular, arbitrary or mala fide.
In fact, BSNL’s bona fides and anxiousness to preserve the fairness of the
tender process is also made out from the fact that it sought legal opinion, as
to the justification and fairness of the entire process. The opinion, dated
20.04.2017 expressed that the entire process was conducted fairly and was
without flaw.
28.     This court is unable to agree with the petitioner that the objection as to
IPR was fully or satisfactorily explained. It was submitted that the
documents furnished by the petitioner on the issue, clearly showed that IPRs
and the technology were not licensed or assigned to the petitioner. Rather,
the document clearly envisioned ownership of the IPRs would continue with
Altobridge.       Now, those documents (i.e. inter se the petitioner and
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                      Page 18 of 19

Altobridge) have not been brought on record. They were considered by the
public agency, i.e. BSNL. Furthermore, the inability to match the prescribed
criteria in respect of batteries, also furnishes adequate reason to BSNL to
have found the petitioner’s bid non-compliant. Given these facts as well as
the narrow scope of judicial review in such matters, this Court is of the view
that there is no reason to interfere with the tender process. It is only if the
decision of the CET is so unreasonable that no reasonable man would have
reached such a conclusion, can the decision be struck down; in the present
case, the decision arrived at by the CET seems not only perfectly reasonable,
but also procedurally regular and bona fide.
29.     In the circumstances, the Court is of the view that the writ petition is
unmerited. It deserves to fail. The writ petition is accordingly dismissed
along with the pending applications. There shall be no order as to costs.
                                                      S. RAVINDRA BHAT
                                                                     (JUDGE)
                                                                  S.P. GARG
                                                                     (JUDGE)
JULY 31, 2017
W.P.(C) 4393/2017                                                    Page 19 of 19


