$~32
*      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                    Date of Decision: 8th September, 2016
+      FAO 408/2015
       SANJEEV DESAI                                       ..... Appellant
                           Through:    Mr. Mukesh Gupta, Advocate
                           versus
       STATE NCT OF DELHI & ORS                            .....Respondents
                           Through: Mr. Arun Kumar Panwar, Ms.
                                       Aayushi Gupta, Advocates for Mr.
                                       Raman Duggal, Standing Counsel
                                       for Respondent No.1.
                                       Ms.Vrishti Gupta, Advocate for
                                       Respondent Nos.2 and 3.
       CORAM:
       HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUNIL GAUR
                           JUDGMENT
%
1.     Impugned order of 06th July 2015 dismisses appellant’s probate
petition in respect of the Will dated 14th March, 2011 by holding that the
Will produced by the appellant/petitioner does not inspire confidence.
2.     The factual backdrop, as noticed in the impugned order, is that
appellant is Executor of the Will of 14th March, 2011 executed by late Sh.
Lalit Mohan Gupta who had passed away on 05 th January, 2013. The
parents of the Testator had pre-deceased him and the Testator was
FAO 408/2015                                                       Page 1 of 6

survived by his wife Mrs. Constance Gupta and daughter, namely
Ms.Charu. The appellant/petitioner was appointed as Executor of the Will
in question as he was a neighbour and the close friend of the Testator.
The Will in question pertains to various amounts lying in the banks in
fixed deposits, shares etc. and immovable property i.e. First floor of the
property No.174-Golf Links, New Delhi which is under lease to M/s.
Desaico Consulting Pvt. Ltd. for a period of 20 years.
3.     The contents of operative portion of the Will in question
(paragraph Nos.7 to 9 thereof) have been reproduced by Trial Court in the
impugned order. A bare perusal of the Will in question reveals that the
aforesaid immovable property shall devolve upon wife and children of the
appellant. So far as the two only heirs of the Testator are concerned, as
per the Will in question, they get assets of the Testator which are in
United States of America.
4.     The death certificate of the Testator and the original Will in
question running into 4 pages was tendered in evidence. The valuation
report as well as publication in the newspaper was also tendered in
evidence. The daughter of the Testator had filed her evidence by way of
an affidavit before the Trial Court in which she had given no objection to
the grant of probate of the Will. The Testator’s daughter had also made a
verification and she filed Affidavit of 11th November, 2013 to this effect.
The original Will produced before the Court was laminated. The LRs of
the deceased resides in USA and they had sent self-attested signatures of
theirs which were tabulated by the Trial Court in paragraph 12.2 of the
impugned order. It is noted in the impugned order that last page of the
FAO 408/2015                                                     Page 2 of 6

Will filed in the Court contained 2 sets of signatures of the LRs of the
Testator.
5.      The Trial Court found that signatures of Testator’s daughter on the
left side of the Will did not match with her signatures on the right side of
the Will and the copy of the said Will is on appeal record as Annexure
A-5. It is noted in the impugned order that the explanation of petitioner to
the variation of signatures on the Will in question was that the signatures
on the right side on the Will were affixed on 27th January 2013 before the
Notary to get the Will attested, which has been done after the death of the
Testator. Trial Court concluded that this explanation raised further doubts
which were expressed in the impugned order in the following manner:-
              “(a) How for the purposes of self attestation done
              in USA when the original was with the
              petitioner/Executor.
              (b) What circumstances necessitated self
              attestation of Will (unregistered) by a Notary after
              the death of Testator.
              (c)    The entire evidence of the petitioner has
              claimed that the Will of the Testator has been duly
              notarized.”
6.      Trial Court has relied upon the Supreme Court’s decision in
Niranjan Umesh Chandra Joshi Vs. Mridula Jyoti Rao: 2007 (1) AD SC
477 and Surinder Pal Vs. Saraswati Arora (1974) 2 SCC 600 to observe
that where the propounder takes prominent part in the execution of the
Will which confers on him a substantial benefit, that is itself one of the
suspicious circumstances, which must be removed by clear evidence. The
Trial Court concluded that by disowning fourth page of the notarized
FAO 408/2015                                                       Page 3 of 6

Will, petitioner has defeated his entire case which was built on the
alleged notarized Will and that by the Will in question, substantial benefit
stood conferred upon the wife of the Executor and this by itself created
suspicious circumstance. While relying upon various decisions of the
Supreme Court, Trial Court has dismissed the probate petition by holding
that the Will in question is shrouded in suspicion.
7.     The challenge to the impugned order by the learned counsel for
appellant is on the ground that Ms. Charu, daughter of Testator had
travelled from all the way to USA and appeared before the Trial Court to
give no objection to the probate of the Will in question and there was no
question of doubt qua the so-called variation of signatures on the attested
notarized Will which was self-attested/notarized on 27th January, 2013
and thus, the Trial Court has erred in not relying upon the original Will,
which is there on the record. It is submitted that the primary evidence has
to be seen and that is the original Will itself and so, on the basis of
secondary evidence i.e. attested/notarized Will, the entire case cannot be
discarded without eliciting any clarification from the attesting witnesses
particularly when the daughter of the Testator had deposed to support the
Will in question.
8.     It was vehemently asserted by learned counsel for appellant that
there was no question of disowning of the fourth page of the self-attested/
notarized Will and trial court has erred in holding so. It was submitted
that by way of abundant caution, fourth page of the Will was got signed
by the attesting witness in the presence of the Notary to put the Will in
question beyond any challenge. It is pointed out that as per Section 68 of
FAO 408/2015                                                       Page 4 of 6

The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 the examination of one attesting witness is
required to prove the Will and the evidence of real daughter of Testator as
attesting witness is already on record. It is asserted that there was ample
justification for the Testator to bequeath his assets in India to the wife of
the Executor due to close relations and assets of the Testator in USA had
already been bequeathed to the wife and daughter of the Testator. Thus, it
is submitted that no suspicious circumstance exists to discard a validly
executed Will and the reliance placed by the Trial Court upon various
decisions is wholly misplaced and that the impugned order of 6 th July,
2015 deserves to be set aside and the Will in question ought to be
probated.
9.      After having heard learned counsel for appellant and on perusal of
impugned order, evidence on record and decisions cited, I find that the
queries raised by the trial court in the impugned order ought to have been
put to the attesting witness- Charu. A bare perusal of the evidence of the
attesting witness- Charu reveals that no court question was put to this
witness. Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that due to time gap, little
variation in signatures can take place. Otherwise also, there is no marked
variation of signatures of the attesting witness on the original Will and
notarized Will. So, on this ground, refusal to probate the Will in question
is wholly unjustified and trial court has erred in doing so.
10.     The answer to the query, as given by appellant’s counsel and noted
in the impugned order, is that self attestation was done by attesting
witness on the photocopy of the last page of the Will in USA and the
same was got notarized by the witness and the original Will as well as its
FAO 408/2015                                                        Page 5 of 6

last page, which was self attested and notarized, was sent to appellant.
The aforesaid answer cannot be termed to be implausible one and trial
court was unjustified in rejecting the probate on this ground as well.
Judicial notice can be taken of the fact that at times, a party may get the
Will notarized while being ignorant of the fact that a Will need not be
attested or notarized to seek probate. Infact, the probate petition was
based on original Will, which was laminated and merely because extra
copy of the last page of the Will was got separately notarized, would not
be of any consequence in the instant case because the original Will of 14 th
March, 2011 was produced before the Court.
11.    In the light of the aforesaid, the suspicion cast by the trial court on
the Will in question stands abundantly dispelled and so, reliance placed
by the trial court upon various decisions, as referred to in the impugned
order, would not be of any avail, as this Court finds from the evidence of
the Executor as well as attesting witness that there was no question of
disowning the fourth page of the Will in question. Thus, there was no
valid basis to discard the Will in question.
12.    Consequently, impugned order is set aside and the Will of 14th
March, 2011, which was got notarized on 27 th January, 2013, stands
probated subject to payment of requisite Court fees and upon furnishing
of requisite indemnity bond to the satisfaction of the trial court.
13.    The appeal is disposed of in aforesaid terms.
                                                           (SUNIL GAUR)
                                                               JUDGE
SEPTEMBER 08, 2016
neelam/r
FAO 408/2015                                                         Page 6 of 6


