*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                              Date of Order: May 02, 2018
+                    W.P.(C) 4640/2018 & CMs 17907-08/2018
        DR. JITENDRA KUMAR VERMA                           ..... Petitioner
                            Through: Mr. Shrey Yadav, Mr. Anshuman
                            Sahni and Mr. Apurv Chandola, Advocates
                     versus
        INDIAN INSTITUTE OF FOREIGN TRADE                  ..... Respondent
                            Through: Nemo
        CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUNIL GAUR
                            ORDER
                             (ORAL)
1.      On 23rd January, 2018, petitioner had received interview call for
the post of Assistant Professor Level-1 to be held on 8th February, 2018.
It is the case of petitioner that on 8th February, 2018, he had gone to the
venue of interview and he was abruptly told by the staff of respondent-
Institute that the panel members have stated that petitioner is not eligible
to attend the interview.
2.      Learned counsel for petitioner submits that on the same very day,
petitioner had sent an Email (Annexure P-2) to the Registrar of
respondent-Institute to find out as to why petitioner was not allowed to
appear in the said interview and on the next day, i.e. on 9th February,
2018, petitioner had received an Email response to the effect that
petitioner was not eligible to attend the said interview. Attention of this
W.P.(C) 4640/2018                                                    Page 1 of 3

court is drawn to a document (Annexure P-1 colly.), which indicates that
online applications were invited for the post in question, i.e. Assistant
Professor in Information and Technology, and as per this document
(Annexure P-1 colly.), the essential qualification for the post in question
is NET/SET/SLET and M.Phil/Ph.D. is desirable.
3.     Learned counsel for petitioner submits that petitioner had got the
Ph.D. degree in December, 2017 and on the day of the interview, he was
holding Ph.D. degree and so, there is no reason as to why petitioner was
not interviewed. It is submitted that in any case, Ph.D. degree was not an
essential qualification, but was desirable. Thus, it is submitted that
respondent be directed to call petitioner for the interview as the result of
the selection to the post of Assistant Professor in Information and
Technology has not yet been declared.
4.     Despite service of advance notice, none appears on behalf of
respondent-Institute.
5.     In the facts and circumstances of this case, it is deemed appropriate
to permit petitioner to send an Email to the Registrar of respondent-
Institute to specifically elicit as to how petitioner was not eligible to
attend the interview in question. Respondent-Institute shall give an Email
response to petitioner within 24 hours of receiving the said query from
petitioner.
6.     Respondent-Institute be apprised of this order forthwith to ensure
its compliance. If petitioner is not satisfied with response so received
from respondent-Institute, then petitioner would be at liberty to avail of
the remedies as available in law, if need be.
W.P.(C) 4640/2018                                                  Page 2 of 3

7.     With aforesaid directions, this petition and the applications are
disposed of.
       Copy of this order be given dasti under signatures of the Court
Master to counsel for petitioner.
                                                  (SUNIL GAUR)
                                                      JUDGE
MAY 02, 2018
s
W.P.(C) 4640/2018                                              Page 3 of 3


