                  IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL
                                 PRADESH)
                            Test Case No. 4/2005
                       On the death of Late Chauthmal Jalan
                       his legal heirs:
                       1. Smt. Ratni Devi Jalan, wife of Late Chauthmal
                           Jalan.
                       2. Shri Sanwarmal Jalan, son of Late Chauthmal
                           Jalan.
                       3. Shri Girdharilal Jalan, son of Late Chauthmal
                           Jalan.
                       4. Shri Ashok Kumar Jalan, son of Late Chauthmal
                           Jalan.
                       5. Smti. Dropadi Devi Singhania, wife of Shri
                           Satyanarayan Singhania, C/o Gopiram Satya
                           Narayan Singhania, P.O. Nalbari.
                       6. Smt. Sumitra Devi Gupta, wife of Shri Tak Chand
                           Gupta, C/o M/s. Globe transport Company,
                           Athgaon, gaushala Road, P.O., Guwahati.
                       7. Smti Lalita Devi Choudhury, wife of Shri Jagdish
                           Prasad Chaudhury, C/o M/s. M.M. Auto
                           Agencies, P.O. Bokakhat.
                       8. Smti Nirmala Devi Harlalka, wife of Shri Sajan
                           Kumar Harlalka, C/o M/s. Pawan Store, Tura
                           Bazar, P.O. Tura, Meghalaya.
                                                         ………..Appellants
                                 -Versus-
                       1. Shri Dindayal Jalan, son of Late Bhaniram Jalan,
                           resident of hem Barua Road, Fancy Bazar, P.O.
                           Guwahati-781001, District Kamrup, Assam.
                                                  …….Principal respondent
   Test Case 4 of 2005                                     Page 1 of 16

For the Appellants       :      Mr. O.P. Bhati, Advocate
For the Respondent       :      Mr. P.K. Roy Choudhury, Advocate
                                         BEFORE
                       THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MIR ALFAZ ALI
Date of hearing                 : 08.06.2017
Date of Judgment and order : 23.06.2017
                     JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV)
         This appeal under Section 299 of the Indian Succession Act is directed
against the judgment and order dated 16.08.2003 passed by the Addl.
District Judge No. 3, Kamrup in PTS No. 1/1987 granting probate in favour of
the principal respondent/plaintiff.
2.       Brief facts of the case are that one Late Rukmini Devi executed a
WILL in favour of the respondent, who is the grandson (son of the eldest
son) of the testatrix Rukmini Devi, bequeathing the properties mentioned in
the WILL. The respondent filed a petition for grant of probate in respect of
the said WILL. One Chautmal Jalan (since deceased) predecessor of the
appellants, raised objection against granting of probate, alleging that the
WILL in question was not executed by Rukmini Devi and the same was also
not duly attested as required by law and that the WILL was a fraudulent one
as Rukmini Devi was seriously ill and was not physically and mentally fit to
execute the WILL. Further contention of the objector was that the property
bequeathed did not belong to the testatrix. Contention being raised, the
probate case was registered as Title Suit and proceeded accordingly. On
death of Chautmal Jalan, his legal heirs, the present appellants were brought
on record. Learned Addl. District Judge on the basis of the pleadings of the
parties, framed the following issues:
         (i)     W hether the W ILL w as executed properly by testatrix ?
         (ii)    W hether the probate should be granted as prayed for
                 by the appellant? and
         (iii)   R eliefs if any.
Test Case 4/2005                                                      Page 2 of 16

3.      The plaintiff/respondent examined four witnesses, including himself.
The appellant/defendant also examined one witness. Upon hearing the
parties and on appreciation of the evidence, learned Addl. District Judge
granted probate of the WILL in favour of the respondent.
4.      Aggrieved by the judgment and order of the learned Addl. District
Judge, the appellant has preferred the instant appeal.
5.      I have heard Mr. O.P. Bhati, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr.
P.K. Roy Choudhury, learned counsel for the respondent. Also perused the
records of the Probate (T) Suit.
6.      In the first limb of his argument, Sri O.P. Bhati, learned counsel
appearing for the appellant submitted, that the appellant filed a petition
before the Trial Court, praying for leave to adduce documentary evidence
being a certificate issued by the doctor, but the learned Trial Court rejected
the petition and therefore, learned counsel pressed for remanding the suit in
order to enable the appellant to adduce the documentary evidence, with
regard to illness of the testatrix, as the appellant was prejudiced for denial of
the opportunity to produce and prove the medical certificate. Secondly,
arguing on merit of the case, learned counsel contended that Rukmini Devi
was not physically and mentally fit to execute the WILL and that there were
suspicious circumstances in making the WILL, which the respondent could not
dispel. Besides, proving that the WILL was properly executed, the respondent
was also under obligation to dispel the suspicious circumstances in execution
of the WILL, submitted Mr. Bhati. According to the learned counsel, the
beneficiary of the WILL took major initiative in execution of the WILL, which
created a suspicious circumstances and the respondent failed to dispel such
suspicion. Further contention of the learned counsel is that the testatrix did
not have title over the property involved in the WILL, and on that count also,
the learned Trial Court ought to have refused to grant the probate. Learned
counsel for the appellant placed reliance on the following authorities:
Test Case 4/2005                                                        Page 3 of 16

(i)     Gulam Qadir Vs. Special Tribunal & Ors. reported in (2002) 1 SCC 33
(ii)    Mahesh Kumar (dead) by LRS Vs. Vinod Kumar & Ors. reported in
        (2012) 4 SCC 387.
7.      Per-contra, learned counsel for the respondent, placing reliance on
the decisions in Durlabh Chandra Bhattacharjee Vs. Atul Barthakur reported in
2005 (4) GLT 306; Ghulam Qadir Vs. Special Tribunal reported in (2002) 1
SCC 33; Keshab Prasad Shah vs. Ram Pujan Shah reported in 2001 (3) GLT
436; Daulat Ram & Ors. Vs. Sodha & Ors. reported in (2005) 1 SCC 40;
Meenakshiammal (Dead) Through LRS & Ors. Vs. Chandrasekaran & Anr.
reported in (2005) 1 SCC 280; Surendra Pal & Ors. Vs. Dr. (Mrs.) Saraswati
Arora & Anr. reported in (1974) 2 SCC 600 and Dilip Dutta Bhowmik Vs. Mira
Dutta Bhowmik reported in 2007 (1) GLT 345 submitted that the respondent
has successfully discharged his burden to prove, that the WILL was duly and
genuinely executed and attested by witnesses as per requirement of law and
therefore, the impugned judgment and order, requires no interference by this
Court.
8.      Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act provides the requirement of a
will, which reads as under:
        “Section 63: Execution of unprivileged Wills. —Every testator, not
        being a soldier employed in an expedition or engaged in actual
        warfare, [or an airman so employed or engaged,] or a mariner at sea,
        shall execute his Will according to the following rules:—
                (a) The testator shall sign or shall affix his mark to the will, or
                it shall be signed by some other person in his presence and by
                his direction.
                (b) The signature or mark of the testator, or the signature of
                the person signing for him, shall be so placed that it shall
                appear that it was intended thereby to give effect to the
                writing as a will.
                (c) The will shall be attested by two or more witnesses, each
                of whom has seen the testator sign or affix his mark to the will
                or has seen some other person sig n the will, in the presence
                and by the direction of the testator, or has received from the
                testator a personal acknowledgement of his signature or mark,
                or the signature of such other person; and each of the
                witnesses shall sign the will in the presence of the testator, but
                it shall not be necessary that more than one witness be
Test Case 4/2005                                                         Page 4 of 16

                present at the same time, and no particular form of attestation
                shall be necessary.
9.      Unlike other document, a WILL comes into force after the death of the
testator/testatrix and therefore, when the WILL is produced before the Court,
the testator having already left the world, cannot come to the Court to say,
whether the WILL is genuine or not. Sanctity of a WILL is attached to the fact
that it is the last wish of a dead person. Therefore, while proving the
genuineness of a WILL, one must be vigilant that the last wish of dead man is
honoured.    Section 68 of the Indian Evidence Act provides as to how a
document required by law to be attested has to be proved. If a document is
required by law to be attested, at least one attesting witness is required to be
called for proving such document, if there be an attesting witness alive.
Though the proviso to Section 68 has given some relaxation to other
documents which are required by law to be attested, WILL is not included in
those exempted documents.
10.     Before adverting to the factual matrix of the case, it would be
beneficent to have a look at the authorities cited by the learned counsel for
the parties, as all those decisions are      basically relating to the principles
surrounding valid execution of WILL as well as the nature of proof required
for establishing proper execution of the WILL. The Apex Court in M ahesh
K um ar (Death) by L.R .S. Vs. Binod K um ar reported in (2012) 4 SCC
387 held as under:
                “19. The ratio of H. Venkatachala Iyengar's case was relied upon
                or referred to in Rani Purnima Devi v. Kumar Khagendra Narayan
                Dev (supra), Shashi Kumar Banerjee v. Subodh Kumar Banerjee
                AIR 1964 SC 529, Surendra Pal v. Dr. (Mrs.) Saraswati Arora
                (supra), Seth Beni Chand (since dead) now by Lrs. v. Kamla
                Kunwar (supra), Uma Devi Nambiar v. T.C. Sidhan (supra),
                Sridevi v. Jayaraja Shetty (supra), Niranjan Umeshchandra Joshi
                v. Mrudula Jyoti Rao (supra) and S. R. Srinivasa v. S.
                Padmavathamma (supra). In Jaswant Kaur v. Amrit Kaur, (1977)
                1 SCC 369 the Court analysed the ratio in H. Venkatachala
                Iyengar's case and culled out the following propositions: -
                "1. Stated generally, a will has to be proved like any other
                document, the test to be applied being the usual test of the
                satisfaction of the prudent mind in such matters. As in the case of
Test Case 4/2005                                                          Page 5 of 16

              proof of other documents, so in the case of proof of wills, one
              cannot insist on proof with mathematical certainty.
              2. Since Section 63 of the Succession Act requires a will to be
              attested, it cannot be used as evidence until, as required by
              Section 68 of the Evidence Act, one attesting witness at least has
              been called for the purpose of proving its execution, if there be
              an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the court
              and capable of giving evidence.
              3. Unlike other documents, the will speaks from the death of the
              testator and therefore the maker of the will is never available for
              deposing as to the circumstances in which the will came to be
              executed. This aspect introduces an element of solemnity in the
              decision of the question whether the document propounded is
              proved to be the last will and testament of the testator. Normally,
              the onus which lies on the propounder can be taken to be
              discharged on proof of the essential facts which go into the
              making of the will.
              4. Cases in which the execution of the will is surrounded by
              suspicious circumstances stand on a different footing. A shaky
              signature, a feeble mind, an unfair and unjust disposition of
              property, the propounder himself taking a leading part in the
              making of the will under which he receives a substantial benefit
              and such other circumstances raise suspicion about the execution
              of the will. That suspicion cannot be removed by the mere
              assertion of the propounder that the will bears the signature of
              the testator or that the testator was in a sound and disposing
              state of mind and memory at the time when the will was made,
              or that those like the wife and children of the testator who would
              normally receive their due share in his estate were disinherited
              because the testator might have had his own reasons for
              excluding them. The presence of suspicious circumstances makes
              the initial onus heavier and therefore, in cases where the
              circumstances attendant upon the execution of the will excite the
              suspicion of the court, the propounder must remove all legitimate
              suspicions before the document can be accepted as the last will
              of the testator.
              5. It is in connection with wills, the execution of which is
              surrounded by suspicious circumstances that the test of
              satisfaction of the judicial conscience has been evolved. That test
              emphasises that in determining the question as to whether an
              instrument produced before the court is the last will of the
              testator, the court is called upon to decide a solemn question and
              by reason of suspicious circumstances the court has to be
              satisfied fully that the will has been validly executed by the
              testator.
Test Case 4/2005                                                        Page 6 of 16

               6. If a caveator alleges fraud, undue influence, coercion etc. in
               regard to the execution of the will, such pleas have to be proved
               by him, but even in the absence of such pleas, the very
               circumstances surrounding the execution of the will may raise a
               doubt as to whether the testator was acting of his own free will.
               And then it is a part of the initial onus of the propounder to
               remove all reasonable doubts in the matter."
11.     Apex Court in Daulat R am & Ors. Vs. Sodha (supra) on proof of
will observed as under:
               “10. Will being a document has to be proved by primary
               evidence except where the Court permits a document to be
               proved by leading secondary evidence. Since it is required to
               be attested, as provided in Section 68 of the Indian Evidence
               Act, 1872, it cannot be used as evidence until one of the
               attesting witnesses at least has been called for the purpose of
               proving its execution, if there be an attesting witness alive,
               and subject to the process of the Court and capable of giving
               evidence. In addition, it has to satisfy the requirements of
               Section 63 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925. In order to
               assess as to whether the Will has been validly executed and is
               a genuine document, the propounder has to show that the Will
               was signed by the testator and that he had put his signatures
               to the testament of his own free will; that he was at the
               relevant time in a sound disposing state of mind and
               understood the nature and effect of the dispositions and that
               the testator had signed it in the presence of two witnesses
               who attested it in his presence and in the presence of each
               other. Once these elements are established, the onus which
               rests on the propounder is discharged. But where there are
               suspicious circumstances, the onus is on the propounder to
               remove the suspicion by leading appropriate evidence. The
               burden to prove that the will was forged or that it was
               obtained under undue influence or coercion or by playing a
               fraud is on the person who alleges it to be so.”
12.     In Surendra Pal & Ors . (supra), the Apex Court held that -
                       “(i) The propounder has to show that the will was
               signed by the testator : that he was at the relevant time in a
               sound disposing state of mind, that he understood the nature
               and effect of the dispositions, that he put his signature to the
               testament of his own free will and that he has signed it in the
               presence of the two witnesses who attested it in his presence
               and in the presence of each other. Once these elements are
Test Case 4/2005                                                        Page 7 of 16

                established, the onus which rests on the propounder is
                discharged.
                         But there may be cases in which the execution of the
                will itself is surrounded by suspicious circumstances, such as,
                where the signature is doubtful, the testator is of feeble mind
                or is overawed by powerful minds interested in getting his
                property, or where in the light of the relevant circumstances
                the dispositions appear to be unnatural, improbable and unfair,
                or where there are other reasons for doubting that the
                dispositions of the will are not the result of the testator's free
                will and mind.
                         In all such cases where there may be legitimate
                suspicious circumstances those must be reviewed and
                satisfactorily explained before the will is accepted.
                         In cases where the propounder has himself taken a
                prominent part in the execution of the will which confers on
                him substantial benefit that is itself one of the suspicious
                circumstances which he must remove by clear and satisfactory
                evidence.”
13.    What therefore transpires from the principles laid down in the above
authorities is that in a probate case, the primary burden on the propounder of
a WILL is to prove that the WILL was genuinely and properly executed and in
order to discharge such burden, he or she has to establish by adducing
evidence that -
       (i) The WILL was signed by the testator/testatrix
       (ii) At the relevant time the testator/testatrix was in a sound disposing
       state of mind
       (iii) The testator/testatrix understood the nature and affect of the
       disposition.
       (iv) testator/testatrix put his/her signature or thumb impression to the
       testament of his/her own free will.
       (v) testator/testatrix signed in presence of the witnesses, who attest
       the WILL.
       (vi)    Attested     witnesses  put   signature     in  presence  of    the
       testator/testatrix.
Test Case 4/2005                                                        Page 8 of 16

        Once these requirements are satisfied, onus of the propounder is
discharged. However, if it is found that execution of the WILL is shrouded by
any suspicious circumstances, the burden of the plaintiff extends to dispelling
or removing such suspicion, so that it can satisfy conscience of the Court that
the WILL was genuinely or properly executed. If allegations of fraud, undue
inference, coercion are brought, burden to prove those facts lies with the
defendant, who brings such allegations.
14.     In proof of the WILL, Ext.1, the plaintiff/respondent examined four
witnesses including himself as PW-4, others being the Sub-registrar, PW-1,
and the attesting witnesses PW-2 & PW-3. PW-1, the Sub-registrar, who
registered the WILL, deposed that on 24.07.1985, he registered the WILL
executed by late Rukmini Devi on commission in her own residence.
According to him, the testatrix was identified by advocate Mr. M.L. Beswala.
PW-1 further deposed that he explained the contents of the WILL to the
testatrix before registering it and according to him, the testator was steady
both mentally and physically and having understood the contents of the WILL
put her thumb impression in the WILL and on being satisfied as regards the
requirement, he registered the WILL. It was also elicited in cross examination
that on being asked by him, someone amongst the persons present there,
told the name of the testatrix Rukmini Devi and the testatrix, who was sitting
on a bed, endorsed by insiding her head.
15.     PW-2 Prabhu Dayal Jalan, who was an attesting witness of the WILL,
stated that he was present at the time of registration of the WILL and
corroborated the statements of PW-1, that the Sub-registrar explained the
contents of the WILL to the testatrix Rukmini Devi. He also stated that the
testatrix put her thumb impression in the WILL in his presence and the thumb
impression was obtained by Radha Krishna Jalan. According to him, the
testatrix was both physically and mentally fit. He deposed to have put his
signature in the WILL in presence of the testatrix after she had put her
thumb impression. According to him, the WILL was prepared by advocate
Test Case 4/2005                                                      Page 9 of 16

M.L. Besawala, as per the version of Rukmini Devi. The witness is found to
have withstood the cross examination, as nothing significant capable of
creating any dent in his testimony could be elicited during the cross
examination.
16.      PW-3, Kashi Prasad Jalan, another attesting witness, deposed
corroborating the PW-1 & PW-2 that the Sub-register explained the contents
of the WILL to Rukmini Devi. According to him, he put his signature in the
WILL in presence of Rukmini Devi and other witnesses. He further deposed
that Rukmini Devi put her thumb impression in the WILL and her thumb
impression was obtained by Radha Krishna Jalan. He also stated categorically,
that Rukimini Devi was physically and mentally fit at the time of execution of
the WILL. During cross examination, PW-3 stated that Rukmini Devi was not
suffering from any serious illness and pleaded ignorance about any specific
illness, out of which, Rukmini Devi, died. He also stated that he was not
aware of Rukmini Devi suffering from cancer. It has been elicited during cross
examination, that when he came to the house of the testatrix, he found
there, the Sub-register, Radha Krsihna Jalan, Prabhu Dayal and Dina Dayal
(respondent) as well as Rukmini Devi. This witness also stated that the thumb
impression of the testatrix was obtained by Radha Krsihan Jalan.
17.      The respondent, PW-4, stated that he was not present when the WILL
was executed by his grandmother and he came to know about the WILL later
on. In cross examination also he has stated that after one or two days of
making the WILL, his grandmother informed him about the WILL. This part of
the evidence of the PW-4, the propounder of the WILL, seems to have stood
contradicted with PW-3, who stated that Dina Dayal was also present at the
time of registering the WILL. Even if it is accepted that the PW-4 was present
at the time of registration of the WILL, that does not anyway affect the
veracity of the oral testimony of the vital witnesses, i.e. PW-1, PW-2 and PW-
3, which remained unshaken during cross examination, as nothing material
Test Case 4/2005                                                     Page 10 of 16

capable of creating dent in the testimony of the prime witness i.e. PW-1, PW-
2 and PW-3 could be elicited in cross examination.
18.     What therefore transpires from the evidence of all the witnesses is
that the testatrix put her thumb impression in the WILL in presence of the
witnesses and the witnesses also signed the WILL in presence of the
testatrix. The testimony of the Sub-registrar, PW-1 supported by PW-2 & PW-
3 clearly established that before registration, Sub-registrar explained the
WILL to the testatrix. The testimony of the PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 also
demonstrated that the testatrix was sitting with others at the time of
execution and registration of the WILL. No material could be brought on
record to show that the testatrix was not physically or mentally fit. The
unshaken evidence of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 that the testatrix was sitting
with others and approved by insiding head, when her name was stated by
one of the person present there, on being asked by PW-1, leaves no room for
doubt that the testatrix was in a sound disposing mind
19.     Learned counsel for the appellant contended that the testatrix was
suffering from cancer and she was not mentally and physically fit to execute
the WILL, but the learned Trial Court did not allow the defendant/appellant to
adduce evidence to that effect. Evidently, PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 have
categorically deposed that Rukmini Devi was in a sound disposing state of
mind at the time of execution and registration of the WILL (Ext.1) and such
evidence could not be shaken in cross examination.
20.     The document, which the appellant sought to produce and the
learned Trial Court declined leave, was a certificate issued by a doctor in the
year 1997, where it was mentioned that Rukmini Devi Jalan suffered from
cancer of her right cheek and as per records of Late Dr. N.K. Agarwal, biopsy
was done in August 1984. The application for granting probate was filed in
the year 1985 and the impugned judgment was pronounced in the year 2004.
Evidence of the parties were completed on 10.09.1993 as appears from the
Test Case 4/2005                                                     Page 11 of 16

trial court record and the certificate, which sought to be produced by the
appellant was obtained in 1997 in respect of an investigation having been
done in 1984. The certificate sought to be produced was issued by a doctor
from the record of another doctor, who was already dead and therefore, the
doctor, who issued such certificate, apparently did not have any personal
knowledge about the contents of such document. Had the testatrix been
suffering from physical ailment of such magnitude rendering her mentally
indisposed, why the appellant could not come forward with any evidence
regarding     mental   or   physical    indisposition    of  the    testatrix  is
incomprehendible. The appellants being near relatives (grand children) of the
testatrix, it would be absurd to comprehend that they could know about the
ailment of the testatrix only after obtaining the medical certificate in 1997.
Interestingly, DW1 deposed that he knew about the cancer suffered by
Rukmini Devi in 1984.
21.     In the above facts and circumstances, even if it is assumed for the
sake of argument, on the basis of the certificate issued in 1997, production of
which was denied by the trial court, that the testatrix was suffering from
cancer, and her biopsy was done, in absence of any other cogent evidence
indicating that such ailment rendered the testatrix physically and mentally
unfit to execute the WILL, the medical certificate, as indicated, even if
allowed to be adduced as evidence could, be of no effect on the face of the
overwhelming evidence brought on record clearly establishing that the
testatrix was mentally and physically fit at the time of execution of the WILL.
22.     Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that the plaintiff
being beneficiary, took a prominent role in execution of the WILL, which itself
was a suspicious circumstance shrouding the genuineness of the WILL. The
PW-3 deposed that Dina Dayal Jalan, PW-4, was present at the time of
registration of the WILL. Except the testimony of PW-3, that Dina Daya Jalan,
propounder of the WILL was present at the time of registration of the WILL,
there is no other evidence or material to show that besides, remaining
Test Case 4/2005                                                       Page 12 of 16

present at the time of registration of the WILL, Dina Dayal took any active
part. Evidently, one Radha Krishna Jalan obtained the thumb impression of
the testatrix. Execution and registration of the will (Ext.1) having taken place
in the house of the testatrix, mere presence of PW-4, being the grandson of
the testatrix and a member of the family, along with other witnesses and
Sub-registrar, in absence of any further evidence, indicating his active
participation in the execution of WILL, can by no stretch of imagination, be
held to be active participation or prominent role in execution of the WILL.
23.     Suspicious circumstances in respect of a WILL does not necessarily
mean any suspicion that may arise because of some contradiction or
discrepancy in the evidence. Suspicious circumstances must be one, which
was inherent in the transaction. Apex Court in M eenakhsiam m al & Ors.
Vs. Chandra Shekharan & Anr . reported in (2005) 1 SCC 280 held as
under.
                “20. In the case of Ryali Kameswara Rao v. Bendapudi
                Suryaprakasarao & others reported in [AIR 1962 AP 178] this
                Court while discussing the provisions of section 63 of the
                Succession Act, 1925, has held that the suspicion alleged must
                be one inherent in the transaction itself and not the doubt that
                may arise from conflict of testimony which becomes apparent
                on an investigation of the transaction…………………”
24.     Another question raised by the learned counsel is that the testatrix did
not have title over the property of the WILL and relying on a decision of the
Apex Court in Ghulam Qadir (supra) submitted that the probate court
before granting the probate, ought to have considered the fact that the
testator did not have title over the properly bequeathed by WILL in question.
It is now settled position of law that a probate court cannot enter into the
question of title. The enquiry of the probate court is limited to ascertain,
whether the WILL was genuine and it was properly executed or not. In the
above decision, the Apex Court was dealing with the title in respect of the
Test Case 4/2005                                                      Page 13 of 16

property involved in the WILL in a different perspective. The Apex Court in
Ghulam Quadir (supra) held as under:
               “Learned counsel appearing for the appellant referred to the
               judgments of this Court reported in Smt.Rukmani Devi & Ors. vs.
               Narendra Lal Gupta [1985 (1) SCC 144] and Chiranjilal Shrilal
               Goenka v. Jasjit Singh & Ors. [1993 (2) SCC 507] to urge that the
               probate granted in favour of the appellant by a competent court
               of jurisdiction is conclusive of the validity of the Will unless it is
               revoked and no evidence can be admitted to impeach it except in
               proceedings taken for revoking the probate. There cannot be any
               dispute to the legal proposition that the grant of probate
               establishes conclusively as to the appointment of the executor
               and the valid execution of the Will. However, it does not establish
               more than the factum of the Will as probate court does not
               decide question of title or of the existence of the property
               mentioned therein. If despite admitting the execution of the Will
               and issuance of the probate, a question arises as to its effect on
               the property of another person which is likely to be affected,
               nothing prevents the authorities under the Act to examine the Will
               or the probate to that extent”
25.     In K eshab Prasad Shah (supra), this High Court while answering
the question – “can the probate court decide the question of title or the
existence of the property allegedly bequeathed by will” held as under.
               “10. In view of the settled law by the Apex Court, for giving
               answer to the question posed in the opening paragraph of the
               judgment, it need not detain us any further. The answer is
               that a probate court can only go into the genuineness and the
               due execution of the will and nothing beyond that. It has no
               power to decide any question of title or the existence of the
               property itself or to the extent of property sought to be
               bequeathed. In other words, it cannot go into the question as
               to whether the will stood wholly or partially revoked.”
26.     The ratio of this decision was that in case of the property of third
party being affected or likely to be affected by a WILL, court is empowered to
examine that aspect. For example, even if a WILL is properly and genuinely
executed by the testator and probate is granted and a question subsequently
arises as to whether the title to the property involved in the WILL is really
conveyed to the beneficiary, because of deficiency in the title of the testator,
in that case, the probate will not be considered as conclusive proof with
Test Case 4/2005                                                         Page 14 of 16

regard to the title to the property in respect of which WILL is made. If it is
found that at the time of making the WILL, the testator had no title, even if
the WILL is genuinely executed, that would not convey any title to the
beneficiary and this aspect can be examined by any Court in any proceeding.
There is no scope for the probate court to enquire about the title of the
testator for the purpose of deciding whether the WILL was genuinely
executed or not.
27.     In Durlabh Chandra Bhattacharjee (supra) in paragraph-28 and
34, this Court held as under:
               “28.The Apex Court in Ishwardeo Narain Singh (supra) has held
               that the Court of probate is only concerned with the question as
               to whether the document put forward as the last will and
               testament of a deceased person was duly executed and attested
               in accordance with law and whether at the time of such execution
               the testator had sound disposing mind. The question whether a
               particular bequest is good or bad is not within the purview of the
               probate court. It has further been held that there is nothing in
               law which requires the registration of a will and to draw any
               interference against the genuineness of the will on the ground of
               its non registration was wholly unwarranted.”
               “34. In Chiranjilal Shrilal Goenka, the Apex Court has held that
               the probate court is not to decide the question of title or
               existence of property involved in the will but it has to seen
               whether the will was duly executed and attested as required
               under the law. It has further been held that in case of probate of
               will the Civil Court has no jurisdiction and the jurisdiction lies only
               on the probate court judgment by probate court is in rem and
               binds not only the parties but also the whole world. The Apex
               Court has further held that the decree passed by the court
               without jurisdiction is a nullity and non est. In Ghulam Qadir
               (supra), it has been held by the Apex Court that there can be no
               dispute to the legal proposition that the grant of probate
               establishes conclusively as to the appointment of executor and
               the valid execution of the will. It does not decide more than the
               factum of will as the probate court does not decide the title or the
               existence of property mentioned therein. A Division Bench of this
               Court in the case of Keshab Prasad Shah, replying on the
               judgment of the Apex Court in Ishwardeo Narain Singh, as well as
               Chiranjilal Goenka case has also reiterated the said position of
               law.”
Test Case 4/2005                                                           Page 15 of 16

    28.      The overwhelming evidence brought on record demonstrates that the
    propounder of the WILL has proved, that the WILL was signed by the
    testatrix Rukmini Devi in presence of the attesting witnesses PW-1 and PW-2
    and the attesting witnesses also signed the WILL as witnesses, in presence of
    the testatrix, and at the time of registration of the WILL, the Sub-Registrar,
    PW-1 explained the contents of the WILL to the testatrix. The evidence also
    shows that the testatrix had sound disposing mind at the time of execution of
    the WILL and she put her thumb impression out of her free will. The evidence
    also demonstrates that there is nothing material, which could be considered
    as suspicious circumstances shrouding the genuineness of the WILL.
    Although the defendant/appellant alleged in their written objection that the
    WILL was fraudulent one, no evidence has been adduced by the
    defendant/appellant to prove the allegation of fraud. It is settled position of
    law, that burden to prove any allegation of fraud, coercion, undue inference
    etc. lies with the person, who alleges the same. No iota of evidence has been
    brought on record in support of the plea of fraud.
    29.      In view of what have been discussed hereinabove, I am of the view
    that the propounder of the WILL has successfully discharged his burden of
    proving the WILL being executed by late Rukmini Devi out of her free will as
    her last wish and therefore, the appeal is found devoid of merit.
    30.      The appeal is accordingly dismissed. No cost.
    31.      Send down the LCR.
                                                                           JUDGE
Mkk
    Test Case 4/2005                                                    Page 16 of 16


