                           HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                                 W.P.(C) No. 15962 of 2010
        In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
        Constitution of India.
                                         --------
        M/s. Jindal Stainless Ltd. (now JSL Ltd.),
        represented by its duly authorized signatory,
        Sri Sanjay Ketan Swain,
        Deputy General Manager (Finance),
        JSL Ltd., Kalinga Nagar Industrial Complex,
        Duburi, Danagadi, Dist: Jajpur-755026                      …     Petitioner
                                       -Versus-
        State of Orissa and others                                 …   Opp. Parties
                     For Petitioner            :       Mr. B.K. Mahanti, Sr. Advocate
                                                       M/s. A.N. Das, N. Sarkar &
                                                       E.A. Das
                     For Opp. Parties          :       Mr. R.P. Kar,
                                                       Standing Counsel (Revenue)
                                            ----------
 P R E S E N T:
           THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SHRI V.GOPALA GOWDA
                                     AND
                  THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.N.MAHAPATRA
                                Date of Judgment: 07.08.2012
B.N.Mahapatra,J.           This writ petition has been filed with the following
        prayers:
                     “(i)  Admit and allow the present writ petition,
                     (ii)  Strike down Section 77(4) of the Orissa Value
                           Added Tax Act, 2004 read with the proviso to Rule
                           87 of the Orissa Value Added Tax Rules, 2005 as
                           ultra vires the Constitution of India and declare it

                                       2
                    as unconstitutional and violative of Articles 14,
                    19, 21 and 265 of the Constitution of India,
             (iii)  Strike down Section 42(5) of the Orissa Value
                    Added Tax Act, 2004 read with Rule 49(6) of the
                    Orissa Value Added Tax Rules, 2005 as ultra
                    vires the Constitution of India and declare it as
                    unconstitutional    and   violative   of   Articles
                    14,19,21 and 265 of the Constitution of India,
             (iv)   Quash the impugned audit assessment order
                    dated 20.10.2008 for the assessment year 2005-
                    06 and consequent demand notice(s) under the
                    Orissa Value Added Tax Act, 2004,
             (v)    Quash the impugned communication notice
                    No.2177 dated 16.05.2008 under the OVAT in
                    form VAT 306 issued by the Assessing Authority
                    and   the  enclosed   audit   visit report   dated
                    31.03.2008”
2.           Petitioner’s case in a nutshell is that it is a company
incorporated and registered under the Companies Act, 1956, having its
registered office at O.P. Jindal Marg, Hisar,-125005 (Haryana) and its unit
within the State of Orissa at Kalinganagar Industrial Complex, Duburi, P.O.
Danagadi, Dist: Jajpur, Odisha State. The petitioner is engaged in setting
up of an integrated Stainless Steel Plant as well as manufacture of Ferro
Alloys. It is a registered dealer under the Odisha Value Added Tax Act,
2004 (for short, “OVAT Act”). It is paying substantial amount of tax and is
listed as a Large Tax Unit (LTU).

                                        3
3.            The officers of the Investigation Wing of the Commercial Taxes
Department visited the business premises of the petitioner on 01.10.2007
without disclosing their identity and authorization. On objection and
protest, the petitioner was threatened with various coercive actions. The
petitioner therefore, under duress, protest and compulsion, rendered
necessary assistance to the said persons and provided all informations and
documents sought for from it. Documents and files were seized and
removed from the petitioner’ premises. No seizure list of documents and
files seized and removed from the petitioner’s premises was prepared and a
copy thereof was handed over to the petitioner. Audit was completed on the
same day. On or about 1st Week of January, 2008, the petitioner received a
notice in VAT 306 enclosing copy of Audit Visit Report indicating the date of
appearance before the Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, Jajpur Range,
Jajpur Road on 10th June, 2008. Pursuant to the above notice, the
petitioner appeared and provided details required under the notice. The
details were provided on various dates and last most important dates being
24.10.2008 and 15.11.2008. On or about 19/20.11.2008, the petitioner
received the assessment order dated 20.10.2008 (Annexure-2). Being
aggrieved by the said assessment order, the petitioner has filed the present
writ petition.
4.            Mr. B.K. Mahanti, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf
of the petitioner challenging the vires of Section 77(4) of OVAT Act read
with the proviso to Rule 87 of the Orissa Value Added Tax Rules, 2005 (for

                                      4
short, “OVAT Rules) submitted that the condition precedent of pre-deposit
of 20% of the tax or interest or both, in dispute, is ab initio void for
entertaining an appeal (which effectively is the first available opportunity to
approach the adjudicating authority) under the Scheme of OVAT is
unreasonable, oppressive and violative of and ultra vires Article 14 of the
Constitution of India. Lack of any provision in the statute and lack of any
power in the hands of the statutory authority for relieving the assessee of
the burdensome and onerous provision of pre-deposit (especially when the
tax amount in full is deposited at the time of filing the return), renders the
provision of pre-deposit unreasonable and hit by and ultra vires Article 14
of the Constitution of India. The scheme of assessment under the OVAT
being that of self assessment and the entire admitted tax being deposited
for acceptance of the return and the return to be valid, the stage of the first
appeal is the first available opportunity to the petitioner to agitate against
and raise any grievance against an impugned assessment order like in the
present case wherein an audit assessment under Section 42 of the OVAT
Act has been done. A condition of deposit of admitted tax in full and twenty
per centum of tax or interest or both, in dispute, at the threshold bereft of
any relieving provision renders the provision as oppressive and onerous,
unreasonable and unsustainable in law. Such situation militates against
the very spirit and concept of OVAT and defeats the very purpose of the
Statute. Such a provision especially in cases of unsustainable demands
makes the provision unreasonable, illegal and ultra vires Articles 14, 19,

                                       5
21 and 265 of the Constitution of India. The workability of the statute is
defeated and the entire appeal provision is rendered illusory and nugatory
as the opposite parties artificially and on flimsy grounds inflate the
assessed amount and thereby burden the assessee and realize twenty
percent of the inflated tax or interest or both through the provision of pre-
deposit in appeal and the balance of tax, interest and penalty for
conditional stay at the stage of hearing of the interim stay petition. Such
provision circumvents and defeats the very spirit and legislative intent of
introducing OVAT and repealing Orissa Sales Tax Act. The provision
thwarts, defeats obliterates and eclipses a substantive right of appeal of the
petitioner by imposing such an unreasonable and oppressive provision. The
concept of pre-deposit and artificially inflated demand in cases like the
present militates against and defeats the fiscal regime and causes severe
harm to perspective planning and defeats any fiscal discipline causing sever
harm to the economy.
5.           Mr. Mahanti, further submitted that the petitioner challenges
the constitutional validity of sub-section (5) of Section 42 of the OVAT Act
read with sub-rule (6) of Rule 49 of the OVAT Rules being arbitrary,
unreasonable, fatally hit by gross and flagrant violation of the principles of
natural justice. Section 42(5) of the OVAT Act and Rule 49(6) of OVAT Rules
are ultra vires the Constitution of India and also hit by doctrine of double
jeopardy. Section 42(5) of the OVAT Act provides that without prejudice to
any penalty or interest that may have been levied under any provision of

                                       6
this Act, an amount equal to twice the amount of tax assessed under sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) shall be imposed by way of penalty in respect
of any assessment completed under the said sub-sections.         There is no
provision to show cause as to whether penalty should be imposed or not
and therefore, this provision is rendered illegal, unconstitutional and ultra
vires the Constitution.
6.           Challenging the impugned notice dated 16.05.2008 (Annexure-
1)   vide communication No.1677, the enclosed audit visit report dated
31.03.2008 and the consequent audit assessment order dated 20.10.2008
(Annexure-2) for the assessment year 2005-06 and issuance of the demand
notice to the petitioner, Mr. Mahanti, submitted that those notices and
orders issued /passed by the opposite parties are not sustainable in law.
No notice intimating the date of audit visit in terms of Rule 42 of the OVAT
Rules was issued to the petitioner. Such fatal infirmity vitiates the entire
audit proceedings rendered unsustainable in law and the same is without
jurisdiction and non-est in law. Lack of any notice to the petitioner has
rendered the opposite party No.5 lack of the jurisdiction to proceed with
and take steps for making audit assessment. There exists no case for
satisfaction of the mandate of Rule 41(3) of the OVAT Rules and no case
can possibly be made out for dispensing with prior notice of tax audit
under Section 42 of the OVAT Act read with Rule 41 of the OVAT Rules.
There exists no revenue risk either on the basis of objective analysis or on
the basis of any intelligence report. The petitioner verily believed that no

                                       7
prior approval of the next higher authority has been taken in terms of Rule
44(3) of the OVAT Rules. The condition precedent for acquisition of
jurisdiction under Rule 41 of the OVAT Rules does not exist and therefore,
exercise of jurisdiction to dispense with the pre-requisite notice of audit
visit is an arbitrary exercise of power and is grossly vitiated and fatally hit
by inherent lack of jurisdiction in the hands of opposite party No.6. The
contents, findings and prejudicial material in the audit visit report and lack
of any opportunity to the petitioner to contend, rebut and reply to the
allegations in the said materials clearly violate the principles of natural
justice and render the consequent prejudicial finding leading to the audit
visit report and the assessment order unsustainable in law.
7.            The notice in Form VAT-306 itself is contrary to the provisions
of Section 42(2) of the OVAT Act insofar as the mandatory statutorily
prescribed period of thirty days granted therein illegally and in gross
violation of the principles of natural justice has been reduced to around
twenty five days. The audit visit report has been submitted by a person who
was neither a part of nor is the head of the team of audit visit on
01.10.2007. The approval of the audit visit report has been given by the
Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, Enforcement Range, Berhampur on a
report submitted by the Sales Tax Officer, Investigation unit, Bhubaneswar
as head of the audit team.
8.            Section 41(4) of the OVAT Act provides a period of seven days
to the authorized officer to submit the audit report to the Assessing

                                      8
Authority. But in the instant case, the audit report was submitted on
31.03.2008 i.e. after a period of six months from the date of completion of
the audit. Therefore, audit report and consequential assessment order are
unreasonable, unsustainable, non-est and void ab initio in law. The time
period provided under Section 42(6) of the OVAT Act is six months from the
date of receipt of the audit report. Section 41(4) of the OVAT Act having
been clearly violated, the authorized officer signed the audit report on
31.03.2008, i.e. exactly on completion of six months. The impugned audit
assessment order dated 20.10.2008 would also be barred by limitation and
the statutory bar would be fatal to the order/proceedings. Therefore, there
exists no jurisdiction in the hands of the assessing officer to proceed with
the assessment order under Section 42 of the OVAT Act. The assessment
order travels beyond the materials available in the audit visit report. The
said assessment officer also relies on extraneous and irrelevant material
which is neither on record nor is a part of the audit visit report. He has also
conveniently ignores materials on record. Hence the impugned assessment
order is liable to be quashed and the assessing officer has no jurisdiction to
travel beyond the mandate of the audit visit report and cannot rely on any
material which is extraneous and alien to the audit visit report.
9.           Mr. Mahanti, further submitted that the petitioner strongly
believes that after completion of six months as provided under Section
42(6) of the OVAT Act, no extension of time for completion of assessment
has been granted by the Commissioner. The audit visit dated 01.10.2007

                                         9
was followed by a report dated 31.03.2008. The report reveals that the
entire audit was for the period April, 2005 till March, 2006. The notice in
Form 306 enclosing the audit visit report is for the period 01.04.2005 to
31.03.2007 (i.e. 2005-06, 2006-07 and 2007-08) [upto 30.09.2007]. The
notice thus travels/transgresses beyond the period in the audit visit report
and it is therefore, ab initio void and non-est in the eye of law and without
jurisdiction. This clearly demonstrates that the order has been antedated
and the assessment order dated 20.10.2008 is fabricated document
inasmuch as in the order dated 20.10.2008 the materials submitted on
24.10.2008 and 15.11.2008 are incorporated. The interpretation of the
provisions relating to the input tax credit and disallowance thereof are
wholly misconceived and are based on an erroneous interpretation of law
and therefore the same ought to be deleted. The impugned assessment
order ignores the details submitted to opposite party No.6 which clearly
favours the petitioner and proceeded contrary to the materials available on
record and reaches a perverse and unsustainable conclusion and saddles
the petitioner with the extra demand and therefore, learned Senior
Advocate Mr. Mahanti, prays to allow this writ petition by granting the
reliefs as prayed in this writ petition.
10.          Mr. R.P. Kar, learned Standing Counsel appearing for the
Revenue submitted that an alternative and efficacious remedy by way of
appeal is available to the petitioner and the petitioner itself admits that it
has filed appeal against the impugned order of assessment before the First

                                       10
Appellate    Authority.   Therefore,  the  petitioner   cannot  avail  parallel
proceedings against the impugned order of assessment passed under
Annexure-1.
              Mr. Kar further submitted that the assertion of the petitioner
that the audit assessment order has been passed without giving
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and thereby principles of natural
justice is violated is contrary to its own averments made in paragraph 2(t)
of writ petition, wherein it is averred that the petitioner appeared, assisted
and complied with the direction of opposite party No.6 and provided all
material data for the purpose of assessment.
11.           Placing reliance on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in the case of Smt. Har Devi Asnani vs. State of Rajasthan & Others, 2011
(6) Supreme 596, Mr Kar submitted that the provisions of pre-condition to
deposit 20% of the tax or penalty or both in dispute to maintain appeal is
constitutionally valid. Provision of Section 42(5) of the OVAT Act
authorizing imposition of penalty equal to twice the amount of tax assessed
is constitutionally valid. Therefore, Mr. Kar, prays for dismissal of the writ
petition.
12.           On the rival, factual and legal contentions urged on behalf of
the parties, with reference to prayer made in the writ petition the following
questions fall for consideration of this Court:
       (i)    Whether the condition precedent for pre-deposit of
              20% of tax or interest or both in dispute in addition to

                                11
      payment of admitted tax for entertaining an appeal as
      provided under Section 77(4) of OVAT Act read with
      proviso to Rule 87 of OVAT Rules is unreasonable,
      oppressive, violative and ultra vires of Article 14 of the
      Constitution of India?
(ii)  Whether the provisions of sub-section (5) of Section 42
      of the OVAT Act, 2004 read with sub-rule (6) of Rule
      49 of the OVAT Rules, 2005 authorizing imposition of
      penalty equal to twice the amount of tax assessed
      under Section 42(3) and (4) of the OVAT Act are
      arbitrary, unreasonable, oppressive and ultra vires the
      Constitution of India?
(iii) Whether the Authorized Officer has not submitted
      audit visit report to the Assessing Authority within
      seven days from the date of audit as provided under
      Section 41(4) of the OVAT Act and thereby the
      impugned audit      report dated 31.03.2008 and audit
      assessment dated 20.08.2008 would be non est /
      unsustainable in the eye of law?
(iv)  Whether the audit visit report is vitiated on the ground
      that the same has been submitted by an officer who
      was neither a part of nor is the head of the team of
      audit?
(v)   Whether statutory period of 30 days allowed in Section
      42(2) of the OVAT Act, 2005 has not been extended to
      the petitioner in Form VAT 306 and thereby the audit
      assessment proceedings are vitiated?
(vi)  Whether the Investigation Wing of the Commercial
      Taxes Department without disclosing their identity and
      authorization in their favour visited the business

                                 12
       premises of the petitioner on 01.10.2007 and on
       objection and protest the petitioner was threatened
       with various coercive actions as a result of which the
       petitioner under duress, protest and compulsion
       rendered necessary assistance to the Investigating
       Officer and provided all materials and documents
       sought for from him?
(vii)  Whether the documents filed were seized and removed
       by the Investigating Officials from the business
       premises of the petitioner without preparing and
       handing over any seizure list to the petitioner?
(viii) Whether there exists no case for dispensing with prior
       notice on tax audit under Section 42 of the OVAT Act,
       2004 read with Rule 42 of the OVAT Rules, 2005 ?
(ix)   Whether    the  pre-condition   of   an  intelligence  or
       information regarding evasion of tax was not satisfied
       as required under Rule 41(3) of the OVAT Rules before
       an order was passed by the Commissioner for audit
       under that Rule?
(x)    Whether no prior or post facto approval of the next
       higher authority as provided under Rule 44(3) of the
       Rules has been taken for directing audit under Rule
       41(3) of the OVAT Rules.
(xi)   Whether     approval   of   the   report   by   Assistant
       Commissioner     of  Sales   Tax,   Enforcement    Range
       Berhampur renders the approval of report to be
       vulnerable and a case of mechanical exercise of power
       without any application of mind?
(xii)  Whether AVR reveals that the entire audit is for the
       period April, 2005 till March, 2006, but the notice is

                                 13
       for the period from 01.04.2005 to 31.03.2007 and
       thus the notice travels/transgresses beyond the period
       in audit visit report and therefore without jurisdiction
       and non est in the eye of law?
(xiii) Whether the contents, findings and materials in the
       audit visit report were not disclosed to the petitioner
       and    reasonable   opportunity    of  hearing was not
       afforded to him to rebut the same?
(xiv)  Whether the impugned order of assessment dated
       20.10.2008      has   been   antedated    and  materials
       submitted by      the petitioner on 24.10.2008       and
       15.11.2008 are incorporated in the said order of
       assessment dated 20.10.2008 and the impugned audit
       assessment order ignores the details submitted by the
       petitioner to opposite party No.6 which clearly favours
       the petitioner and therefore the assessment order is
       not sustainable in law?
(xv)   Whether assessment order relies on extraneous and
       irrelevant materials which are neither on record nor as
       a part of audit visit report and it also ignores the
       materials on record, therefore, the impugned order of
       assessment is liable to be quashed?
(xvi)  Whether in response to notice/direction given by the
       Assessing    Officer,   the  petitioner   appeared   and
       complied with the direction of opposite party No.6 and
       provided    all  materials/data    for  the  purpose   of
       assessment and therefore, in law the best judgment
       cannot be permissible?

                                       14
13.           Many points have been urged on behalf of the petitioner and
many decisions have also been cited in the written argument submitted on
behalf of the petitioner. It is not necessary to burden this judgment by
referring to all the decisions cited.
14.           Question No.(i) is with regard to requirement of pre-deposit of
20% of tax or interest or both in dispute in addition to payment of admitted
tax for entertaining the appeal. Section 77(4) of the OVAT Act provides that
no appeal against any order shall be entertained by the appellate authority,
unless it is accompanied by satisfactory proof of payment of admitted tax in
full and twenty per centum of the tax or interest or both in dispute.
              According to Mr. Mahanti, learned Senior Advocate, this
provision is very harsh. There is no relieving provision as no power is vested
with the appellate authority to grant any relaxation in the matter of pre-
deposit of 20% of tax or interest or both in dispute. In case of raising
arbitrary demand, it is difficult to maintain an appeal as it is mandatory as
per the existing provision to deposit of 20% of the tax or interest or both in
dispute to maintain appeal. According to Mr.Mahanty, such a provision is
arbitrary, unreasonable and hit by Articles 14 and 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India. Placing reliance on the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Mardia Chemicals Ltd. and others vs.
Union of India and others, (2004) 4 SCC 311, Mr. Mahanti submitted
that the Hon’ble Supreme Court declared that the provision of Section 17 of
the Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement

                                        15
of Security Interest Act, 2002 requiring deposit of 75% of the demand is
constitutionally invalid. The Hon’ble Supreme Court has further held that
the amount of deposit of 75% of the demand, at the initial proceeding itself
sounds unreasonable and oppressive, more particularly when the secured
assets/the management thereof along with the right to transfer such interest
has been taken over by the secured creditor or in some cases property is also
sold. Requirement of deposit of such a heavy amount on the basis of one-
sided claim alone cannot be said to be a reasonable condition at the first
instance itself before start of adjudication of the dispute.
15.          Situation is different in case of filing of an appeal before the
First Appellate Authority under Section 77 of the OVAT Act. Under the
OVAT Act, the First Appeal is preferred only after the assessment under the
OVAT Act is completed. Thus, the first adjudicating authority is the
Assessing Officer where ample scope was given to the assessee to defend its
case. Only against the assessment order, appeal is preferred before the
First Appellate Authority. Therefore, payment of 20% of the tax or interest
or both in dispute is not a requirement at the initial stage but is a
requirement at the appellate stage. Hence, the decision of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Mardia Chemcials Ltd. (supra) is
distinguishable so far as maintaining appeal before the First Appellate
Authority under the OVAT Act is concerned.
16.          According to Mr. Kar, in view of the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Smt. Har Devi Asnani (supra) that right of

                                       16
appeal or right of revision is not an absolute right and it is a statutory right
which can be circumscribed by the conditions in the grant made by the
statute. Therefore, precondition of depositing 20% of tax or interest or both
in dispute is constitutionally valid.
17.          Needless to say that appeal is a creation of the Statute and it
cannot be created by acquiescence of the parties or by order of Court.
             Law is well-settled that right of appeal/revision cannot be
absolute and the legislature can put conditions for maintaining the same.
18.          In Vijay Prakash D. Mehta & Jawahar D. Mehta vs.
Collector of Customs (Preventive), Bombay, AIR 1988 SC 2010, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:-
             “Right to appeal is neither an absolute right nor
             an ingredient of natural justice, the principles of
             which must be followed in all judicial and quasi-
             judicial adjudications. The right to appeal is a
             statutory right and it can be circumscribed by
             the conditions in the grant….. The purpose of
             the Section is to act in terrorem to make the
             people comply with the provisions of law.”
19.          In Kondiba Dagadu Kadam vs. Savitribai Sopan Gujar &
Ors., AIR 1999 SC 2213, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:
             “It has to be kept in mind that the right of appeal is
             neither a natural nor an inherent right attached to the
             litigant being a substantive statutory right it has to be
             regulated in accordance with law in force at the
             relevant time. The conditions mentioned in the section
             must be strictly fulfilled before an appeal can be
             maintained and no Court has the power to add to or
             enlarge those grounds. The appeal cannot be decided
             on merit on merely equitable jurisdiction.”

                                       17
20.          In   Gujarat   Agro    Industries    Co.   Ltd. vs.  Municipal
Corporation of the City of Ahmedabad & Ors., (1999) 4 SCC 468, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court held that right of appeal, though statutory, can be
conditional/qualified and such a law cannot be held to be violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution. An appeal cannot be filed unless so provided
under the statute and when a law authorizes filing of an appeal, it can
impose conditions as well.
21.          The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Smt. Har Devi
Asnani (supra), referring to its earlier decision held that
             “10…..this Court has taken a consistent view that the
             right of appeal or right of revision is not an absolute
             right and it is a statutory right which can be
             circumscribed by the conditions in the grant made by
             the statute. Following this consistent view of this
             Court, we hold that the proviso to Section 65(1) of the
             Act, requiring deposit of 50% of the demand before a
             revision is entertained against the demand is only a
             condition for grant of the right of revision and the
             proviso does not render the right of revision illusory
             and is within the legislative power of the State
             legislature.”
22.          Therefore, it becomes crystal clear that appeal is a statutory
remedy and the same is maintainable provided that the Statute enacted by
a competent Legislature provides for it. Further, there can be no quarrel
that the right of appeal cannot be absolute and the Legislature can put
conditions for maintaining the same.

                                       18
             For the reasons stated above, the decisions relied upon by the
petitioner are of no help to the petitioner as those decisions are rendered in
respect of particular facts of that case.
23.          In view of the above, we are of the considered view that the
provisions of Section 77(4) of the OVAT Act requiring deposit of 20% of the
tax or interest or both in dispute as a precondition for entertaining an
appeal against the order enumerated under Section 77(1) of the OVAT Act
does not make the right of appeal illusory and such a condition is within
the legislative power of the State Legislature and cannot be held to be
unreasonable and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
24.          Question No.(ii) is with regard to imposition of penalty under
Section 42(5) which is equal to twice the amount of tax assessed under
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of Section 42 of the OVAT Act which
according to the petitioner is arbitrary, unreasonable, oppressive and ultra
vires the provisions of Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 21 and 265 of the Constitution
of India.
25.           Section 42 of the OVAT Act deals with “Audit Assessment”.
             Section 42(5) provides that without prejudice to any penalty or
interest that may have been levied under any provision of this Act, an
amount equal to twice the amount of tax assessed under sub-section (3) or
sub-section (4) shall be imposed by way of penalty in respect of any
assessment completed under the said sub-sections.

                                       19
26.          The constitutional validity of sub-section (5) of Section 42 of
the OVAT Act is under challenge basically on two grounds:
             (i)    this provision mandates imposition of penalty without
                    prejudice to any penalty, or interest that may have been
                    levied under any provisions of the Act; and
             (ii)   without any show cause to the affected assessee.
27.          VAT is indirect tax on consumption of goods. It is the form of
collecting sales tax under which tax is collected in each stage on the value
added to the goods. The basic object of VAT Scheme is to provide voluntary
and self compliance. It goes without saying that to plug the leakage of
revenue, the Legislature enacted law authorizing imposition of penalty for
infraction of any statutory provision. We are conscious that generally
penalty proceedings are quasi judicial in nature. Therefore, before imposing
penalty, opportunity of hearing should be provided to the affected assessee-
dealer. In the OVAT Act, various Sections provide for imposition of penalty
for  infraction   of  statutory   provisions. In most     of  those  Sections
opportunity of being heard is provided to a dealer before imposition of
penalty. Those Sections are Section 28(1), Section 31(9), Section 34(3),
Section 54(6), Section 61(5), Section 62(6), 65(2), Section 73(10), Section
73(12(e), Section 73(13), Section 76(3), Section 76(8), Section 101(4) and
Section 107(4). The present position is entirely different. Quantification of
penalty is dependant on the tax assessed under Section 42 of the OVAT
Act. For the purpose of assessing tax, opportunity of hearing was afforded

                                      20
to the assessee, the explanation of the assessee and its books of account
were examined and considered. Penalty is only quantified on the basis of
the tax assessed. No discretion is left with the Assessing Officer for levying
any lesser amount of penalty. Therefore, even if further opportunity will be
given to the assessee before imposing penalty that will be a futile exercise.
Penalty is not independent of the tax assessed. If the tax is assessed,
imposition of penalty under 42(5) is warranted.
             Mr. Mahanti, learned Senior Advocate has not brought to our
notice any other provision of the OVAT Act authorizing imposition of
penalty in the nature of penalty envisaged under Section 42(5). If the
nature of the penalty elsewhere provided under the Statute that is different
from the nature of penalty envisaged under Section 42(5) of the OVAT Act.
Therefore, the question of double jeopardy does not arise.
28.          The matter may be looked into from different angle. Section 42
of the OVAT Act deals with “Audit Assessment”. As stated above, imposition
of penalty is dependent upon the quantum of tax assessed in audit
assessment under Section 42 of OVAT Act. If such a penal provision is not
provided then fraudulent dealers would seriously venture to evade tax and
whenever they will be caught hold of they will simply pay the tax and escape.
Therefore, the provision for imposing penalty twice the amount of tax
assessed, under Section 42 of the OVAT Act has been made so that a dealer-
assessee would refrain himself from taking any step to avoid payment of
legitimate tax. If, however, any dealer indulges himself in any fraudulent

                                        21
activities to evade tax, then in addition to tax assessed he would pay penalty
which is twice the amount of tax assessed and therefore, it cannot be said
that the provision in this regard is arbitrary and unreasonable.
29.           Against the assessment of tax and penalty there is a provision
for appeal. In appeal, if the amount of tax assessed under Section 42 of the
OVAT Act is reduced, the quantum of penalty will also be reduced
automatically. Therefore, it is not an unreasonable provision as contended
by Mr. Mahanti, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner.
30.           In view of the above, we are of the considered view that Section
42(5) of the OVAT Act authorizing imposition of penalty equal to twice the
amount of tax assessed under Section 42(3) or (4) of the OVAT Act is
constitutionally valid. It is not arbitrary, unreasonable, oppressive, or hit by
Article 14 or in any way ultra vires the Constitution of India.
31.           Question No. (iii) is whether the Authorized Officer has not
submitted audit visit report to the Assessing Authority within seven days
from the date of audit as contemplated under Section 41(4) of the OVAT Act
and thereby the impugned audit visit report dated 31.03.2008 and audit
assessment dated 20.08.2008 would be non est / unsustainable in the eye
of law. Normally, it is a mixed question of fact and law. But the documents
annexed to the writ petition reveal that there is infraction of the provision
and time provided under Section 41(4) has not been adhered to. Section
41(4) provides that after completion of tax audit of any dealer under sub-
section (3), the officer authorized to conduct such audit shall, within seven

                                      22
days from the date of completion of the audit, submit the audit report to
the assessing authority in the prescribed form along with the statements
recorded and documents obtained evidencing suppression of purchases or
sales, or both, erroneous claims of deductions including input tax credit
and evasion of tax, if any, relevant for the purpose of investigation,
assessment or such other purposes.
32.             In the instant case, notice issued in form VAT 306 and the
accompanying audit visit report reveal that the audit of the business of the
petitioner was undertaken by the officers of the audit unit on 01.10.2007
and audit visit report was to be submitted within seven days from
01.10.2007 as contemplated in Section 41(4). But the audit visit report was
submitted on 31.03.2008, i.e., after six months of the completion of the
audit. This is in clear violation of the statutory provision contained in
Section 41(4) since there is a time limit prescribed for submission of audit
visit report and the same has not been complied with. Therefore, the said
audit visit report has no validity.
33.           It is unfortunate that while under OVAT Act Section 41(4)
provides for submission of audit visit report within seven days from the
date of audit and audit assessment is to be completed within six months
from the date of receipt of AVR by assessing authority, the action of the
Authorised Officer in submitting the AVR to Assessing Authority after six
months from the date of audit visit not only violates the statutory

                                        23
provisions contained in Section 41(4) but also is against the scheme and
spirit of audit visit and audit assessment provided under the OVAT Act.
34.           Question No.(iv) is whether the audit visit report is vitiated on
the ground that the same has been submitted by an Officer who was
neither a part of nor is the head of the team of audit.
              Mr.Mohanti, learned Senior Advocate submitted that the audit
visit report has been submitted by a person who was neither a part of nor is
the head of the team of audit visit on 01.10.2007. The audit visit report has
been submitted under the seal and signature of Sales Tax Officer,
Investigation Unit, Bhubaneswar as head of the audit team. But as a matter of
fact the said Officer was never a part of the audit team and the audit visit
report also does not disclose the said Officer to be a part of the audit visit
team. Therefore, the Sales Tax Officer, Investigation Unit, Bhubaneswar
cannot be the head of the audit team and has no jurisdiction and competence
to sign the audit visit report. Moreover, the approval of the audit visit report
has been given by the Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax on a report
submitted by the Sales Tax Officer Investigation Unit, Bhubaneswar as head
of the audit team. It is a matter of record that the audit at Bhubaneswar office
of the petitioner was under the supervision of the Assistant Commissioner of
Sales Tax, Enforcement Range, Balasore whereas the report has been
approved by the Assistant Commissioner, Enforcement Range, Berhampur.
This renders the approval of the report vulnerable and a case of mechanical
exercise of power without application of mind by an incompetent and

                                         24
unauthorized officer. Therefore, the report and their approval are void and
non est in the eye of law; therefore liable to be quashed.
35.          To deal with the above question, it is necessary to refer Section
41(4) of the OVAT Act read with Rule 45(3) of the OVAT Rules. Section 41(4)
envisages that after completion of tax audit of any dealer, the officer
authorized to conduct such audit shall within seven days from the date of
completion of the audit, submit the audit visit report. Rule 45(3) says audit
report in Form VAT-303 shall be submitted by the officer-in-charge of the
audit team conducting audit to the Assessing Authority within seven days
of completion of the audit. Conjoint reading of Section 41(4) of the OVAT
Act and Rule 45(3) of the OVAT Rules makes it clear that after completion
of the tax audit of any dealer, the officer-in-charge authorized to conduct
such audit shall within seven days from the date of completion of the audit
submit the audit visit report in Form VAT-303 to the Assessing Authority.
             Therefore, an audit visit report if submitted by an officer, who
is neither a part of nor is the head of the team of audit, is vitiated in law.
36.          The audit visit report attached to the writ petition under
Annexure-1 reveals that on 01.10.2007, an Investigation Audit under Rule
41(3) of the OVAT Rules was preferred by the Enforcement Wing of
Commercial Taxes, Government of Odisha, simultaneously, at both the
factory premises as well as the registered office premises of the company
located at Jajpur and Bhubaneswar. While a team of officials led by ACST-
Enforcement Range, Berhampur visited the factory premises, the registered

                                      25
office   premises  was   visited  by   STO(I), Berhampur     and   ASTOs     of
Investigation Unit of Bhubaneswar under the supervision of the A.C.S.T.,
Enforcement Range, Balasore. Thus, the ACST, Enforcement Range,
Berhampur was in-charge of the audit team conducting audit in factory
premises. But the audit visit report reveals that the same has been
submitted by the S.T.O., Investigation Unit, Bhubaneswar as head of the
audit team. Thus, the audit visit report has not been submitted by the
officer-in-charge of the audit team authorized to conduct the audit in the
factory premises as required under Section 41(4) of the OVAT Act read with
Rule 45(3) of the OVAT Rules. Therefore, the said report is vitiated in law.
             Further, irregularity noticed from the audit visit report is that
while the registered office premises was visited by STO (I), Berhampur and
ASTO’s of Investigation Unit, Bhubaneswar under the supervision of ACST,
Enforcement Range, Balasore, the said audit visit report has been approved
by the Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax, Enforcement Range,
Berhampur. This is also not permissible under the law.
37.          Question No.(v) is as to whether statutory period of 30 days
allowed in Section 42(2) of the OVAT Act, 2005 has not been extended to
the petitioner in Form VAT 306 and thereby the audit assessment
proceedings are vitiated. Section 42(1) provides that where the tax audit
conducted under sub-section (3) of Section 41 results in the detection of
suppression of purchases or sales, or both, erroneous claims of deductions
including input tax credit, evasion of tax or contravention of any provisions

                                        26
of this Act affecting the tax liability of the dealer, the assessing authority
may, notwithstanding the fact that the dealer may have been assessed
under Section 39 or Section 40, serve on such dealer a notice in the form
and manner prescribed along with a copy of the Audit Visit Report,
requiring him to appear in person or through his authorized representative
on a date and place specified therein and produce or cause to be produced
such books of account and documents relying on which he intends to rebut the
findings and estimated loss of revenue in respect of any tax period or periods as
determined on such audit and incorporated in the Audit Visit Report.
38.          Section 42(2) provides that where a notice is issued to a dealer
under sub-section (1) he shall be allowed time for a period not less than 30
days for production of relevant books of account and documents. In the
instant case, notice in Form VAT 306, which has been attached to the writ
petition as Annexure-1 reveals that such notice though was dated
30.04.2008 has been issued vide Issue No.2177 dated 16.05.2008 fixing
date of appearance and production of the books of account on 10.06.2008.
Thus, the notice in Form VAT 306 itself shows that 30 days time as
provided under Section 42(2) has not been allowed to the petitioner.
Petitioner’s case is that the notice in Form VAT 306 was served in first week
of June, 2008 and thus the petitioner barely had 4-5 days to appear and
comply with the direction in the notice and thereby the cardinal principle of
natural justice is violated. Thus, this is a case of clear violation /infraction
of the mandatory provisions of Section 42(2) of the OVAT Act.

                                      27
39.          Law is well-settled that when the statute requires to do certain
thing in certain way, the thing must be done in that way or not at all. Other
methods or mode of performance are impliedly and necessarily forbidden.
The aforesaid settled legal proposition is based on a legal maxim “Expressio
unius est exclusion alteris”, meaning thereby that if a statute provides for a
thing to be done in a particular manner, then it has to be done in that
manner and in no other manner and following other course is not
permissible. (See Taylor v. Taylor, (1876) 1 Ch.D.426; Nazir Ahmed v. King
Emperor, AIR 1936 PC 253; Ram Phal Kundu v. Kamal Sharma; and Indian
Bank’s Association v. Devkala Consultancy Service, AIR 2004 SC 2615).
40.          In the fact situation, completion of audit assessment on the
basis of AVR which has been submitted in violation of statutory provision of
Section 41(4) of the OVAT Act read with Rule 45(3) of the OVAT Rules and
upon issuance of notice in Form VAT 306 in violation of Section 42(2) is not
sustainable in law. Accordingly, we set aside the impugned assessment
order dated 20.10.2008 and the consequent demand notice.
41.          In view of the answer to question Nos.(iii), (iv) and (v) there is
no need to answer other questions.
42.          In the result, the writ petition is allowed in part to the extent
indicated above.
                                                    ….…………………………
                                                      B.N. Mahapatra,J.
V. Gopala Gowda, C.J.           I agree.

                           28
                              …………….………….
                               Chief Justice.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 7th August, 2012/ss


