                 HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                        W.P.(C) No. 5331 of 2011
In the matter of an application under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India.
                                  --------
Tarini Sandhibigraha,
S/o- Panchanan Sandhibigraha,
Village- Belampur,
P.O./Dist: Jajpur.
                                                   …     Petitioner
                               -Versus-
State of Orissa and others                         …     Opp. Parties
             For Petitioner             :    M/s. Kamal B., Panda,
                                                   P.K. Shahoo
             For Opp. Parties           :   Addl. Govt. Advocate
                                              (For O.P.No.1)
                                            M/s. Narasingha Patra,
                                            A.K. Patra & B.N.Shadangi
                                              (For O.P.No.3)
                                 ----------
P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SHRI.V.GOPALA GOWDA
                                    AND
        THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.N.MAHAPATRA
                     Date of Judgment:28.03.2012
B.N.MAHAPATRA,J.            This writ petition has been filed with a
prayer to quash the order of the State Government dated 10.02.2011
(Annexure-4)    by which the Additional Secretary to Government of
Orissa    in  Excise    Department      communicated    to   the  Excise

                                      2
Commissioner, Orissa, Cuttack          that Government after careful
consideration have been pleased not to approve the proposal sent vide
letter No.9039 dated 27.12.2010 for sanction of Beer Parlour “ON”
licence in favour of Shri Tarini Sandhibigraha over Plot No. 600/794,
Khata No. 197/29, Mouza Sanapatuli under Korei P.S. in the district
of Jajpur for the remaining period of 2010-11 as the same is not
feasible in view of the existence of prohibitive sites under Rule 34 of
the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965 urging various facts and legal
contentions. The further prayer of the petitioner is to issue a writ in
the nature of mandamus directing the opposite parties to consider the
application of the petitioner for grant of Beer Parlor “ON” Licence
afresh.
2.           Petitioner’s case in a nutshell is that his application made
before opposite party no.2-Collector, Jajpur for grant of beer parlour
“ON” shop licence over plot no.600/794, Khata No. 197/29, Mouza
Sanapatuli under Korei P.S. in the district of Jajpur was duly
considered by opposite party no.2, who after following due procedure
had forwarded the application to the State Government for passing of
necessary orders. While the application of the petitioner was pending
before the State Government, opposite party no.3 filed W.P.(c) No. 381
of 2011 in the garb of Public Interest Litigation before this Court
challenging the recommendation made by opposite party no.2 to the

                                      3
State Government for sanction of the beer parlour “ON” shop licence
in favour of the petitioner raising various allegations against the State
authorities. This Court vide order dated 13.01.2011 passed in Misc.
Case No. 266 of 2011 arising out of said PIL directed opposite party
no.2-Collector to take steps for measurement of the distance between
the new beer parlour ‘ON’ shop        which is going to be opened at
Sanapatuli under Dhaneswar Grama Panchayat and the bathing ghat
with the assistance of competent Engineers of Works Department and
submit a report before this Court for consideration of the interim
prayer. This Court further ordered that if any licence has not been
issued for opening of the proposed new beer parlour ‘ON’ shop at
Sanapatuli under Dhaneswar G.P., the same shall not be issued till
the next date. Pursuant to the said order of this Court dated
13.1.2011, opposite party no.2 deputed the Executive Engineer of
Panikoili (R&B) Division to take necessary measurement . The said
Executive Engineer prepared a free hand-sketch map showing the
distance of different restricted places from the proposed beer parlour
and submitted a report as per measurement taken by him to the
opposite party no.2 vide letter dated 20.01.2011.         Basing on the
measurement taken by the Executive Engineer as per Annexure-3, the
State Government vide its order dated 10.2.2011 rejected the proposal
for sanction of the beer parlour ‘ON’ shop licence in favour of the

                                      4
petitioner. W.P.(c) No.381 of 2011 filed by opposite party no.3 in the
nature of PIL was taken up by this Court on 23.2.2011 and on that
date a copy of the order of the Government passed under Annexure-4
was produced before this Court. On the basis of Annexure-4 this
Court disposed of the writ petition with an observation that there was
no need for this Court to examine the claim of the petitioner any
further as the Government is not inclined to grant licence in favour of
the petitioner (O.P.No.3 in PIL) for the area in question. Hence, the
writ petition.
3.           Mr. K.B. Panda, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the petitioner submitted that the measurement taken and recorded by
the Executive Engineer was not done as per sketch. The same has
been prepared without verifying the mouza of the area. Mr. Panda
further submitted that Annexure-4 which has been passed solely on
the basis of the free hand-sketch map of the area prepared by the
Executive Engineer is illegal, arbitrary and passed without proper
application of mind. The hand-sketch map prepared by the Executive
Engineer is in total contrast to the ground realities and the allegations
that were made in the PIL.      The free hand-sketch map is prepared
bereft of any plot number and refers to pond, flour mill, SC & ST
Labour colony and residential college. There is no bathing ghat over
Plot no.241 corresponding to Khata No.76 which is a private land

                                     5
belonging to one Gopal Charan Mallick. Plot No.606 does not have a
Flour Mill, but a show-room besides the High-way. There is no college
over plot no.179 which is at a distance of 580 metres from the
proposed site. The Siva Temple at plot no.130 is at a distance of 720
metres from the proposed site. There is no SC & ST Labour colony
over plot no.212, but there are only two unauthorized huts. Although
there is mention of bathing ghat in the PIL filed by the opposite party
no3, the Executive Engineer reported that there is a pond across the
High-way.
4.           Mr. Panda further submitted that Maa Tarini IMFL ‘ON’
shop is located within a distance of 140 metres of recognized and
approved Government bathing ghat situated over Plot No.1261 and is
at a distance of 240 metres from the petitioner’s proposed site to open
the beer parlour ‘ON’ shop. Opposite party no.3 had filed the PIL with
a vested interest. If an IMFL ‘ON’ shop can operate in the same
vicinity within 140 metres of an approved bathing ghat, there is no
reason to reject the application of the petitioner for being granted
licence of a beer parlour ‘ON’ shop. Thus the decision of the State
Government taken under Annexure-4 is discriminatory, arbitrary and
illegal. Further the said PIL has been filed suppressing various
material facts. Opposite party no.3 had filed the writ petition bearing
W.P.(c) No. 381 of 2011 as a self styled social worker, but in fact he

                                        6
was acting as an Agent of the owner of one Hotel ‘Maa Tarini IMFL
‘ON’ shop located in the same vicinity. Placing reliance upon the
decision of this Court in Villagers of Jarasingh Basantinath Dutta v.
State of Orissa and others, AIR 1997 Orissa 163, Mr. Panda submitted
that Public Interest Litigation which has now come to occupy an
important field in the administration of law should not be public
interest litigation for private interest litigation. There must be real and
genuine public interest involved in the litigation and it cannot be
invoked by a person or a body of persons to further his or their
personal causes or satisfy him or his personal grudge or enmity. The
Courts    of   justice  should    not  be    allowed   to  be polluted   by
unscrupulous litigants by resorting to the extra-ordinary jurisdiction.
Concluding his arguments, Mr. Panda prayed to allow the prayer
made in the writ petition.
5.           Learned Addl. Government Advocate appearing on behalf of
opposite party no.2 submitted that from the report of the Executive
Engineer (R&B) , Panikoili it reveals that several restricted places exist
within 500 metres and the proposal is violating the Rule 34 of the
Orissa Excise Rules, 1965. After careful consideration of the report of
Executive Engineer, Panikoili, the Government have been pleased not
to approve the proposal for sanction of beer parlour ‘ON’ shop licence
at Sanaputli in favour of the petitioner for the remaining period

                                      7
2010-11.     The writ petitioner in W.P.(c) No. 381 of 2011, who is
opposite party no.3 in the present writ petition, is one Alok Kumar
Mohanty, who is the Secretary, CPI, Jajpur District Council, Secretary
of Korei Anchalik Committee and President of           Industrial Labour
Association, Vyasanagar as reflected in the objection filed by him on
12.4.2010 against the proposed beer parlour          in response to the
Form-A, Public Notice.      There is no such report/complaint about
connivance of Sri Alok Kumar Mohanty, opposite party no.3 or
existence of any recognized and Govt. approved bathing ghat within
140 metres distance from the existing ON shop, Sanapatuli. The
Government has not sanctioned the proposed beer parlour ‘ON’ shop
licence at Sanapatuli for the remaining period 2010-11 in favour of
the writ petitioner for violation of Rule 34 of the Orissa Excise Rules,
1965 and the decision of the Government in this regard is final.
Therefore, there is no question of reconsideration of application of the
petitioner for grant of beer parlour in question afresh.
6.            Mr. N. Patra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
opposite   party   no.3   submitted    that  since   under   Annexure-4
Government has not approved the proposal for sanction of beer
parlour ‘ON’ shop in favour of the petitioner in Mouza Sanapatuli for
the remaining period 2010-11 in view of existence of the prohibitive
site under Rule 34 of the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965 and by efflux of

                                       8
time the writ petition has become infructuous, the writ petition
should be dismissed as such.
7.           On the rival contentions of the parties, the following
questions fall for consideration by this Court:
             (i)    Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case,
                    the petitioner is entitled to grant of reliefs claimed
                    in the writ petition?
             (ii)   What order?
8.           In the writ petition the petitioner has made two prayers
i.e. to quash the decision taken by the Government under Annexure-
4 to the extent not approving the proposal for opening of beer parlour
at Sanapatuli; secondly for a direction to opposite parties to consider
afresh the application of the petitioner for grant of beer parlour ‘ON’
shop licence afresh.
9.            Under Annexure-4 the Government had not approved the
proposal for sanction of beer parlour ‘ON’ shop licence in favour of
the petitioner at Sanapatuli for the remaining period 2010-11 on the
ground of existence of prohibitive sites mentioned under Rule 34 of
the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965.
10.          The relief sought for quashing Annexure-4 cannot be
granted for the following reasons:
(a)          There is existence of restricted places for the proposed
beer parlour ‘On’ shop at Sanapatuli which is violative of Rule 34 of

                                     9
the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965. The State Government in paragraph 9
of its counter affidavit stated that as per measurement report of the
Executive Engineer (R&B), Panikoili , the following restricted places
exist within 500 metres surrounding the proposed beer parlour ;
             Name of the Units              Distance reported by the
                                            Executive Engineer.
             1. U.P. School                 293 Mtrs.
             2. Siva Temple                 477 Mtrs.
             3. ST/SC Labour Colony         255 Mtrs.
             4. Pond                        145.20 Mtrs.
             5. Flour Mill                   55.50 Mtrs.
             On the basis of the above report, the Government has
disapproved the proposal for sanction of beer parlour ‘ON’ shop in
favour of the petitioner under Annexure-4. Perusal of Annexure-4
further reveals that the Government has issued direction to initiate
disciplinary action against the erring official Abhaya Panjar Sahoo,
Inspector of Excise, Jajpur, who has furnished false and misleading
information putting the Government into embarrassment. The Excise
Commissioner, Orissa, Cuttack, the Excise Deputy Commissioners
and the Collectors have been advised under Annexure-4 to scrutinize
such proposal thoroughly before endorsing it to Government for
approval.
(b)    By efflux of time the period of 2010-11 for which the proposal
for opening of new beer parlour ‘ON’ shop has been disapproved by
the Government is already over.

                                      10
11.           In the facts and circumstances, the decision of this Court
passed in Villagers of Jarasingh Basantinath Dutta (supra) is of
no help to the petitioner.
12.           In view of the above, we do not find any infirmity or
illegality in the order passed by the Government dated 10.2.2011
under Annexure-4 warranting interference of this Court.
13.           So far as the petitioner’s other prayer for issuance of a
direction to the opposite parties to re-consider his application for
grant of Beer Parlour ‘ON’ licence afresh is concerned, Mr. Panda,
vehemently argued that though Maa Tarini IMFL ‘ON’ shop is located
within a distance of 140 Metres of recognized and approved
Government bathing Ghat over Plot No.1261 and at a distance of 240
Metres from the petitioner’s       proposed site, the opposite parties
illegally permitted him to run the IMFL ‘ON’ Shop.
14.           We find in paragraph 10 of the counter affidavit filed by
opposite party no.2, it is stated as follows :
              “…….It is a fact that at the same place, Sanapatuli
              under Dhaneswar G.P. where the instant Beer
              Parlour proposed, there is an another IMFL ‘ON’
              Shop in the name and style as ‘Maa Tarini IMFL
              ON Shop’ functioning at a distance of 250 metres
              since 15.12.2007…”
15.           In view of the above admitted fact, we are unable to
appreciate the action of the State Government in allowing ‘Maa Tarini
IMFL ‘ON’ Shop to run at the same place and refusing /disapproving

                                     11
the proposal for sanction of beer parlour ‘ON’ shop in favour of the
petitioner. Such discrimination is impermissible.
16.           Law is well settled that every action of the State and its
instrumentality should be fair, legitimate and above board and
without any affection or aversion (See the decisions in E.P. Royappa
v. State of Tamilnadu, AIR 1974 SC 555; State of Andhra Pradesh
and another v. Nalla Raja Reddy, AIR 1967 SC 1458.
17.          In M/s. Erusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd. V. State
of West-Bengal & another, AIR 1975 SC 266, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court observed that where Government activity involves public
element, the “citizen has a right to claim equal treatment” and where
“the State acts to the prejudice of a person, it has to be supported by
legality”. Functioning of democratic form of Government demands
equality and absence of arbitrariness and discrimination.
18.          In view of the above, we direct opposite party Nos. 1 and 2
to conduct an inquiry regarding the functioning of Maa Tarini IMFL
‘ON’ Shop at Sanapatuli under Dhaneswar G.P. and if it is found that
such ‘ON’ shop is functioning violating the distance criteria as
provided under Rule 34 of the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965, immediate
step should be taken to cancel the licence issued in favour of Maa
Tarini IMFL ‘ON’ Shop after giving opportunity of hearing to it. This is

                                                 12
         necessary in view of the provisions of sub-rule (2) of Rule 34 of the
         Orissa Excise Rules, 1965.
                           However, in exercising power under the proviso to Rule
         34 of the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965, if the Government relaxed or
         intends to relax the restriction of minimum distance as mentioned at
         clauses (d) and (e) of Rule 34 (1) of the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965,
         under any special circumstances, in case of Maa Tarini IMFL ‘ON’
         shop to allow it to run the shop at Sanapatuli, the proposal for grant
         of licence in favour of the petitioner to open beer parlour ‘ON’ shop in
         that area shall be considered in similar manner.
         19.               With the above said observation and direction, the writ
         petition is disposed of.
                                                              ………………..........
                                                               B.N.Mahapatra, J.
         V. Gopala Gowda, C.J.               I agree
                                                               ……………………….
                                                                  Chief Justice
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Dated 28th March, 2012/ssd/sss/skj


