                         HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
                               W.P.(C) No. 2444 of 2011
       In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
       Constitution of India.
                                         ----------
       Orissa Trust of Technical Education and Training,
       At: Prasnagarbha,
       S-3, 68, 69 and 83,
       Sector-A, Zone-B, Mancheswar Industrial Estate,
       Bhubaneswar,
       Dist: Khurda                                              …     Petitioner
                                      -Versus-
       Chief Commissioner of Income Tax, Orissa
       and another                                               …   Opp. Parties
                   For Petitioner              :     M/s. R.P.Kar, A.N. Ray,
                                                     P.K. Mishra, M.S. Raman &
                                                     K.K. Sahoo
                   For Opp. Parties            :     Mr. A.K. Mohapatra,
                                                     Standing Counsel
                                                     [Income Tax]
                                          ----------
P R E S E N T:
         THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SHRI V.GOPALA GOWDA
                                   AND
                THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE B.N.MAHAPATRA
                              Date of Judgment: 31.07.2012
B.N.Mahapatra,J.         This writ petition has been filed with a prayer to quash
       order dated 30.09.2010 (Annexure-5) passed by opposite party No.1-
       Chief Commissioner of Income Tax (for short, “Chief Commissioner”) by

                                      2
which the application of the petitioner made in Form 56-D for grant of
approval for exemption under Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Income Tax Act,
1961 (for short, “Act, 1961”) for the financial year 2008-09 has been
rejected on the ground that the fees collected by the petitioner under
head “Placement and Training” are well within the scope of law as has
been prescribed and published through notification in Official Gazette by
the Government of Orissa, Industry Department.
2.           Petitioner’s case in a nutshell is that the petitioner is a Trust
registered under the Indian Trust Act and in consonance with one of its
objectives,  it   has   established   two   Educational      Institutions  i.e.
Bhubaneswar Institute of Management and Information Technology and
Indian Institute of Science and Information Technology for imparting
Higher Education in MBA and MCA courses respectively. The aforesaid
two institutions have been established with the sole intention to provide
higher   education    only  without   having    any   profit   motive.   These
institutions are running to impart world class environment and training
to enable the youth of India belonging to all sections and strata of the
society to give a foot hold and place in the international market.
Therefore, these institutions come within the scope and ambit of Section
10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961. As per the said provision, the petitioner filed
an application vide Annexure-2 in Form No.56-D with the Chief
Commissioner for grant of exemption under Section 10(23C)(vi) of the

                                     3
Act, 1961 for the financial year 2008-09. While adjudicating the
petitioner’s claim, the Chief Commissioner directed opposite party No.2-
Commisisoner of Income Tax to make an inquiry and submit a report on
the actual activity of the petitioner. Accordingly, an inquiry was
conducted by opposite party No.2, records were examined and finally
being satisfied a report regarding the two institutions of the petitioner
was submitted. After receipt of the report from opposite party No.2, the
Chief Commissioner issued notice to the petitioner for hearing and
during the course of hearing the petitioner produced various documents
as directed by opposite party No.1. Those documents are;
       (a)   The manner of receipt of fees and heads of receipt from the
             students and the Books of Accounts,
       (b)   Copies of the Notification of the Government of Orissa,
             Industry Department prescribing fees to be charged under
             different heads,
       (c)   Copy of the audit report showing details of receipt and
             expenditure made for educational activities, and
       (d)   Letter of Approval granted by the AICTE
Before the Commissioner, the petitioner has also explained the details of
activities which are in consonance with the law governing the field and
which make it eligible to be granted exemption under Section 10(23C)(vi)
of the Act, 1961. However, the Chief Commissioner has rejected the

                                     4
application of the petitioner for approval of exemption under Section
10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961. Hence, the present writ petition.
3.           Mr. R.P. Kar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner submitted that the aforesaid two institutions have been duly
approved by the All India Council for Technical Education (for short,
(AICTE) for conducting MBA and MCA Courses. The Chief Commissioner
without appreciating and analyzing the law in its proper perspective and
the documents produced before him, rejected the application for approval
of exemption under Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961. The rejection
order passed by the Chief Commissioner is wholly untenable. The
petitioner has collected placement and training fees in accordance with
the notification of the Government of Orissa, Industries Department. The
said notification as would be evident is in pursuance of exercise of power
of the State under the provisions of the Orissa Professional Educational
Institutions (Regulation of Admission and Fixation of Fee) Act, 2007 and
consequent upon the interim order dated 01.06.2007 passed by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in S.L.P.(Civil) No.10318 of 2007 and in three
others and interim order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 18.06.2007
in Civil (Appeal) No.2872 of 2007 envisaging a Fee Structure Committee
to be constituted for determination of fee. The Committee so constituted
recommended the fees under different heads which would be charged for
the Academic Session 2007-08. Under Clause (1), a ceiling limit was fixed

                                     5
for certain costs which could be levied including placement fee by the
institutions. The Legislature of the State of Orissa enacted the Orissa
Professional Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admission and
Fixation of Fee) Act, 2007 (for short, “Act, 2007”) to provide for the
regulation of admission and fixation of fee, prohibition of capitation fee,
reservation in admission and for other measures to ensure equity and
excellence in professional educational institutions and for the matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
4.           Mr. Kar, further argued that in Islamic Academic of
Education and others vs. State of Karnataka, AIR 2003 SC 3724, it was
held that two Committees for monitoring the admission procedure and
determining fee structure in professional Educational Institutions are
permissible as regulating measures. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in P.A. Inamdar and others vs. State of Maharashtra, AIR 2005 SC
3226, held that it is for the Central Government or for the State
Governments, in absence of a central legislation, to come out with
detailed thought out legislation on the subject. Thus, the State of Orissa
has enacted the Act, 2007 in line with the observations of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the cases referred to supra. The Act, 2007 was
challenged before this Court in W.P.(C) No.3689 of 2007 and this Court
by judgment dated 18.05.2007 declared it unconstitutional. The said
judgment of this Court dated 18.05.2007 was challenged by the State

                                     6
before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in S.L.P.(Civil) No.10318 of 2007 and
by order dated 01.06.2007, the Hon’ble Supreme Court constituted the
policy planning body and so also the “Fee Structure Committee” and
directed that other provisions of the Act shall continue to be in force. In
the aforesaid background the notifications of the Government of Orissa
Industries Department vide Annexure-4 was published for the Academic
Session 2007-08. The said notification is holding the field and is the law
insofar as the collection of fees under different heads is concerned. The
Chief Commissioner has relied on the Government of India Resolution for
fee structure, 1997 and the Government of Orissa Industries Department
Resolution dated 17.09.1998, to come to a conclusion that fees collected
towards placement and training is in excess of what was prescribed by
the said resolutions. Thus, the resolution relied upon by the Chief
Commissioner no more holds the field in view of the Act, 2007 and the
order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 01.06.2007 and subsequent
notification vide Annexure-4 issued by the Industries Department. The
resolution of 1997 and dated 17.09.1998 relied upon by the Chief
Commissioner as aforesaid has become redundant and non-est. The
concept and recommendation for charging a “placement and training fee”
came with effect from 2007 vide Annexure-4 and is very much for
educational purpose and cannot be held otherwise and in the least can
ever be considered as a profit earning by the petitioner’s institution.

                                    7
Therefore, the said fee collection is for educational purpose only as
envisaged under Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961.
5.           It was argued that the institutions are obliged to see the
placements of its students as per the AICTE Guidelines and train them
accordingly. The fee for the same has been permitted to be collected
which is for educational purpose. The subsequent notification dated
20.09.2010 is also in similar lines with a ceiling on optional cost to be
collected from the students and also provided for collecting “placement
and training fee”. The Notification vide Annexure-4 also provides that
Colleges are not allowed to charge any other optional costs in any other
name other than prescribed and if any institution has collected any other
fee in any name guise, the same will entail in withdrawal of NOC by the
AICTE and levy of penalties as per the Act, 2007. The placement and
preplacement training is a part of the curriculum and has been
recognized by the AICTE. A perusal of the approval letter of the AICTE
and Clause (4) of the General Conditions thereof would go to show that
other fees shall be charged as prescribed by the competent authority.
The placement fee comes within the category of “other fee” collection of
which has the approval of the Fee Structure Committee which is the
competent authority. Therefore, placement and training is a mandatory
condition for grant of approval and collection of the fee for it is a part of
the curriculum and an educational activity of the Institution.

                                      8
6.            Mr. Kar further submitted that the case laws relied upon by
the Chief Commissioner have been misinterpreted by him. He has held
that a legally prescribed mandatory educational activity is not to be
prescribed by relying on the resolutions which no more hold the field.
Therefore, the case needs reconsideration by the said authority in the
interest of justice. The observation of the Chief Commissioner is that the
petitioner is engaged in non-educational activity like horticulture and
generating income from the same is a misunderstanding of facts. There
were standing Coconut and mango trees in the land acquired by the
petitioner for establishment of the Educational Institutions. In order to
maintain a salubrious and green environment the trees were not cut
down but maintained. The petitioner has reflected the receipt in its
income and expenditure Account and the amount of Rs.15,000/-
received has been utilized in the educational activities of the Institutions
and for infrastructural development and the same cannot be termed as a
profit earned to deny the benefits of Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961.
It is also submitted that the income earned by the Trust has been
applied wholly and exclusively for educational activities of the Institution
itself and not otherwise. The Chief Commissioner has recorded
observations that the petitioner is having one non educational objective
i.e. item No.16 at page 13 of the Trust Deed. The petitioner has drawn
out different objectives but for the present it is only involved in one of the

                                       9
objectives i.e. establishment of Educational Institutions and running
them on a no profit basis. The present activity for which the exemption is
sought for is the educational institutions established and for nonelse.
Concluding his argument Mr. Kar, submitted that the case of the
petitioner requires for reconsideration in its proper perspective.
7.            Per contra, Mr. A.K. Mohapatra, learned Standing Counsel
appearing for the Income Tax Department vehemently argued that there
is no illegality and infirmity in the order of the Chief Commissioner. The
order passed by the Chief Commissioner is a reasoned order as per
Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961. It was submitted that the
institutions must exist solely for educational purposes. Since the
petitioner has other objectives, which are not connected with education,
the Chief Commissioner is justified in not granting approval under
Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961. The very fact of collection of fees
under the head other than educational purpose, disentitles the petitioner
to avail exemption under Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961.
8.            On the rival, factual and legal contentions advanced by the
parties, the questions which fall for consideration by this Court are as
follows:
       (i)    Whether the petitioner Trust is existing solely for
              educational purpose and not for the purpose of profit so
              that the income received by it shall not be included in

                                       10
             computing its total income for the financial year
             2008-09 ?
      (ii)   Whether opposite party No.1-Chief Commissioner is
             justified in not granting approval under Section 10(23C)
             (vi)  of   the   Act,  1961     for   the    financial  year
             2008-09 ?
9.           Since both the aforesaid questions are interlinked, they are
dealt with together.
10.          To deal with the aforesaid two questions, it is necessary to
know what is contemplated in Section 10(23C)(vi) of the I.T. Act. The
same is extracted below:
             “10. Incomes not included in total income
                    In computing the total income of a previous
             year of any person, any income falling within any of
             the following clauses shall not be included —
                           xx           xx             xx
             (23C) any income received by any person on behalf
             of —
                           xx           xx             xx
             (vi)   any     university    or     other     educational
             institution existing solely for educational purposes
             and not for purposes of profit, other than those
             mentioned in sub-clause (iiiab) or sub-clause (iiiad)
             and which may be approved by the prescribed
             authority”.
                           xx           xx             xx
                                          (Underlined for emphasis)

                                       11
             A plain reading of Section 10(23C)(vi) of the I.T. Act makes it
amply clear that in order to be eligible for exemption under Section
10(23C)(vi) of the I.T. Act, the following conditions are to be satisfied:
             (i)    there must be an educational institution,
             (ii)   such university or other educational institution must
                    exist solely for educational purposes,
             (iii)  it should not exist for the purposes of profit, and
             (iv)   approval by the prescribed authority.
             The prescribed authority as per Rule 2CA(1) of the Income
Tax Rules, under sub-clause (vi) of Section 10(23C) shall be the Chief
Commissioner or Director General, to whom application shall be made.
11.          At this juncture, it is necessary to know some of the relevant
provisos of Section 10(23C)(vi) of the I.T. Act for our present purpose.
             The first proviso provides that the other educational
institution shall make an application in the prescribed form and manner
to the prescribed authority for the purpose of grant of exemption or
continuance thereof.
             The second proviso provides that the prescribed authority
before approving the other educational institution may call for such
documents including audited annual account or information from the
educational institution as it thinks necessary in order to satisfy itself
about genuineness of the activities of other educational institution. The

                                      12
prescribed authority may also make such inquiries as it deems
necessary in that behalf.
              The third proviso provides that the income of a university or
educational institution should be applied or accumulated for application
wholly and exclusively to the objects for which it is established. Clause
(b) of the third proviso states that the cash must be invested or deposited
in one or more of the forms or modes specified in sub-section (5) of
Section 11.
              The seventh proviso to Section 10(23C) provides that nothing
contained in sub-clause (vi) shall apply in relation to any income of the
university or educational institution, being profits and gains of business,
unless the business is incidental to the attainment of its objectives and
separate books of account are maintained by it in respect of such
business.
              The 12th proviso provides that where the other educational
institution does not apply its income during the year of receipt and
accumulates it, any payment or credit out of such accumulation to any
trust or institution registered under Section 12AA or to any fund or trust
or institutions or any university or other educational institution or
hospital or other medical institutions shall not be treated as application
of income to the objects for which such fund or trust or institution or

                                       13
university or other educational institution or hospital or other medical
institutions as the case may be is established.
12.          The Hon’ble Supreme Court referring to its earlier decision
in the case of Surat Art Silk, (1980) 2 SCC 31, considered the provision
of   Section  10(23C)(vi)    in  American    Hotel & Lodging Association
Educational Institute vs. CBDT, (2008) 301 ITR 86 (SC) and made the
following observations:
             “With the insertion of the first proviso, the prescribed
             authority is required to vet the application. This
             vetting process is stipulated by the second proviso. It
             is important to note that the second proviso also
             indicates the powers and duties of the prescribed
             authority. While considering the approval application
             in the second proviso, the prescribed authority is
             empowered, before giving approval, to call for such
             documents        including     annual    accounts     or
             information from the applicant to check the
             genuineness of the activities of the applicant-
             institution. Earlier that power was not there with the
             prescribed authority.
             Under the third proviso, the prescribed authority has
             to ascertain while judging the genuineness of the
             activities of the applicant-institution, as to whether
             the applicant applies its income wholly and
             exclusively to the objects for which it is constituted/
             established.
             Under the 12th proviso, the prescribed authority is
             required to examine cases where an applicant does not
             apply its income during the year of receipt and
             accumulate it but makes payment there from to any
             trust or institution registered under section 12AA or to
             any fund or trust or institution or University or other
             educational institution and to that extent the proviso
             states that such payment shall not be treated as

                                     14
            application of income to the objects for which such
            trust or fund or educational institution is established.
            The idea underlying the 12th proviso is to provide
            guidelines to the prescribed authority as to the meaning
            of the words “application of income to the objects for
            which the institution is established”.     Therefore, the
               th
            12 proviso is the matter of detail. The most relevant
            proviso for deciding this appeal is 13th proviso. Under
            that proviso the circumstances are given under which
            the prescribed authority is empowered to withdraw the
            approval earlier granted. Under that proviso, if the
            authority is satisfied that the trust, fund, University or
            other educational institution etc. had not applied its
            income in accordance with the 3rd proviso or if it finds
            that such institution, trust or fund etc. has not
            invested/deposited its funds in accordance with the 3rd
            proviso or that the activities of such fund or institution
            or trust etc. are not genuine or that its activities are
            not being carried out in accordance with the conditions
            subject to which approval is granted then the
            prescribed authority is empowered to withdraw the
            approval earlier granted after applying with the
            procedure mentioned therein.”
13.         In the above case the Hon’ble Supreme Court further held
that it is only if the prerequisite condition of actual existence of the
educational institution is fulfilled, the question of compliance with
requirements in the provisos would arise. To make the section with the
proviso workable, monitoring conditions in the third proviso like
application/utilization of income, pattern of investments to be made, etc.,
could be stipulated as conditions by the prescribed authority subject to
which approval could be granted. While imposing stipulations subject to
which approval is granted, the prescribed authority may insist on certain

                                     15
percentage of accounting income to be utilized/applied for imparting
education in India.
             However, the prescribed authority must give an opportunity
to the petitioner-institution to comply with the monitoring conditions
which are stipulated for the first time as mentioned in the third proviso
to Section 10(23C) of the I.T.Act. After grant of approval, if it is brought
to the notice of the prescribed authority that conditions on which
approval was given have been breached or that circumstances mentioned
in the thirteenth proviso exist, then the prescribed authority can
withdraw    the approval    earlier  given by     following the procedure
mentioned in that proviso.
             The Hon’ble Supreme Court further held that on the issue of
deciding whether an institution is existing for profit or not, the mere
excess of income over expenditure cannot be decisive. An institution
cannot be considered to be existing for profit, if some surplus is
generated over expenditure. According to the Hon’ble Supreme Court, it
is not possible to carry on educational activity in such a way that the
expenditure exactly balances the income and there is no resultant profit.
14.          The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oxford University
Press vs. CIT, (2001) 247 ITR 658 (SC), has held that non profit
qualification in Section 10(23C)(vi) of the I.T. Act has to be tested against
Indian activities.

                                     16
15.           In Section 10(23C)(vi) of the I.T. Act, emphasis has been
given on the word “solely” for educational purposes. Solely means
exclusively. Thus, the expression “solely” appearing in Section 10(23C)
(vi) makes it clear that only the income of the institution established
solely for educational purposes and not for commercial activities is
entitled for exemption. Therefore, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case
of American Hotel & Lodging Association Educational Institute (supra),
held that even when one of the objects enables the institution to
undertake the commercial activities, it will not be entitled to approval
under Section 10(23C)(vi) of the I.T. Act.
16.           The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Aditanar
Educational Society (supra), held that in deciding the character of the
recipient of the income, it is necessary to consider the nature of the
activities undertaken. If the activity has no co-relation to education,
exemption has to be denied. The recipient of the income must have the
character of an educational institution to be ascertained from its objects.
17.           The Chief Commissioner in his order dated 30.09.2010
under Annexure-5 has quoted the following objective of the petitioner-
Trust:
              “One of the non educational objectives (i.e. item no-
              16 at page-13 of the trust deed) of the assessee trust
              is:

                                     17
             “the Managing Trustee or with the consent of the
             Managing Trustee the trustees may manage or
             supervise the management of any lands,
             hereditaments, and premises of the Trust Estate or
             any part thereof with power to erect, pull down,
             rebuild, add to, alter and repair houses and other
             buildings and to build drains and make roads and
             fences and otherwise to improve and develop and
             to cultivate or cause to be cultivated all or any of
             the said lands, hereditaments and premises and to
             insure houses and buildings against loss or damage
             by fire and/or other risks or to let, lease, make
             allowances to any agreements with tenants,
             agriculturists and generally to deal with the said
             lands, hereditaments and premises as they may
             deem fit in their absolute discretion.”
18.          The Chief Commissioner further held that the petitioner
trust is not existing solely for educational purposes. The trust has been
created with other aims and objectives which are clearly in the nature of
business. However, from the impugned order under Annexure-5, it does
not reveal whether the petitioner trust has carried on any activities
enumerated against item No.16 at page 13 of the Trust deed.
19.          The Chief Commissioner, in paragraph 5 of his order under
Annexure-5, has observed that on verification of the audited income and
expenditure statements for financial years 2008-09 and 2007-08 it is
seen that the assessee was engaged in non-educational activities like
horticulture and generating income from the same. But the said order is
totally silent as to what is the nature and magnitude of horticultural
activities carried on by the assessee and what is its annual income and

                                    18
how it is utilized by the assessee. With regard to horticultural income,
the contention of the assessee is that there were standing coconut and
mango trees in the land acquired by the petitioner for establishment
of the educational institution. In order to maintain a salubrious and
green environment the trees were not cut down but maintained. The
petitioner has reflected the receipt in its income and expenditure
account. Amount of Rs.15,000/- received has been utilized in the
educational     activities of the institutions and   for  infrastructural
development. Therefore, it cannot be treated that the profit was earned
for non-educational activities. The stand of the petitioner needs
examination by opposite parties with regard to quantum of income and
utilization of the same.
20.           The other reason given by the Chief Commissioner for
refusing to grant exemption under Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961 is
that the petitioner has collected fees under the head “placement and
training” from the students which is not in conformity with the fees
prescribed. Referring to the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
the case of Islamic Academic of Education (supra) , learned Chief
Commissioner has held that if any amount is charged other than the fee
prescribed by the Committee under any head or guise, the same would
amount to capitation fee.

                                     19
21.         As it appears from the impugned order under Annexure-5,
the Chief Commissioner has relied on the Government of India resolution
providing for fee structure, 1997 and the Government of Orissa
Industries Department Resolution dated 17.09.1998 to come to a
conclusion that the fees collected towards “placement and training” is in
excess of what was prescribed by the said resolutions.
            Petitioner’s case is that the resolution relied upon by the
Chief Commissioner no more holds the field in view of the Act, 2007 and
the order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 01.06.2007 and
subsequent notification vide Annexure-4 issued by the Industries
Department. The resolution of 1997 and 17.09.1998 relied upon by the
Chief Commissioner as aforesaid has become redundant and non-est.
The concept and recommendation for charging a “placement and training
fee” came with effect from 2007 vide Annexure-4 and is very much for
educational purpose and cannot be held otherwise and in the least can
ever be considered as a profit earning by the petitioner’s institution.
Therefore, the said fee collection is for educational purpose only as
envisaged under Section 10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961. The institutions are
obliged to see the placements of their students as per the AICTE
Guidelines and train them accordingly. The fee for the same has been
permitted to be collected which is for educational purpose.

                                     20
22.           The Chief Commissioner, therefore, is required to see
whether the fees collected under head “placement and training” is in
consonance with the Act, 2007, order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
dated 01.06.2007 and subsequent notification vide Annexure-4 as
claimed by the petitioner. If the collection is in consonance with the Act,
2007, order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 01.06.2007 and
subsequent notification vide Annexure-4, then it cannot be said that the
collection is without any authority of law.
23.           The next question that arises and needs to be determined is
as to whether the collection of money made under the head “placement
and training” is for educational purposes. It is to be further examined by
the Chief Commissioner that how the income earned under head
“placement and training” is utilized, i.e., whether for educational purpose
or non-educational purpose. Recording of findings on the above issues by
the Chief Commissioner is very much necessary to decide as to whether
the petitioner is entitled to the grant of exemption in terms of Section
10(23C)(vi) of the Act, 1961.
24.           In view of the above, the order of the Chief Commissioner
under Annexure-5 is set aside and the matter is remitted back to the
said authority to re-examine the case of the petitioner in the light of the

                                                   21
      observations made above and pass appropriate order in accordance with
      law within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this
      judgment.
      25.               With the aforesaid observations and direction, the writ
      petition is disposed of.
                                                          ……………………........
                                                           B.N.Mahapatra, J.
V. Gopala Gowda, C.J.                  I agree.I agree.
                                                          …....……………………
                                                               Chief Justice
                                           …....…………………
                                                               Chief Justice
      Orissa High Court, Cuttack
      Dated 31st July, 2012/ssd/ss/skj


