*             IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                          WP(C) No.3517/1997
 %                                                       February 04, 2013
RAKESH KUMAR SORIOB AND ORS.                                 ..... Petitioners
                           Through: Mr. Ajay Kumar Tandon, Advocate
                                         with Mr. Shivanshu Kumar, Advocate
                                         for petitioner No.1.
                           versus
INDIAN AIR LINES AND ANOTHER                                 ..... Respondents
                           Through: Mr. Lalit Bhasin, Advocate with Mr.
                                         Ratna D. Dhingra, Advocate with Ms.
                                         Bhavna Dhami, Advocate and Ms.
                                         Sneha Balakrishnan, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
  To be referred to the Reporter or not?
VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J (ORAL)
1.            This writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India is by nine petitioners seeking the following reliefs:
    “ It is therefore, prayed that a writ of Mandamus be issued directing
    the respondents to absorb the Petitioners as Engineer helper from the
    date of their employment with the respondent and also issue suitable
    directions and appropriate write, directing the respondents to pay at
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                    Page 1 of 10

    the same rate as paid to other employees.
       A writ of Prohibition be also issued to the respondents not to
    terminate the services of the Petitioner during pendency of the Writ
    Petition and status-quo be maintained.
       It is further prayed that the petition be allowed by regularizing
    their services with all consequential benefits of service in the regular
    establishment of the 1st respondent, and upon return of the Rule and
    upon hearing the parties, may further be pleased to:-
    (ii)      pay them the equal pay as are admissible to the other
    regular employees during the similar/same nature of work, and
    (iii)     not to disengage/terminate the services of the casual
    workers misconstruing the judgment rendered by this Hon’ble Court
    dated 9.5.1997, vide Annexure.
    (b)       make the Rule Absolute by directing the respondents
    authorities by a writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ or
    recommend to absorb petitioners by regularizing their services in the
    regular establishment of the 1st respondent with all consequential
    benefits of service; and not to disengage/terminate their services till
    actual regularization;
    (c)       award cost; and
    (d)       make such other and further order as this Hon’ble Court
    may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case.
       AND FOR THIS, THE PETITIONER SHALL EVER PRAY.”
              Counsel for the petitioner No.1 states that actually now
petitioner Nos.2 to 9 are not pursuing the case and it is only the petitioner
No.1 who is pursuing the case for the reliefs being granted.
2.            Whatever be the language of the prayer clauses, effectively,
what the petitioner No.1 seeks is appointment by regularization of his
services on the basis of certain past services rendered by him with the
respondent No.2.
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                  Page 2 of 10

3.            The petitioner was appointed as an Engineer Helper in
Engineering Department. The petitioner before filing of the writ petition
and during the pendency of this writ petition which was filed on 13.8.1997
worked for the following periods:-
              “PERIOD                                DAYS
              08.11.92 to 13.12.92                   36
              03.02.93 to 27.03.93                   53
              31.01.94 to 29.04.94                   89
              16.05.95 to 15.08.95                   89
              16.04.96 to 04.04.98                  699
                     TOTAL                           966”
4.            A reference to the writ petition as also the additional affidavit
by the respondent No.1 on 18.12.2002 shows that the petitioner No.1 was
only a casual helper. The appointment of the petitioner as a casual worker
by its very nature is not against any specific sanctioned post. Of course, in a
particular case it may be that the nature of the work of a person may be
called casual, however, there can be sanctioned posts even for such causal
workers.
5.            Petitioner No.1 prays that he should be absorbed by the
respondent No.1 on account of his having worked for the aforesaid periods
totalling to 966 days. On behalf of petitioner No.1, his counsel has argued
that the petitioner No.1 should be given employment or regularization either
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                Page 3 of 10

from 8.11.1992 or 16.4.1996 being the first date of the first appointment of
the petitioner or first date of the last casual appointment of the petitioner.
6.            Admittedly, however, the petitioner No.1 was not employed
under a regular recruitment process through advertisement and/or
information being submitted by the employment exchange.                        The
Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Secretary,
State of Karnataka & Ors. vs. Uma Devi & Ors., 2006 (4) SCC 1 has laid
down the following ratio:
            (I)      The questions to be asked before regularization
            are:-
            (a)(i) Was there a sanctioned post (court cannot order
            creation of posts because finances of the state may go
            haywire), (ii) is there a vacancy, (iii) are the persons
            qualified persons and (iv) are the appointments through
            regular recruitment process of calling all possible persons
            and which process involves inter-se competition among the
            candidates
            (b)      A court can condone an irregularity in the
            appointment procedure only if the irregularity does not go
            to the root of the matter.
            (II)     For sanctioned posts having vacancies, such posts
            have to be filled by regular recruit process of prescribed
            procedure otherwise, the constitutional mandate flowing
            from Articles 14,16,309, 315, 320 etc is violated.
            (III)    In case of existence of necessary circumstances the
            government has a right to appoint contract employees or
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                   Page 4 of 10

          casual labour or employees for a project, but, such persons
          form a class in themselves and they cannot claim
          equality(except possibly for equal pay for equal work) with
          regular employees who form a separate class. Such
          temporary employees cannot claim legitimate expectation
          of absorption/regularization as they knew when they were
          appointed that they were temporary inasmuch as the
          government did not give and nor could have given an
          assurance of regularization without the regular recruitment
          process being followed.        Such irregularity appointed
          persons cannot claim to be regularized alleging violation of
          Article 2. Also the equity in favour of the millions who
          await public employment through the regular recruitment
          process outweighs the equity in favour of the limited
          number of irregularity appointed persons who claim
          regularization.
          (IV) Once there are vacancies in sanctioned posts such
          vacancies cannot be filled in except without regular
          recruitment process, and thus neither the court nor the
          executive can frame a scheme to absorb or regularize
          persons appointed to such posts without following the
          regular recruitment process.
          (V)      At the instance of persons irregularly appointed the
          process of regular recruitment shall not be stopped. Courts
          should not pass interim orders to continue employment of
          such irregularly appointed persons because the same will
          result in stoppage of recruitment through regular
          appointment procedure.
          (VI) If there are sanctioned posts with vacancies, and
          qualified persons were appointed without a regular
          recruitment process, then, such persons who when the
          judgment of Uma Devi is passed have worked for over 10
          years without court orders, such persons be regularised
          under schemes to be framed by the concerned organization.
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                               Page 5 of 10

            (VII) The aforesaid law which applies to the Union and
            the States will also apply to all instrumentalities of the
            State governed by Article 12 of the Constitution.”
7.            In view of the aforesaid ratio there are only two categories of
persons who can seek employment with Central Government or State
Government or instrumentalities of State. The first set of persons are those
persons who have been appointed by a regular recruitment process i.e firstly
there has to be a sanctioned post, secondly there is vacancy in that post,
thirdly the concerned persons satisfy the necessary qualifications and lastly
the recruitment is through a regular recruitment process in accordance with
the rules including by inviting applications by issuing of advertisement.
8.            It is not disputed on behalf of petitioner No.1 before me that
appointment of the petitioner No.1 was not pursuant to a regular recruitment
process whether through the employment exchange or after advertisement
was issued in the newspaper. This fact itself in my opinion is good enough
to deny the reliefs claimed by the petitioner No.1 in the present petition
because the Constitution Bench has now made it abundantly clear that no
appointment to a public post be granted unless regular recruitment process is
followed. Since the regular recruitment process admittedly was not followed
in granting the employment to the petitioner No.1, there does not arise the
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                 Page 6 of 10

question of granting employment to the petitioner No.1 either afresh or by
regularization on the basis of his past services totalling to 966 days.
9.            Though, counsel for the petitioner No.1 has very strenuously
endeavoured to show that there were sanctioned posts with vacancies of
casual labour, I find that there is no specific document showing existence of
specific sanctioned posts of casual labour either on 8.11.1992 or 16.4.1996,
the two dates which are relied upon by the petitioner No.1 to seek
employment/regularization of employment. Counsel for the petitioner No.1
has referred to documents at pages 188 and 201 of the paper book being the
circulars/letters dated 3.1.1998 and 28.11.2002 and which show existence of
vacancies for casual labour or inviting the applications for appointments of
casual labour but they do not pertain to the dates of 8.11.1992/16.4.1996.
Also, that would not change the issue so far as the present petitioner is
concerned who has not been employed by the regular recruitment process.
10.           Counsel for the petitioner urges that in place of the petitioner
who was an ad hoc/casual worker, another casual worker, namely Sh.
Subhash Chander is appointed and therefore the petitioner No.1 could not
have been removed from the services and Sh. Subhash Chander appointed in
his place.    Reliance is placed in this regard upon the judgment of the
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                  Page 7 of 10

Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and Others Vs. Piara Singh
and Others (1992) 4 SCC 118 and paras 45 and 46 whereof read as under:-
       “45.         The normal rule, of course, is regular recruitment
      through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may
      sometimes call for an adhoc or temporary appointment to be made.
      In such a situation, effort should always be to replace such an
      adhoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected employee as
      early as possible. Such a temporary employee may also compete
      along with others for such regular selection/appointment. If he gets
      selected, well and good, but if he does not, he must give way to the
      regularly selected candidate. The appointment of the regularly
      selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the
      sake of such an adhoc/temporary employee.
      46.           Secondly, an adhoc or temporary employee should not
      be replaced by another adhoc or temporary employee; he must be
      replaced only by a regularly selected employee. This is necessary to
      avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.”
11.          In my opinion, the judgment which is relied upon by the
petitioner No.1 cannot help the petitioner No.1 because the observations as
made by the Supreme Court in the judgment in the case of Piara Singh
(supra) have to be read in the light of the ratio of the Constitution Bench
judgment in Uma Devi’s(supra) case that no doubt one ad hoc employee
cannot replace another ad hoc employee and there will have to be regular
recruitment process, however, that will not help the petitioner No.1 to secure
employment as he was not appointed through the regular recruitment
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                 Page 8 of 10

process. Also, in the present case the appointment of Sh. Subhash Chander
is not in issue and is not sought to be challenged by the petitioner No.1,
besides the fact that Sh. Subhash Chander is not even a respondent in the
present case.
              Therefore, I need not examine the issue of validity of
appointment of Sh. Subhash Chander in place of petitioner No.1 inasmuch as
it is the petitioner No.1 who is seeking appointment or regularization of
services admittedly when the regular recruitment process was not followed
at the time of appointment of the petitioner No.1.
12.           Finally, counsel for the petitioner No.1 urged that a panel of
persons to be appointed was drawn up by the competent authority of the
respondent No.1 on 20.11.1990, and of which panel over 200 candidates
were empanelled, and therefore petitioner No.1 had shown existence of
vacancies with respect to casual labour and therefore the petitioner No.1
ought to have been appointed as he has worked for 966 days.       Counsel for
the petitioner No.1 for this purpose relies upon the certain facts which have
been noted by a Division Bench of this Court in its decision dated 9.5.1997
in C.W.P. No.4113/1994.
13.           In my opinion, this last argument urged on behalf of the
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                Page 9 of 10

petitioner No.1 is like putting old wine in new bottle i.e effectively the
petitioner No.1 seeks absorption or regularization of the employment
without following the regular recruitment process. This I cannot do because
it will violate the ratio of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Uma Devi (supra).
14.           In view of the above, I do not find any merit in the petition
which is accordingly dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
                                               VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
FEBRUARY 04, 2013
Ne
WP(C) No.3517/1997                                                 Page 10 of 10


