*              IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                           W.P. (C) No.5219/1998
 %                                                        January 09, 2013
ASHOK KUMAR & ORS.                                           ...... Petitioners
                            Through:       Mr. Mahesh Srivastava, Advocate.
                            VERSUS
CENTRAL WAREHOUSING CORPORATION & ORS. ...... Respondents
                            Through: Mr. K.K. Tyagi, Advocate with Mr.
                                          Iftekhar Ahmad, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
  To be referred to the Reporter or not?
VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J (ORAL)
1.             In the present writ petition, seven petitioners who were casual
labourers of the respondent No.1-Central Warehousing Corporation claim
the following reliefs:
    “i)        issue and appropriate writ in the nature of mandamus
    commanding the respondents to regularize the services of the
    petitioners in the interest of justice;
    ii) issue and appropriate writ in the nature of mandamus directing the
W.P.(C) No.5219/98                                                  Page 1 of 6

    respondents to pay equal wages for equal work to the petitioners at
    par to the operators who are regular and permanent.
    iii)      pass any other order which this Hon’ble Court may deem fit
    and proper under the facts and circumstances of the present case.”
2.            The prayer clause (ii) is effectively to say that wages which
should be granted should be as per the permanent employees of the Central
Warehousing Corporation.
3.            The case of the petitioners can be best understood by their
synopsis and list of dates of events which reads as under:-
    “SYNOPSIS AND DATES OF EVENTS
    The petitioners have been appointed by the respondent Corporation
    as their casual workers and since the date of their appointment the
    petitioners have been working with the respondent corporation
    continuously.
    That the respondent corporation has been awarded a contract of the
    pest and rodent control services at the Indira Gandhi International
    Airport New Delhi. The respondent corporation deputed the
    petitioners to do the job at the Airport pursuant to the aforesaid
    contract.
    That the petitioners have been issued identity cards so that they may
    enter the premises of the Airport on the basis of being workers of the
    respondents corporation and the Corporation has also admitted the
    fact that the petitioners are their casual workers by way of certifying
    their date of appointment as well as their date of retirement.
    That the petitioners despite being employees of the respondent
    corporation are not getting the minimum prescribed wages and also
    not getting equal wages and other benefits which are available to
    other employees of the respondent corporation. The petitioners are
    also not getting their services regularized. When the petitioners
    demanded for these benefits, the respondent corporation are now
W.P.(C) No.5219/98                                               Page 2 of 6

    trying to throw them out and trying to fill up their vacancies by the
    workers to be supplied by the private contract labour suppliers.
    Hence this writ petition is being filed before this Hon’ble Court.”
    (underlining added)
4.             The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of
Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors Vs. Umadevi & Ors. 2006(4) SCC 1
has laid down the following ratio with regard to recruitment for public
employment:-
       (i)     The questions to be asked before regularization are:-
       (a)     (i) Was there a sanctioned post (court cannot order
       creation of posts because finances of the state may go haywire),
       (ii) is there a vacancy, (iii) are the persons qualified persons and
       (iv) are the appointments through regular recruitment process of
       calling all possible persons and which process involves inter-se
       competition among the candidates
       (b)     A court can condone an irregularity in the appointment
       procedure only if the irregularity does not go to the root of the
       matter.
       (ii).   For sanctioned posts having vacancies, such posts have to
       be filled by regular recruitment process of prescribed procedure
       otherwise, the constitutional mandate flowing from Articles
       14,16,309, 315, 320 etc is violated.
       (iii). In case of existence of necessary circumstances the
       government has a right to appoint contract employees or casual
       labour or employees for a project, but, such persons form a class
W.P.(C) No.5219/98                                                  Page 3 of 6

      in themselves and they cannot claim equality(except possibly for
      equal pay for equal work) with regular employees who form a
      separate class.      Such temporary employees cannot claim
      legitimate expectation of absorption/regularization as they knew
      when they were appointed that they were temporary inasmuch as
      the government did not give and nor could have given an
      assurance of regularization without the regular recruitment
      process being followed.      Such irregularly appointed persons
      cannot claim to be regularized alleging violation of Article 21.
      Also the equity in favour of the millions who await public
      employment through the regular recruitment process outweighs
      the equity in favour of the limited number of irregularly
      appointed persons who claim regularization.
      (iv)   Once there are vacancies in sanctioned posts such
      vacancies cannot be filled in except without regular recruitment
      process, and thus neither the court nor the executive can frame a
      scheme to absorb or regularize persons appointed to such posts
      without following the regular recruitment process.
      (v)    At the instance of persons irregularly appointed the
      process of regular recruitment shall not be stopped.       Courts
      should not pass interim orders to continue employment of such
      irregularly appointed persons because the same will result in
      stoppage of recruitment through regular appointment procedure.
      (vi)   If there are sanctioned posts with vacancies, and qualified
      persons were appointed without a regular recruitment process,
      then, such persons who when the judgment of Uma Devi is
W.P.(C) No.5219/98                                              Page 4 of 6

       passed have worked for over 10 years without court orders, such
       persons be regularized under schemes to be framed by the
       concerned organization.
       (vii). The aforesaid law which applies to the Union and the
       States will also apply to all instrumentalities of the State
       governed by Article 12 of the Constitution.
5.            Points (i), (ii), (iv) and (vii) above apply to the facts of this case
because counsel for the petitioners on the query of the Court fails to point
out any averment in the writ petition as to what were the sanctioned posts of
the casual labourers of the Central Warehousing Corporation when the
petitioners were sought to be appointed as casual labourers by the Central
Warehousing Corporation; what were the vacancies available in the
sanctioned posts of casual labourers; what were the recruitment rules with
respect to employment of casual labourers and their qualification; and
finally, as to whether a regular recruitment process was followed for
employment of the petitioners.
6.            Therefore, it is quite clear that petitioners who are casual
labourers cannot seek regularization and also therefore no benefit of
consequential equal rights for pay etc as the permanent employees of the
respondents-corporation inasmuch as to allow such prayers as made by the
petitioners would be to violate the direct ratio of the Constitution Bench
W.P.(C) No.5219/98                                                   Page 5 of 6

judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Umadevi (supra) by giving
regularization without point (i) of the ratio as stated above being complied
with.
7.            Learned counsel for the petitioners states that petitioners are
casual labourers of the respondents-corporation and which could be seen
from page 19 of the writ petition. The same however cannot make any
difference because even assuming if the petitioners are employees of
respondent No.1, as stated above, they cannot be regularized in view of ratio
of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Umadevi (supra).
8.            For the sake of record, I may note that even as per the case of
petitioners, the petitioners are no longer employed with the respondents-
corporation for last about 14 years i.e from the year 1999.
9.            In view of the above, there is no merit in the petition which is
accordingly dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
                                               VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
JANUARY 09, 2013
Ne
W.P.(C) No.5219/98                                              Page 6 of 6


