*            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                         W.P.(C) No. 4979/2013
%                                                       6th August, 2013
NEERAJ KAUSHIK                                          ......Petitioner
                          Through:     Mr. Manoj Sharma and Mr. Kapil
                                       Kaushik, Advocates.
                          VERSUS
THE REGISTRAR, CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY & ANR. ...... Respondents
                          Through:     Mr. L.K.Garg, Adv. for R-1.
                                       Mr. Anil Kumar, Adv. for R-2
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
 VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J (ORAL)
1.           By this writ petition, petitioner impugns the orders dated
29.12.2010 and 9.3.2012 whereby the petitioner-probationer was removed
from the services of the bank during the probationary period after
conducting an enquiry as there was a complaint against him that he willfully
blocked the narrow passage in front of a woman employee when she was
coming back from the washroom. Counsel for the petitioner has argued
before me three aspects:-
WPC 4979/2013                                              Page 1 of 11

(i)    First is that the termination order is stigmatic though this aspect is not
pleaded in the writ petition and since this argument arises out of an admitted
fact this issue be considered by the Court.
(ii)   Second aspect which is argued is that enquiry which was conducted
against the petitioner was in violation of principles of natural justice.
(iii)  The third aspect which is argued is that petitioner did not continue as
a probationary employee and was a confirmed employee in view of the
service rules of the respondent.
2.            So far as the first aspect of the order being a stigmatic order is
concerned, though the petitioner has not so pleaded before this Court,
however, the impugned order dated 29.12.2010, communicated to the
petitioner shows that he has been removed in view of the report of the
Enquiry Officer. This would in my opinion amount to a stigmatic order.
Since however petitioner has not pleaded this issue and I have permitted him
to do so, I therefore now allow the respondent to pass a non-stigmatic order
of termination against the petitioner and which would operate from
29.12.2010. Also, I may state that it is not the case of the petitioner that the
impugned order dated 29.12.2010 has been found stigmatic by any
subsequent employer with whom petitioner has sought employment.
WPC 4979/2013                                                  Page 2 of 11

Therefore, allowing the respondent to pass a non-stigmatic order of
termination will serve the interest of justice in the present case.
3.            So far as the issue of enquiry proceedings being violative of
principles of natural justice is concerned, it is settled law that the enquiry
proceedings have not to be like the proceedings in the civil court, also it is
not necessary that evidence must be led in the enquiry proceedings in
accordance with the Evidence Act. The Supreme Court in its judgments
reported as State Bank of India and Others Vs. Narendra Kumar Pandey
(2013) 2 SCC 740 and Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher
Secondary Education vs. K.S.Gandhi and Ors. (1991) 2 SCC 716 has held
that provisions of Evidence Act do not act to departmental enquiries and
strict rules of proving facts as applicable to a civil court do not apply to
departmental proceedings.       Supreme Court has further observed in the
judgments that compliance of principles of natural justice depends on facts
of each case in the departmental proceedings. The relevant para of the
judgment in the case of State Bank of India (supra) is para 23 which reads
as under:
    “23. The Inquiring Authority has examined each and every charge levelled
    against the charged officer and the documents produced by the presenting
    officer and came to the conclusion that most of the charges were proved. In
    a departmental inquiry, the disciplinary authority is expected to prove the
WPC 4979/2013                                                   Page 3 of 11

   charges on preponderance of probability and not on proof beyond reasonable
   doubt. Reference may be made to the judgments of this Court reported in
   Union of India v. Sardar Bahadur (1972) 4 SCC 618 and R.S. Saini v.
   State of Punjab and Ors. (1999) 8 SCC 90. The documents produced by the
   bank, which were not controverted by the charged officer, supports all the
   allegations and charges levelled against the charged officer. In a case, where
   the charged officer had failed to inspect the documents in respect of the
   allegations raised by the bank and not controverted it is always open to the
   Inquiring Authority to accept the same.”
4.            Paras 17,22,32 and 37 of the judgment in the case of
Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary
Education(supra) are relevant and which read as under :-
      17. The students involved at the examination of secondary education are
      by and large minors but that by itself would not be a factor to hold that
      the students were unfairly treated at an inquiry conducted during the
      domestic inquiry. Assistance of an Advocate to the delinquent at a
      domestic enquiry is not a part of the principles of naturaljustice. It
      depends on the nature of the inquiry and the peculiar circumstances and
      facts of a particular case. The regulations and the rules of enquiry
      specifically excluded the assistance of an Advocate at the inquiry.
      Therefore, the omission to provide the assistance of a counsel at the
      inquiry is not violative of the principles of natural justice. The show
      cause notice furnished wealth of material particulars on which the
      tampering was alleged to be founded and given the opportunity to each
      student to submit the explanation and also to adduce evidence, oral or
      documentary at the inquiry. Each student submitted the explanation
      denying the allegation. At the inquiry the questionnaire in the pro-forma
      was given to each student. It is undoubted that the allegation of
      fabrication was stated to have been done at the behest of either the
      student/parents or guardians and the parents or guardians were not
      permitted to participate in the inquiry. Inspection of documents was
      given. Their answer-sheets and marks secured were perused by the
      students and were asked to testify whether the answer-books belongs to
      him or her and to identify the marks awarded by the examiner to each
      answer to the question and the total marks awarded. It was also asked to
      verify and state whether the moderator's marks-sheets were tampered in
      the concerned subject or subjects as the case may be. The student could
WPC 4979/2013                                                    Page 4 of 11

     easily identify and in fact identified his or her answer books and verified
     the marks awarded and answered positively that the marks were
     fabricated in the moderators' mark-sheets. The questionnaire was also
     given to indicate their educational background in the previous school
     years and also the marks they expected at the final examinations. The
     need of the assistance of the parents/guardians was thus absolutely nil.
     Further question in the proforma was to ascertain from the students, due
     to tampering, whether or not the marks were increased to his or her
     advantage. It could be answered by a mere look at the marks. No outside
     assistance is needed. All the students have admitted that the answer
     books belong to them. They also admitted the marks initially awarded by
     the examiner or added or subtracted, if any, by the moderators. They also
     admitted that the fabrication in the moderators' marks-sheets in the
     subject or subjects and the marks were increased to their advantage.
     They also denied the complicity of him or her or of parents or guardians.
     It is not the case of the respondents that they were coerced to answer the
     questions in a particular manner. It is obvious from the record that they
     had prior consultations with the counsel. Thus it could be seen that the
     procedure adopted at the inquiry is fair and just and it is not vitiated by
     any procedural irregularity nor is violative of the principles of natural
     justice. The absence of opportunity to the parents or guardians, in this
     background does not vitiate the legality or validity of the inquiry
     conducted or decision of the Committee.
     22. From this perspective, the question is whether omission to record
     reasons vitiates the impugned order or is in violation of the principles of
     natural justice. The omnipresence and omniscience of the principle of
     natural justice acts as deterrence to arrive at arbitrary decision in flagrant
     infraction of fair play. But the applicability of the principles of natural
     justice is not a rule of thumb or a straight jacket formula as an abstract
     proposition of law. It depends on the facts of the case nature of the
     inquiry and the effect of the order/decision on the rights of the person
     and attendant circumstances. It is seen from the record and is not
     disputed, that all the students admitted, the talcum of fabrication and it
     was to his or her advantage and that the subject/subjects in which
     fabrication was committed belong to him or her. In view of these
     admissions the Inquiry Officer obviously did not find it expedient to
     reiterate all the admissions made. If the facts are disputed, necessarily the
     authority or the Inquiry Officer, on consideration of the material on
     record, should record reasons in support of the conclusion reached. Since
     the facts are admitted, the need to their reiteration was obviated and so
     only conclusions have been stated in the reports. The omission to record
WPC 4979/2013                                                      Page 5 of 11

     reasons in the present case is neither illegal, nor is violative of the
     principles of natural justice. Whether the conclusions are proved or not is
     yet another question and would need detailed consideration.
     32. It was held that in evaluating the evidence of circumstantial nature it
     is the duty of the prosecution that all the circumstances must be fully
     established circumstances should be consistent only with the hypothesis
     of the guilt of the accused. This standards of proof also is not relevant
     not to be extended to consider the evidence in an inquiry by the domestic
     tribunal. The ratio in Bank of India v. J.A.H. Chinoy AIR 1950 PC 90
     that the appellate court would be reluctant to differ from conclusion of
     the trial Judge if his conclusion is based on the impression made by a
     person in the witness box is also not germane for the purpose of this
     case. It was laid therein that inferences and assumptions founded on a
     variety of facts and circumstances which, in themselves, offer no direct
     or positive support for the conclusion reached, the right of the appellate
     court to review this inferential process cannot be denied. While dealing
     with proof of fraud it was held that speculation is not enough to bring
     home a charge of fraudulent conspiracy.
     37. It is thus well settled law that strict rules of the Evidence Act, and the
     standard of proof envisaged therein do not apply to departmental
     proceedings or domestic tribunal. It is open to the authorities to receive
     and place on record all the necessary, relevant, cogent and acceptable
     material facts though not proved strictly in conformity with the Evidence
     Act. The material must be germane and relevant to the facts in issue. In
     grave cases like forgery, fraud, conspiracy, misappropriation, etc. seldom
     direct evidence would be available. Only the circumstantial evidence
     would furnish the proof. In our considered view inference from the
     evidence and circumstances must be carefully distinguished from
     conjectures or speculation. The mind is prone to take pleasure to adapt
     circumstances to one another and even in straining them a little to force
     them to form parts of one connected whole. There must be evidence
     direct or circumstances to deduce necessary inferences in proof of the
     facts in issue. There can be no inferences unless there are objective facts,
     direct or circumstantial from which to infer the other fact which it is
     sought to establish. In some cases the other facts can be inferred with as
     much practical as if they had been actually observed. In other cases the
     inferences do not go beyond reasonable probability. If there are no
     positive proved facts, oral, documentary or circumstantial from which
     the inferences can be made the method of inference fails and what is left
     is mere speculation or conjecture. Therefore, when an inference of proof
WPC 4979/2013                                                       Page 6 of 11

       that a fact in dispute has been held established there must be some
       material facts or circumstances on record from which such an inference
       could be drawn. The standard of proof is not proof beyond reasonable
       doubt "but" the preponderance of probabilities tending to draw an
       inference that the fact must be more probable. Standard of proof cannot
       be put in a straight Jacket formula. No mathematical formula could be
       laid on degree of proof. The probative value could be gauged from facts
       and circumstances in a given case. The standard of proof is the same
       both in civil cases and domestic enquiries.”    (underlining added)
5.             The respondent has filed before this Court a copy of the enquiry
report dated 14.8.2010. The enquiry report states that petitioner participated
in the enquiry, he was heard, he noted the statements of the witnesses of the
department, he gave his own statement also. Thereafter, the Enquiry Officer
drew out the report finding the petitioner guilty. The enquiry report reads as
under:-
                              “ENQUIRY REPORT                 Dt. 14.08.2010
        By the CEO, Delhi Nagrik Sehkari Bank Ltd, the undersigned has been
     directed to conduct a preliminary enquiry into the complaint dated
     28.07.2010 of Ms. Prerna Rajora, Clerk cum Cashier (Code No. 522) made
     against Sh. Neeraj Kaushik,Clerk cum Cashier (Code No. 517)
     List of Allegations:
        According to Ms. Prerna Rajora, Sh. Neeraj Kaushik had been showing
     bad behavior towards her ever since she joined office at Head office. On
     27.7.2010 (Tuesday) according to her, he again misbehaved with her by
     blocking her way outside the wash room, when she was going there. She
     requested him to leave her way. When he did not listen her request, she
     called Sh. Rajeev Gupta accountant who was nearby the spot at that time
     to help her, as Sh. Neeraj Kaushik was blocking her way and not letting
WPC 4979/2013                                                   Page 7 of 11

   her to pass through. Finally after the intervention of Sh. Rajeev Gupta he
   let the passing of her.
   Proceeding of Enquiry
      I started the enquiry by conducting extensive questioning from Sh.
   Neeraj Kaushik, Sh. Rajeev Gupta and Miss Prerna who have mainly
   figured into this untoward incident. I had also tried to enquire from other
   staff members but no one come forward to narrate the account of this
   incident on account of having no substantiated knowledge about it. With
   regard to the charges raised in the said complaint, I also obtained the
   statement of Sh. Neeraj Kaushik and Sh. Rajeev Gupta however the
   complainant Miss Prerna could not submit her statement on the issue.
   1. Sh. Neeraj Kaushik, Clerk cum Cashier (Code No. 517)
      Sh. Neeraj Kaushik through his written statement stated that on that
   fateful i.e. day 27.07.2010, when he was taking tea before the canteen his
   mobile phone, which was placed on his table, had been taken away by
   some one. On not finding his mobile, he doubted on Miss Prerna as she
   had been near his table, and then simply asked her to return his mobile
   phone. He further clarified that this instance happened in gallery and there
   was no instance of any misbehavior from his side.
      During the questioning, he however could not provide any satisfactory
   explanation as to why he followed a female employee upto the washroom
   and why he kept on blocking the narrow passage leading to the washroom
   and not allowed her to pass through safely from that passage. He also had
   no answer to the question and why he did not wait for her coming back
   from the washroom for enquiry about his mobile phone. Further as no
   other employee had been contacted by him for enquiring into his missing
   mobile phone, which shows that the story of missing mobile is concocted
   by him.
   2. Sh. Rajeev Gupta, Accountant , Code No. 422
      Sh. Rajeev Gupta through his written statement stated that on
   27.07.2010he went to the clearing department of enquire about some query
   related to RBI. After completion of his work, when he was returning back
WPC 4979/2013                                                   Page 8 of 11

   he saw that Miss Prerna was calling him by waving her hands. Sh. Neeraj
   Kaushik was also standing there at that time. When he reached there Miss
   Prerna told him that Sh. Neeraj Kaushik had blocked her way and not
   letting her to pass through. At that he told Sh. Neeraj Kaushik to behave
   properly. After that Sh. Neeraj Kaushik gave the way to Miss Prerna.
      The statement of Sh. Rajeev Gupta, Accountant appears to be
   containing the true picture of the incident. He has seen Sh. Neeraj
   Kaushik standing in middle of the narrow passage just in front of the
   complainant, and on his admonishing Sh. Neeraj Kaushik came out of the
   way letting Miss Prerna to go back to her seat. Sh. Neeraj Kaushik also
   could not provide any answer about his such an offensive posture to Sh.
   Rajeev Gupta and silently went away from the scene.
   3. Miss Prerna Rajora, Clerk cum Cashier, Code No. 522.
      Miss Prerna Rajora explained that on that day (27.07.2010) when she
   was going to washroom Sh. Neeraj Kaushik tried to block her way as he
   was already standing there. Thereafter, when she was coming back from
   the wash room he again blocked the narrow passage in front of her
   offensively and deliberately. She requested him to give way but refused to
   do so. Therefore no option was left with her except to call someone for
   help. At that very moment she saw Sh. Rajeev Gupta, Accountant coming
   from the Clearing Department. She immediately asked him to help by
   waving her hands. Sh. Rajeev Gupta immediately came to the spot and
   after hearing her plight, told Sh. Neeraj Kaushik to behave properly and let
   her go as that was not the proper way to deal with any female staff in the
   office. Thereafter Sh. Neeraj Kaushik left the way unceremoniously.
      Though Miss Prerna did not prefer to give anything further in writing,
   she narrated the entire incident to the undersigned, fully supporting her
   accusations made in the complaints against Sh. Neeraj Kaushik, who was
   harassing her for a long time, but she kept on tolerating his unruly
   behavior silently to save her image and reputation. She appears to have
   briefly described the true account of misconduct and misdead of Sh.
   Neeraj Kaushik in her complaint. The matter being of serious and
   sensitive nature, the undersigned did not press her to give her statement in
   writing to save her from further embarrassment and ignominy as the piece
WPC 4979/2013                                                   Page 9 of 11

    of complaint dated 28.7.2010 was already containing the charges
    explicitly.
    Conclusion:
       The close examination of the complaint dated 28.07.2010 and the
    detailed inquiries made into the matter revealed that it was the offensive
    and unruly behavior of Sh. Neeraj Kaushik, which forced the complaint to
    file this complaint against him. He has been established that Sh. Neeraj
    Kaushik willfully blocked the narrow passage in front of her when she was
    coming back from the washroom. The passage at that particular spot is so
    narrow that no other person could have passed without touching him.
    Further, even on the request of giving way, he did not move and kept
    standing there in a very offensive and bullying posture. That kind of
    behavior cannot be accepted/tolerated in any civilized society much less in
    an institution. The story of missing his mobile phone appears to be
    fabricated one, with an objective of covering up his misdeeds as he asked
    no one else about it at that time. The version of Sh. Rajeev Gupta who had
    seen him standing in the middle of that narrow passage in front of the
    complainant further confirmed the incident. When Sh. Rajeev Gupta
    admonished and asked Sh. Neeraj Kaushik to leave the way apprehending
    the situation going serious and coming out in open, he went away from the
    scene, even without explaining his case to him.”
6.             As already stated above, since principles of natural justice are
not hide bound rules and they have to be applied considering the facts of
each case, and considering that petitioner was a probationer, he participated
in the enquiry proceedings and also gave a statement, and thereafter, the
Enquiry Officer after considering the depositions of the witnesses, found the
petitioner guilty, I do not think that present is a case where I must hold that
enquiry report is bound to be set aside because principles of natural justice
WPC 4979/2013                                                    Page 10 of 11

have been violated. This argument is therefore rejected.
7.            The last aspect which is urged on behalf of the petitioner that
since petitioner had completed his first year of probation, therefore he is to
be taken as confirmed as per the service rules, is also an argument without
merit because petitioner has nowhere filed service rules which provides for
deemed confirmation after a period of one year. In fact the appointment
letter of the petitioner as per para-1 specifically states that the period of
probation of the petitioner can be extended. In fact, pursuant to this clause
petitioner’s period of probation was extended up to 31.12.2010 by the letter
dated 24.12.2008 and copy of which is also placed on record. Petitioner
therefore has been terminated in the probation period.
8.            I do not find any merit in the petition which is therefore
dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs. All pending
applications stand disposed of.
9.            As already stated above, a fresh non-stigmatic order against the
petitioner be issued by the respondent no.2 within a period of four weeks
from today.
AUGUST 06, 2013                               VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J.
ib
WPC 4979/2013                                               Page 11 of 11


