*             IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                    RFA No.139/2010
%                                                    1st December, 2011
SHRI GURBAX SINGH                                          ...... Appellant
                          Through:       Mr. K.R. Chawla, Advocate.
                          VERSUS
SHRI CHARAN SINGH & ORS.                                   ...... Respondents
                          Through:       Mr. Ashwin Kumar, Advocate with
                                        Mr. Sudeep Bhandari, Advocate for
                                        respondent Nos.8 and 9.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
  To be referred to the Reporter or not?
 VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J (ORAL)
1.            The challenge by means of this Regular First Appeal under
Section 96 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) is to the impugned
judgment of the trial Court dated 24.12.2009 which dismissed the suit on
account of the failure of the appellant/plaintiff to appear for his examination
in spite of repeated orders and imposition of costs. The impugned judgment
is effectively a judgment under Order 10 Rule 4(2) CPC which provides for
consequences in case a party to a suit who is called for examination by the
Court fails to appear. I may note that the trial Court had passed directions for
RFA No.139/2010                                                       Page 1 of 10

personal appearance because at one stage, the counsel for the appellant had
appeared and said that the compromise had taken place and the
appellant/plaintiff was found to have received monies.
2.           The facts of the case are that the subject suit was filed by the
appellant/plaintiff for declaration, injunction and possession with respect to
the suit property bearing No.E-385, Greater Kailash, Part-II, New Delhi.
Though the plaint is replete with various transactions spread over many years,
and there are as many as nine defendants in the suit, including police officials
and the subsequent purchasers of the property, however, I need not dilate on
merits inasmuch as the basic issue is as to the validity of the impugned
judgment of the trial Court dismissing the suit for non appearance of the
appellant/plaintiff.   The facts which are relevant to note are that after
completion of pleadings, the Court was informed on 4.2.2009 that parties
have settled their disputes pursuant to which the appellant/plaintiff was stated
to have received a sum of ` 10 lacs by two banker’s cheques dated 2.2.2009.
The statements of attorney of the appellant/plaintiff, Director of defendant
No.9, counsel for defendant Nos.5 to 7, defendant No.3 and the attorney of
defendant Nos.1 and 2 were recorded by the Court. On 5.2.2009, when the
case was listed for consideration of the statements, one proxy counsel for the
appellant/plaintiff who was not the earlier counsel, appeared and expressed
surprise with respect to the compromise and asked for an adjournment for
RFA No.139/2010                                                      Page 2 of 10

taking instructions from the appellant/plaintiff.        On 9.2.2009, another
Advocate, namely, Sh. Ashwani Kumar appeared, who claimed to appear on
behalf of the appellant/plaintiff. At that stage, it appeared to the Court that
there was something amiss and therefore to finally determine the issue,
personal appearance of the plaintiff was required by the detailed order dated
9.2.2009. The plaintiff is said to be a resident of Canada. By the detailed
order dated 9.2.2009, all earlier interim orders passed by the trial Court were
vacated. The following are some of the observations of the trial Court in the
order dated 9.2.2009:-
       “…..Not everything appears to be well. Either the plaintiff has
       become dishonest or the previous attorney has acted beyond his
       jurisdiction. Either ways the personal appearance of the plaintiff
       would be required to determine this issue. In this background,
       the plaintiff is directed to appear in person before this court on
       the next date. The counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff
       today submits that the plaintiff is presently in Canada and
       requests for at least one month time to secure his presence in
       India. Ld. Counsel is directed to file his Vakalatnama duly
       obtained in accordance with law after seeking no
       objection/discharge from the previous counsel as per rules…..”
3.           Despite the aforesaid directions, plaintiff failed to appear before
the Court on 12.3.2009 on the ground that the plaintiff was suffering back
pain and could not come to India. There was an additional ground of mother-
in-law of the plaintiff being seriously sick. Another Advocate Sh. Rajan
Sabharwal appeared on behalf of the plaintiff on this date i.e. 12.3.2009 and
one more opportunity was granted for personal appearance of the plaintiff on
RFA No.139/2010                                                      Page 3 of 10

20.4.2009 subject to deposit of costs of ` 10,000/-. However, on 20.4.2009,
the plaintiff once again did not appear and again the illness/back pain of the
plaintiff was mentioned as the reason for being unable to come to India. In
fact, on this date an Advocate Mr. Alim Mizaz who had appeared with the
first counsel Mr. S. Q. Kazim took up a different stand and said that non-
appearance was deliberate as plaintiff had handed over forged documents to
the earlier Advocate and the plaintiff was now deliberately avoiding to furnish
the originals. Trial Court has noted that all earlier counsel who had appeared
were not discharged till that date. In spite of deliberate defiance of the orders
of the trial Court, a final opportunity for personal appearance of the plaintiff
was granted subject to payment of costs of ` 1,50,000/-.
4.            This order of imposing costs of ` 1,50,000/- dated 20.4.2009
was challenged by the appellant/plaintiff in this Court by way of Civil Misc.
(Main) Nos.614/09 and 615/09. An earlier order dated 9.2.2009 was also
challenged. A learned Single Judge of this Court disposed of the two Civil
Misc. (Main) vide order dated 12.10.2009 observing that a Court is always
empowered under Order 10 CPC to direct personal appearance of the parties.
Out of the sum of ` 1,50,000/- imposed as costs, since ` 50,000/- was
already deposited the direction to deposit a further sum of ` 1 lakh was
stayed subject to personal appearance of the appellant/plaintiff. Once again
thereafter the appellant/plaintiff failed to appear before the trial Court on
RFA No.139/2010                                                       Page 4 of 10

4.11.2009. This was despite the specific direction of the learned Single Judge
of this Court, who passed the order dated 12.10.2009. On this date, a fourth
Advocate Mr. Varun Sikka appeared and made a request for adjournment for
personal appearance of the appellant/plaintiff. Though there was no ground
for granting adjournment, in the interest of justice, case was adjourned with
the specific observations that in case of non-appearance, adverse orders would
follow.
5.            On the next date i.e. 21.12.2009, a fifth Advocate appeared on
behalf of the appellant/plaintiff, and who is also the Advocate appearing for
the appellant/plaintiff in this appeal. An application was filed under Section
151 CPC for modification of the order dated 4.11.2009 regarding imposition
of costs. It was pleaded in this application that the plaintiff need not appear at
this stage since he will prove his case by way of evidence. Obviously, this
application was directly in the face of earlier orders of the trial Court directing
personal appearance and which orders were upheld even by this Court. The
trial Court also noted that medical certificates placed on behalf of the
appellant/plaintiff in the Court were of one Mr. Gurbakht Gulati and the
plaintiff was not Mr. Gurbakht Gulati but one Mr. Gurbax Singh. The trial
Court dismissed the application which was filed under Section 151 CPC.
6.            After referring to all the aforesaid aspects including change of
Advocates, appearance of certain Advocates without power of attorney,
RFA No.139/2010                                                        Page 5 of 10

entering into a compromise, receiving amounts, appointing a new counsel
without seeking discharge of the existing counsel and non compliance of
orders of the Court for personal appearance, the following observations have
been made by the trial Court in the impugned judgment:-
         “This being so, I hereby hold that the conduct of the plaintiff in
         keeping away from the court appears to be deliberate. He has
         filed the present suit before this court without placing on record
         the original documents as required under the CPC. His duly
         constituted attorney (which attorney) has not been revoked till
         date as per the judicial record) has accepted two cheques for a
         sum of ` 5 lacs each (` 10 lacs) towards the settlement amount on
         his behalf. I hold that the attempt of the plaintiff is only to keep
         the litigation alive on one ground or the other. He has misused
         and abused the platform of this court firstly to secure favourable
         orders in his favour at the initial stage and later by not placing
         on record the original documents and evading appearance before
         this court due to which reasons all interim orders were revoked.
         The allegations made by the defendants that, this is being done
         by the plaintiff only to arm-twist them for extorting more money
         may not be unfounded. The platforms of the court cannot be
         permitted to be used by unscrupulous persons for their benefits.
         A person who has no respect for law and has abused the
         repeated accommodation given by this court deserves no further
         indulgence. The plaintiff who is an Non Resident Indian based
         in Canada does not appear to be taking the directions of Indian
         Courts (both this court and the Delhi High Court) rather
         seriously and perhaps entertains an impression that come what
         may, he can get away, which impression requires to be dispelled.
         Therefore, unless these circumstances I hereby hold that no
         further accommodation or indulgence can be granted to such a
         person and no useful purpose would be served by keeping the
         present litigation alive, more so as the duly constituted attorney
         of the plaintiff has already compromised all the disputes raised
         by the plaintiff in the present suit with the defendants outside the
         court.”
7.            The trial Court has left the issue open regarding recovery of costs
RFA No.139/2010                                                        Page 6 of 10

and filing of application under Section 340 Cr.P.C. on behalf of defendant
Nos.8 and 9 who are said to have purchased the suit property.
8.            Learned counsel for the appellant/plaintiff before this Court once
again argued that the appellant/plaintiff need not appear personally and there
can be video conferencing.         Obviously, as noted by the trial Court, the
appellant/plaintiff has no respect for the Indian Courts, and in fact the
argument as raised by the counsel for the appellant flies in the face of
confirmation of the earlier orders passed by the trial Court and which were
upheld by this Court. This argument is in clear disregard of the earlier orders
of the trial Court and of this Court.
9.            The Supreme Court recently in the case of Ramrameshwari
Devi and Others v. Nirmala Devi and Others (2011) 8 SCC 249 has observed
that it is high time that actual/realistic costs be imposed. It is held in that
judgment that there is unnecessary litigation in this country because a person
who fails walks away scot free without paying the costs of litigation incurred
by the successful litigant. Some of the relevant paras of aforesaid judgment
of the Supreme Court are as under:-
          “43. We have carefully examined the written submissions of
          the learned Amicus Curiae and learned Counsel for the parties.
          We are clearly of the view that unless we ensure that
          wrongdoers are denied profit or undue benefit from the
          frivolous litigation, it would be difficult to control frivolous
          and uncalled for litigations. In order to curb uncalled for and
RFA No.139/2010                                                       Page 7 of 10

        frivolous litigation, the courts have to ensure that there is no
        incentive or motive for uncalled for litigation. It is a matter of
        common experience that court's otherwise scarce and valuable
        time is consumed or more appropriately wasted in a large
        number of uncalled for cases.
        47. We have to dispel the common impression that a party by
        obtaining an injunction based on even false averments and
        forged documents will tire out the true owner and ultimately
        the true owner will have to give up to the wrongdoer his
        legitimate profit. It is also a matter of common experience that
        to achieve clandestine objects, false pleas are often taken and
        forged documents are filed indiscriminately in our courts
        because they have hardly any apprehension of being
        prosecuted for perjury by the courts or even pay heavy costs.
        In Swaran Singh v. State of Punjab MANU/SC/0320/2000 :
        (2000) 5 SCC 668 this Court was constrained to observe that
        perjury has become a way of life in our courts.
        52. The main question which arises for our consideration is
        whether the prevailing delay in civil litigation can be curbed?
        In our considered opinion the existing system can be
        drastically changed or improved if the following steps are
        taken by the trial courts while dealing with the civil trials.
        A. …
        B. …
        C. Imposition of actual, realistic or proper costs and or
        ordering prosecution would go a long way in controlling the
        tendency of introducing false pleadings and forged and
        fabricated documents by the litigants. Imposition of heavy
        costs would also control unnecessary adjournments by the
        parties. In appropriate cases the courts may consider ordering
        prosecution otherwise it may not be possible to maintain purity
        and sanctity of judicial proceedings.
        …..
        54. While imposing costs we have to take into consideration
        pragmatic realities and be realistic what the Defendants or the
RFA No.139/2010                                                        Page 8 of 10

         Respondents had to actually incur in contesting the litigation
         before different courts. We have to also broadly take into
         consideration the prevalent fee structure of the lawyers and
         other miscellaneous expenses which have to be incurred
         towards drafting and filing of the counter affidavit,
         miscellaneous charges towards typing, photocopying, court fee
         etc.
         55. The other factor which should not be forgotten while
         imposing costs is for how long the Defendants or Respondents
         were compelled to contest and defend the litigation in various
         courts. The Appellants in the instant case have harassed the
         Respondents to the hilt for four decades in a totally frivolous
         and dishonest litigation in various courts. The Appellants have
         also wasted judicial time of the various courts for the last 40
         years.
         56. On consideration of totality of the facts and circumstances
         of this case, we do not find any infirmity in the well reasoned
         impugned order/judgment. These appeals are consequently
         dismissed with costs, which we quantify as Rs. 2,00,000/-
         (Rupees Two Lakhs only). We are imposing the costs not out
         of anguish but by following the fundamental principle that
         wrongdoers should not get benefit out of frivolous litigation.”
         (underlining added)
              In fact, I am also empowered to impose actual costs in terms of
Volume V of the Punjab High Court Rules and Orders (as applicable to
Delhi) Chapter VI Part I Rule 15.
10.           In view of the above-stated facts, the deliberate; willful and
blatant disregard of the orders of the trial Court as upheld by this Court
directing personal appearance of the appellant/plaintiff; I therefore dismiss
this appeal with costs of ` 1 lakh and which costs shall be paid within a
period of four weeks from today.
RFA No.139/2010                                                     Page 9 of 10

C.M. Nos.4433/2010 (stay) and 10952/2011 (video conferencing)
             Since the main appeal has been dismissed, no orders are required
to be passed in these applications which are disposed of as such.
                                                    VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
DECEMBER 01, 2011
Ne
RFA No.139/2010                                                   Page 10 of
10


