*            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                         W.P.(C) No.791/2000
%                                                     10th April, 2018
K.M.TOMAR                                                  ..... Petitioner
                          Through:     Mr. K.C. Mittal, Advocate with
                                       Ms Ruchika Mittal, Advocate,
                                       Mr. Yugansh Mittal, Advocate
                                       and Mr. Amit Prakash,
                                       Advocate.
                          Versus
STATE BANK OF INDIA & ORS.                           ..... Respondents
                          Through:     Mr. Rajiv Kapur, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J (ORAL)
C.M. No.13454/2018 (for condonation of delay in filing review
petition)
1.           Though there is no ground for condonation of delay,
however in the interest of justice, delay of 365 days in filing the
review petition is condoned.
             C.M. stands disposed of.
Review Petition No.147/2018
2.           Some litigants, it appears, are never satisfied. This is
being stated by this Court because filing of review petition has now
RP No.147/2018 in W.P.(C) No.791/2000                           Page 1 of 4

become almost a habit with respect to certain litigants. Not only filing
of the review petition becoming a habit for certain litigants, the same
is also not filed in terms of the rules of this Court, because a review
petition must be accompanied by a certificate of the lawyer that the
review petition is justified, however lawyers are routinely giving
certificate that the review petition should be filed. Giving of
certificates by lawyers in a routine manner defeats the whole purpose
of trusting the lawyers that they would only certify a case being fit for
review only when it clearly falls within the scope of review
jurisdiction. In the present case, it is noted that even the certificate of
lawyer is not filed but the case is said to be a fit case for review only
in terms of para 5 of the review petition.
3.            Another aspect required to be noted is that the impugned
judgment, which is sought to be reviewed by the present petition,
states in its very few lines itself that the review petition was argued
only on one point and which was of the petitioner not being given
notice by the disciplinary authority for setting aside the findings of the
enquiry officer without issuing of first a show cause notice to the
petitioner. This has been found to be factually incorrect and reference
RP No.147/2018 in W.P.(C) No.791/2000                           Page 2 of 4

in the impugned judgment has been made to the order of the
disciplinary authority dated 30.12.1991 that the entire findings of the
enquiry officer as a whole are upheld and which findings were in
partly on some charges in favour of the petitioner and in part for some
charges against the petitioner i.e both findings which were in favour
and against the petitioner by the disciplinary authority were accepted
and it is not that on findings of the enquiry officer in favour of the
petitioner the same were set aside by the disciplinary authority, and in
which case there was no need of show cause notice being given to the
petitioner before the disciplinary authority passed its order and as was
contended on behalf of the petitioner at the time of arguments on the
writ petition.
4.            The scope of the review jurisdiction is confined to an
error apparent on the face of the record. This is also stated by the
petitioner before the Division Bench of this Court on 3.11.2017 for
withdrawing of LPA No.83/2017 filed against the impugned judgment
dated 8.12.2016, however, what is sought to be argued through the
review petition is once again the issue of merits and which is not
within the scope of review jurisdiction.
RP No.147/2018 in W.P.(C) No.791/2000                         Page 3 of 4

5.            A judgment being ‘wrong’ has two connotations. One is
‘wrong’ for the purpose of review petition and another ‘wrong’ is that
the judgment is wrong for the purpose of exercising appellate
jurisdiction by the appellate court. What is within the realm of
jurisdiction of an appellate court for holding the judgment to be
wrong/illegal for being set aside is not within the scope of review
petition and which lies only if there is some ex-facie and complete
illegality in the impugned judgment i.e an error apparent on face of
record. There is no such ex-facie error which is pointed out, and as
already stated above, the writ petition is sought to be re-argued on
merits as if this Court has to sit in appeal over its own judgment.
6.            In view of the above position this review petition is not
only not maintainable, but also the same is also without merits, and is
also an abuse of process of the Court. This review petition is therefore
dismissed with costs of Rs.20,000/- and which costs shall be paid by
the review petitioner to the respondent no.1 within a period of four
weeks from today.
APRIL 10, 2018                                VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
Ne
RP No.147/2018 in W.P.(C) No.791/2000                          Page 4 of 4


