*            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                          W.P.(C) No. 312/1995
%                                               Date of decision : 14th May, 2013
H.U.SIDDIQUI                                                       ......Petitioner
                           Through:      Mr. G.D.Gupta, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Zafar
                                         Sidiqui and Mr. Izhar Ahmad, Advocate.
                           VERSUS
JAMIA HAMDARD (DEEMED UNIVERSITY) & ANR.                           ...... Respondents
                           Through:      Mr. Dhruv Mehta, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Saket
                                         Sikri, Mr. Sameer Abhyankar and Mr.
                                         Sudeep Dey, Advocates.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
To be referred to the Reporter or not?
 VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J (ORAL)
1.      This writ petition is filed by the petitioner Sh. H.U. Siddiqui the erstwhile
employee of the respondent No. 1- Jamia Hamdard University, seeking quashing of
the order of the Disciplinary Authority dated 05.07.1995 imposing penalty of
dismissal from service upon the petitioner.
2.     In the present case, chargesheet is dated 25.01.1995 alongwith which
imputation of charges were annexed. There were a total of 5 charges against the
petitioner. The Enquiry Report dated 10.5.1995 exonerated the petitioner with
respect to charges 3 & 5 but held the petitioner guilty so far as charges 1,2 and 4
WPC-312/1995                                                                   Page 1 of 18

(partly) are concerned. Disciplinary Authority after giving a copy of the enquiry
report to the petitioner gave him a personal hearing and thereafter passed the
impugned order dated 05.07.1995.
3.     Before setting out the arguments which have been urged on behalf of the
petitioner to challenge the report of the Enquiry Officer and order passed by the
Disciplinary Authority, it would be necessary to set out the parameters /scope of a
hearing in a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution whereby challenge is
laid to the orders passed by the Departmental Authorities. It is settled law that the
orders which are passed by the Departmental Authorities can only be successfully
challenged if there is violation of law/rules of the employer-organization or
violation of the principles of natural justice or perversity in the findings of the
Enquiry Officer/Disciplinary Authority. In the present case, arguments have been
urged under all these three heads.
4.     Let us at the outset reproduce the relevant imputation of charges so far as
Articles 1,2 and 4 are concerned, inasmuch as a reference to them will show the
factual aspects which have been decided by the Departmental Authority:
                         ARTICLE OF CHARGE NO.1
      In the work of drilling of tube-well, the Asstt. Engineer (Elec.), Mr.
      H.U.Siddiqui, did not adopt the normal prescribed procedure of
      calling for quotations from reputed parties by post by issuing Notice
      Inviting Tenders so as to obtain wide choice and competitive rates.
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 2 of 18

     On the contrary, he contacted and discounted the matter with firms of
     his choice and collected three quotations personally by hand in
     October,1994. He prepared the Comparative Statement in his own
     hand and submitted the file on 30.11.1994 for approval of his proposal
     of awarding of the work to the so called lowest tenderer M/s Super
     Drilling Pvt. Ltd., Nehru Place, New Delhi. He even certified that
     their rates were reasonable. He willfully manipulated the situation to
     show this firm as the lowest tenderer, even though the so called lowest
     rates were really excessive.
     Two of the tenderers, viz. M/s Super Drilling Works Pvt. Ltd., and
     Dantal Hydrolice Pvt. Ltd., have the same Telephone Number and Fax
     No. The quotations of these two firms are only marginally different,
     and tilted in favour of the first firm. The same typewriter has been
     used in typing out the quotations and the terms and conditions of the
     two firms are identical. The two envelope containing the quotations
     of these parties are also written in the same hand.
     Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, Asstt. Engineer (Electrical) being fully aware of the
     fact that the same party was quoting under two different names is held
     party to this manipulation. As regard the third firm viz. S.S.Drill Well
     Probyn Road, Delhi, no Telephone Number has been indicated on
     their letter. The status and designation of the signatory have also not
     been mentioned. The third quotation is therefore open to serious
     doubt. The exaggerated rates of this party show that the same are fake
     and unrealistic, and obtained by the Asstt. Engineer (Electrical) solely
     with a view to establishing that the rates of M/s Super Drilling Pvt.
     Ltd. are the lowest and reasonable.
      Earlier in March 1994 a reputed firm, namely Paramount Engineers,
     Uday Park, New Delhi, had submitted quotations for Drilling work in
     Talimabad and thoses rates are definitely lower to those from M/s
     Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd.
     Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, Asstt. Engineer (Elect.) deliberately chose not to
     invite rates from Paramount Engineers.
     When Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, some-how became aware that his
     irregularities had come to adverse notice. Mr. Siddiqui was clever
     enough to discuss the matter with M/s Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd. and get
     a reduction of 8% in their rates from the firm in the back date of
WPC-312/1995                                                              Page 3 of 18

     2.12.1994 (Letter put up to the University Engineer on 24.12.1994) so
     as to make their revised offer reasonable. He did this to forestall the
     disciplinary section then being contemplated against him for putting
     up the proposal for award of work at excessive rates.
     The whole procedure and course of section followed by Mr.
     H.U.Siddiqui, Asstt. Engineer (Electrical) would have caused
     avoidable financial loss to the University. Luckily, the mis-chief of
     Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, Asstt. Engineer (Elect.) was detected in time, and
     his recommendation to award the work to M/s Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd.
     was not approved. Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, is guilty of gross misconduct in
     manipulating the quotations with the dishonest motive of defrauding
     the University for personal monetary gain. In doing so, he has
     committed gross misconduct amounting to negligence and lack of
     integrity.
                         ARTICLE OF CHARGE NO.2.
     In January 1994, the Medical Director, Majeedia Hospital proposed
     that old electric fittings may be replaced by new fittings in order to
     improve the lighting in the Hospital. For this purpose the Asstt.
     Engineer (Electrical) Mr. H.U.Siddiqui submitted estimates of
     expenditure for purchase, supply and fixing of electric decorative
     fittings and also certain accessories to the tune of Rs.96,625/- of this
     amount, the expenditure on 114 decorative pieces of electric fittings
     was put at Rs. 75,700/- the balance of Rs.20,925/- representing the
     costs of accessories. The Vice Chancellor accorded his approval on
     4.1.1994 to the proposed expenditure with the remark that the items
     be provided on an emergency basis. Therefore, Mr. H.U.Siddiqui,
     A.E. (Electrical purchased on prepayment the 114 decorative pieces
     from Mayfair Enterprises, Bhagirath Place, Chandni Chowk, Delhi at
     a total cost of Rs.72,223/- inclusive of 12% C.S.T.
     After Vice Chancellor’s approval, Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, A.E.(Elect.) was
     required to follow the prescribed procedure of inviting quotations
     from reputed parties at short notice, or make purchase through the
     Purchase Committee, in order to obtain lowest reasonable rates.
     However, Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, A.E.(Elect.), failed to adopt the normal
     prescribed procedure and purchased the 114 decorative fittings from
     Maypair Enterprises certifying the rates as reasonable even though no
WPC-312/1995                                                              Page 4 of 18

     comparative rates were available to judge the reasonableness of the
     rates of Mayfair Enterprises. The price list of Mayfair Enterprises
     showed the following rates for the two types of fittings:-
     1.      ME-DLF-201                        Rs. 740/- per piece
             for 2X40 watts
      2.     Same for 1X20 watts               Rs.330/- per piece
     The total purchase were 114 items, 83 of the 1 st and 31 of the 2nd type.
     In the bill dt. 14.2.1994, the rates charged were Rs.666/- and Rs. 297/-
     each for type 1st and 2nd respectively, and C.S.T.012%was added,
     thereby, the total bill amount came to Rs.72,223.20 which was duly
     paid to the firm on 14.2.1994 before taking delivery of stores.
     The action of Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, A.E.(Elect.) in purchasing the 114
     decorative fittings from Mayfair Enterprises, without calling for
     tenders of without associating the Purchase Committee gave rise to
     suspicion that Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, A.E.(Elect.) had chosen the Mayfair
     Brand to the exclusion of other Brands which may be equally good
     and may be cheaper too, with some ulterior motive. Subsequent
     investigations revealed that Mayfair Enterprises themselves were
     offering a discount of 25% on the rates shown in their price list and
     were exempting Universities from C.S.T. on furnishing the requisite
     certificate. This firm actually supplied the same electric fittings at
     Rs.555/- and Rs. 247.50 each to Jamia Hamdard in
     November/December 1994. While seeking approval of the competent
     authority the A.E. (Electrical) had withheld the aspects of discount
     and non-application of C.S.T. on furnishing the prescribed certificate
     with dishonest intentions. In the circumstances it is quite clear that
     Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, A.E.(Electrical) had paid excessive and exorbitant
     rates to this firm in making purchases Rs.666/- and Rs.297/- each in
     February 1994. In the process, the purchase of 114 decorative fittings
     caused heavy monetary loss of the order of Rs. 18,486/- with
     corresponding undue gain to the supplier. Mr. H.U.Siddiqui,
     A.E.(Elect.) had obviously made the purchases in February 1994 from
     Mayfair Enterprises at excessive cost with ulterior motive for personal
     gain in the said transaction. Mr. H.U.Siddiqui had thus caused
     avoidable monetary loss to the University and in the process had
     played a fraud for personal gain. He thus committed acts of gross
     negligence and dishonesty.”
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 5 of 18

5.    So far as charge/Article 1 is concerned, Enquiry Officer has dealt with the
same from internal pages 4 to 12 of his report and after considering the depositions
of both the sides as also the documents which have been filed in the enquiry
proceedings, has given the following conclusions:
      “(vii) To sum up, the C.O. did not follow the prescribed procedure in
      October 1994 in the matter of inviting quotations for drilling work. The
      correct procedure was followed in Jan. 1995 for the same work (Exh. D-1).
      There was no urgency to justify spot collection of quotations by C.O.himself
      from the 3 parties (P-1 to P-3). Although he collected the quotations on
      12th/15th Oct. 1994, he sat over them for 45 days and opened the quotations
      only on 30.11.94. Such laziness and delay on his part will expose the
      hollowness of his claim of urgency. Even after issue of N.I.T. in Jan. 1995,
      the work has still not been awarded. (vide reply of P.W.-1 (M.I.M) to Qn.
      13 on page 6 of deposition). He should not have entertained or acted on the
      quotations of two sister firms of Nehru Place (P-1 and P-2) with the same
      address, phone/telex/fax numbers, but he recommended the rates in P-1 in a
      tendentions way. He was aware of the still lower rate of Rs. 1.60.lakhs of
      Paramount Engineers while his proposal of 30.11.94 (P-5) was being
      processed, but instead of brining it to the notice of the superior officers, he
      suppressed it and negotiated with Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd. and obtained 8%
      reduction in their quotation of 12.10.94 (P-6). Even with the reduction of 8%
      the quotation of Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd. was higher than the quotation of
      Paramount Engineers. Ultimately the Vice Chancellor detected the
      irregularities involved in the C.O.’s proposal (P-5) and it was not accepted
      on re-examination and further scrutiny. Even though in actual procedure,
      the University was saved from financial loss by the timely order of the Vice-
      Chancellor (P-5), the C.O.’s proposal involved the risk of wrongful gain to
      Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd. with corresponding wrong loss to the University.
      As the C.O. was handling the job from the start at his own level, he should
      have acted in a just and reasonable manner, adhering to the normal
      procedure. He failed to do so, but tried to cover up his failure on flimsy
      pretexts which cannot succeed. In my view, the first article of a charge
      should be held as proved against the C.O.”
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 6 of 18

6.     On behalf of the petitioner so far as the findings and conclusions of the
Enquiry Officer with respect to Article 1 are concerned, the following contentions
have been raised for quashing of the said findings and conclusions:
(i)    Enquiry Officer has arrived at a finding against the petitioner on the charge
that petitioner did not get the quotations by post from contractors who were to do
the drilling work but instead personally went to collect the quotations showing his
personal interest towards the contractors who gave the quotations. However, this
charge against the petitioner is shown to be absolutely baseless in view of the
admissions made by PW-2 Mr. I.H. Khan who admitted that there was urgency for
the drilling work for a Tubewell and the said urgency was expressed by the Herbal
Garden Committee and thus showing that petitioner was entitled to get the spot
quotations personally.
(ii)    It is also argued that principles of natural justice have been violated because
the rates with respect to tenders for drilling of tubewell which were received
subsequently in January, 1995 were not given to the petitioner in spite of being
asked for by letter dated 13.3.1995. It is argued that the request has been illegally
rejected by the Enquiry Officer vide his order dated 27.3.1995 allegedly on the
ground of documents being confidential/privileged documents.
7.     In my opinion, both the arguments urged on behalf of the petitioner do not
merit acceptance. On the first argument, it may be stated that even though PW-2
WPC-312/1995                                                                  Page 7 of 18

admitted that there was urgency for having tube-wells, yet one cannot overlook the
fact that the original urgency was put to naught by as many as 45 days delay taken
by the petitioner to open the quotations. Thus, whatever urgency which originally
existed came to an end. This aspect has been dealt with by the Enquiry Officer in
the following manner:-
       “……The C.O.’s argument is that in view of urgency, the normal
       procedure was not followed and spot quotations were obtained by
       hand. In this connection he has relied on the replies of P.W-
       2(University Engineer) to Qn. No. 4 and Qn. No. 5 under cross-
       examination.
       Even so, the fact remains that the quotations of 3 parties (P-1 to P-3)
       were collected by the C.O. by hand on 12th Oct. and 15th Oct. 94, but
       the quotations were opened only on 30.11.94, the comparative
       statement was prepared on 30.11.94 and the C.O. put up his proposal
       on 30.11.94, (vide Exh. P-4 and P-5). The C.O. had taken unduly
       long time of an much as 45 days even to open the quotations and then
       to put up his proposal, and he has not come forward with any
       explanation at all for such delay. On the contrary, such delay will
       surely establish that there was no question of urgency, and the drilling
       work was handed by the C.O . in a routine and lazy manner by
       allowing the quotations to remain in closed covers and gather dust
       thereon. It is indeed ominous to note that while putting up the
       comparative statement and seeking approval to his proposal on
       30.11.94 (Exh. P-5), the C.O. has not at all referred to the drilling
       work being one of urgency. In the circumstances his plea of urgency
       factor to justify substitution of the normal usual procedure of N.I.T by
       spot collection by hand is unconvincing and untenable. ……..”
       (underlining added)
8.            I do not find any perversity in the aforesaid findings for interfering
by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Clearly, therefore,
whatever urgency which existed at the outset had come to an end because the
WPC-312/1995                                                                Page 8 of 18

period of delay taken for processing the quotations and which was such that surely
open bids could have been invited.
9.     Another important aspect is that even if we accept the issue of urgency,
however, the issue is of the fact that the petitioner followed a procedure for
favoring a selected party. The selected party’s rates were higher at Rs. 1.89 lacs as
compared to the quotation of another party’s/4th party viz Paramount Engineers
who had offered to do the job at Rs. 1.57 lacs. The Enquiry Officer in this regard
has also concluded that by a back dated letter an 8% discount in the quotation of
Rs.1.89 lacs was obtained from the preferred party M/s Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd. to
bring the quotation in line with the fourth quotation. However in spite of that
discount there was still a difference of about Rs. 14,532/-. The Enquiry Officer has
also noted that not only the proposal of M/s Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd. was higher,
even after his discount offer at 8% further, the difference in the proposal of M/s
Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd. and Paramount Engineers was not put to the Vice-
Chancellor at the time of forwarding by the petitioner the proposal dated
30.11.1994. All in all I do not find that the Enquiry Officer in any manner was
unjustified in giving a finding that the petitioner was deliberately preferring one
party i.e M/s Super Drilling Pvt. Ltd, and which offer if gone through, would have
caused loss to the employer, and which was not caused because the Vice-
Chancellor in his order dated 19.12.1994 mentioned glaring irregularities in the
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 9 of 18

proposal forwarded by the petitioner for approval of the quotation of M/s Super
Drilling Pvt. Ltd.
10.    So far as the second Article of Charge is concerned, it is argued that there
was urgency with respect to the purchase of the electrical fittings for installation in
the hospital and therefore, the petitioner was justified in choosing the quotation of
M/s Mayfair Enterprises. It is also argued that petitioner had rightly chosen to go
to M/s Mayfair Enterprises for purchase of the electrical fittings because the
University Engineer himself had asked the petitioner to purchase from M/s Mayfair
Enterprises, inasmuch as, this admission is found in the statement of PW-2-Mr.
I.H.Khan. It is also argued that the charge of excessive rates being paid to M/s
Mayfair Enterprises falls to the ground in view of the letter of the said firm dated
3.12.1994, by which, it was informed that there was difference in rates in the price
list of June 1993 and the price list as existing in December, 1994 in view of the
fact that the import duty on Acrylic was brought down by 20% in the Finance Bill
for the year 1994-1995. It is argued that once the necessary/ sound explanation is
given for the difference of rates quoted by M/s Mayfair Enterprises so far as the
subject purchase is concerned ie for the low rates as found in December, 1994, the
Enquiry Officer’s report with respect to Charge No.2 should be quashed.
11.    On the aspect of urgency of purchase of electrical fittings which is the
subject matter of Charge no.2, I need not detain myself because it is not disputed
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 10 of 18

by the respondent that there was urgency for purchase. The issue in the present
case was really as to whether the rates which were quoted by M/s Mayfair
Enterprises were excessive rates. In this regard, The Enquiry Officer after giving
the petitioner benefit of merit as regards his contention of the difference in rates in
the beginning of 1994 and at the end of 1994 has however observed that since as
per the rules involvement of Purchase Committee was required, and since
admittedly, the petitioner did not involve the Purchase Committee, consequently
(and if which Purchase Committee was involved) the better rates from M/s Mayfair
Enterprises could not be negotiated. I do not find that the conclusions of the
Enquiry Officer in this regard are perverse and need to be interfered with.
Following are the relevant observations of the Enquiry Officer in this regard:-
       “……………..If the C.O.had associated the Purchase Committee in
       Jan./Feb.1994, it is quite likely that a higher discount could have been
       extracted from the supplier particularly when the quantity purchased
       was large and amount involved was substantial. There is no
       explanation why the C.O. did not go through the Purchase Committee
       for decorative items although admittedly (vide C.O.’s note dt. 24.1.94
       on page 3 of Exh. P-12) the C.O. had suggested purchase of accessory
       items to the tune of Rs. 24402/- through Purchase Section/Committee.
       In Jan. 1994, the C.O. was very well aware of the procedure of making
       purchases through Purchase Committee and hence his action in ignoring
       this Committee only for decorative fittings is open to objection and
       suspicion.
       The C.O.’s plea is that payment of Sales Tax is the concern and respond
       ability of the Finance Office. If Sales Tax exemption is available to
       Universities, the Finance Section should have claimed exemption and
       deducted sales tax from the invoice amount before allowing payment.
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 11 of 18

       In this connection he has relied on the reply of P.W.-2 to Qn. No.11
       under cross-examination (on page 12). While this may be so, the fact
       remain that the Purchase Committee was able to get sales tax exemption
       straight-away from the firm on 29.11.94/1.12.94 (vide Exhibits P-13/P-
       14 and without the help of Finance Office. Accordingly, if only the
       C.O. had associated the Purchase Committee members in Jan. 1994, it
       would have been possible to delete the sales tax from the invoice itself,
       thereby avoiding infructuous expenditure for the University. It may be
       that the sales tax eventually goes into Govt. coffers and not to the
       supplier but at the same time it meant avoidable extra cost to the
       University.”
12.    I may state that the petitioner is justified in arguing that there is merit in his
contention, however, in my opinion, there is equal weight in the conclusion of the
Enquiry Officer that if the Purchase Committee was involved, it could have
negotiated lower rates with M/s Mayfair Enterprises. Once two views are possible,
I cannot while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
interfere with a plausible conclusion which has been arrived at by the Enquiry
Officer. The arguments therefore urged on behalf of the petitioner with respect to
quashing of the charges under Article- 2 are also rejected.
13.    That takes us to Article/Charge No. 4 and which is in two parts. One is with
respect to petitioner not taking steps for getting the defective meter of the generator
not changed from 1990 till the chargesheet was issued, and because of which, it is
contended that petitioner was able to mask consumption of diesel and therefore,
claimed wrong figures resulting in misappropriation of amounts towards purchase
of diesel. The second aspect/part of the charge is that the register in question
WPC-312/1995                                                                 Page 12 of 18

which noted the readings was not got approved from the higher authorities. The
argument urged on behalf of the petitioner is that the allegations are with respect to
generator of 180KV whereas the witness of the respondents itself namely PW-5-
Sh. Azhar Ali admitted in his cross examination on 4.4.1995 that each time meters
were installed for readings in the old generator, the same used to become defective
in a few days, and which, therefore, gave valid reason to the petitioner not to
initiate action for change of the meter.
14.     In my opinion, though the argument urged on behalf of the petitioner that no
steps were required to be taken for initiating change of the meter because each time
a new meter was installed, the same would become defective within few days
because the 180 KV generator was very old however, the crux of the issue really is
that there was maintained a register/log book, and though the register/log book had
to be put to the higher authority which was the University Engineer, the same was
not done. It has been held by the Enquiry Officer that because the consumption
figures had gone unchecked, this resulted in excess purchase of diesel, and misuse
thereof. The relevant findings of the enquiry report in this regard read as under:-
        “(iv) According to P.W.-6, the rate of consumption of diesel per hour
       for the generator will depend on the load factor, the very old 180
       K.V.generator cannot withstand a load beyond 50%. Any load
       exceeding this limit will damage the old generator and it will
       breakdown. After taking over charge of generator, P.W.-6 has
       instructed the Generator Operator (D.W.-1) to run 50% loan only. In
       fact D.W.-1 is now running both the generators at only 50% load
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 13 of 18

     thereby show ing a consumption of only 30 litres per hour as against 40
     litres per hour in the part. (vide replies of D.W.-1 to Qns. 6 and 7
     under cross-examination). According to P.W.-6, the current rate of
     consumption is 30 litres per hour only.
      (v) A perusal of the log book entries for the generators will show
     that upto end of 1994, D.W.-1 was showing consumption at 40 litres
     per hour because 75% load was assumed for both the generators 380
     K.V. and 180 K.V. In other words, D.W.-1 calculated the consumption
     figures on a hypothetical presumption basis without reference to the
     limitation of the load for the old generator, namely 50% beyond which
     there is risk of damage and breakdown. Consequently, the quantity of
     litres consumed was inflated by D.W.-1 to justify excessive purchase
     of diesel and such excess purchase must have been misused of diesel
     and such excess purchase must have been misused for personal gain at
     the cost of the University. The C.O. was scrutinising the log book
     entries periodically and countersigning them. The University Engineer
     (P.W.-2) has seen the log books only once. D.W.-1 was making the
     log book entries and being a relative of the C.O.(reply to Qn. No. 4 on
     page 21) the inflated consumption figures had gone unchecked by the
     C.O. In the circumstances, it will be quite logical to infer that the
     C.O.was party to the bogus entries in the log book. In this connection
     the replies of P.W.-1 to Qns. 18 to 20 under cross-examination (page
     7) will go against the C.O. in the same way as P.W.-1s deposition on
     page 3 (first paragraph. Inspite of the friendly hints given by P.W.-1 to
     C.O. to check the diesel consumption in view of information received
     by P.W.-1 as well as by the Vice-Chancellor that there was something
     suspicious about purchase and consumption of diesel for the
     generators, the C.O.seems to have turned a deaf ear to the advice of
     P.W.-1. It is really interesting that P.W.-1s version on page 3 of
     deposition has not been contradicted by C.O. under cross-examination
     of P.W.-1, and thereby C.O.has tacitly accepted the version of P.W.-1
     as truthful. It may be that University Engineer (P.W.-2) and
     M.I.M.(P.w.-1) had sanctioned payment of the cost of diesel purchase
     from time to time but this cannot serve to condone much less cancel
     the suspicious role of the C.O. in excess purchase of diesel and misuse
     thereof. To my mind, the allegation of fraud in diesel purchase should
     be held as proved against the C.O.”
WPC-312/1995                                                             Page 14 of 18

15.    Once again, I do not find any perversity for this Court to interfere in the writ
proceedings against a finding which cannot be said to be perverse. The Enquiry
Officer has examined the aspect in detail and has found that the wrong
consumption of diesel arose from the load factor and it was necessary that the
figures in the log book too have been checked by the University Engineer and
which was not done. Once again, it is stated that if two views are possible, this
Court is not entitled to interfere with the findings and conclusions arrived at by the
Enquiry Officer, and therefore, I do not find that the findings and conclusions of
the Enquiry Officer so far as the part of the Charge No. 4 is concerned, are in any
manner perverse for being interfered with by this Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
16.    De hors the challenge to the enquiry report, it is urged on behalf of the
petitioner that there is violation of the relevant rules of the University/respondent
inasmuch as the Disciplinary Authority has failed to give any notice of imposing of
penalty upon the petitioner before passing of the impugned order dated 5.7.1995.
The argument can best be understood by reproducing ground ZF of the writ
petition and which is urged in support of this argument. This ground reads as
under:-
             “ZF. That the Impugned order of dismissal was passed by the
                    Disciplinary Authority/Executive Council in violation of the
                    Provisions of Rule 9(4) (1) (b) of Jamia Bye-laws in asmuch
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 15 of 18

                    as no notice of proposed Penalty of dismissal from services
                    was served on the appellant; Rule 9(4) (1) (b) of Jamia Bye-
                    laws runs as follows:-
                    “9. Action on the Inquiry report. (4) (i) If the Disciplinary
                    authority having regard to its findings on all or any of the
                    articles of charge is of the Opinion that any of the penalties
                    specified in Clauses (iv) to (vi) of Rule 5 should be imposed
                    on the employee it shall;
                    (a) …….
                    (b) Give the employee a notice stating the penalty
                        proposed to be imposed on him/her and calling
                    (ii) The disciplinary authority shall consider the
                    representations, if any, made by the employee in pursuance
                    of the notice given to him/her under Clause (1) and
                    determine what penalty, if any, should be imposed on
                    him/her and make such order as it may deem fit”.
17.    On behalf of the respondents, it is argued that this argument is misconceived
and reference has been invited to the following portion of the penalty order:-
       “And whereas a copy of the report of inquiry was sent to Mr.
       H.U.Siddiqui, Assistant Engineer (Elect.) (Under Suspension) vide
       Memo dated 18.5.1995 and he was given an opportunity of making
       such submissions on the report of inquiry as he desired. And whereas,
       as requested by him, Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, Assistant Engineer (Elect.)
       (Under Suspension) was given a personal hearing by the Vice
       Chancellor, Jamia Hamdard on 22.6.1995. His submissions on the
       Report of the inquiry were received vide his letter dated 26.5.1995.
       The said representation of Mr. H.U.Siddiqui, Assistant Engineer
       (Elect.) (Under Suspension) and submissions made during personal
       hearing have been carefully considered by the Executive Council.”
18.    A reading of the aforesaid paragraph of the order of the Disciplinary
Authority dated 5.7.1995 shows that a copy of the Enquiry Report was given to the
petitioner, petitioner was given personal hearing, and therefore, I hold that both in
WPC-312/1995                                                               Page 16 of 18

form and substance, the provision of Rule 9(4) (i) (b) of the bye-laws of the
respondent/University stands complied with. I do not agree with the argument
urged on behalf of the petitioner that there has to be a specific notice in writing
stating that a particular penalty is proposed to be imposed inasmuch as the
requirement of the relevant rule basically is that before imposing of penalty the
charged official must be put to notice by giving the Enquiry Officer’s report and
his stand must be considered and which undoubtedly has been followed in the facts
of the present case. Accordingly, I reject the argument urged on behalf of the
petitioner with respect to violation of the bye-laws of the respondent/University.
19.    That takes me to the final argument urged on behalf of the petitioner that
action against the petitioner is mala fide because petitioner was a President of the
Union of the respondent/University and the chargesheet dated 25.1.1995 was
served immediately after the Union through the petitioner had given a call for a
pen down strike on 16.1.1995 and suspension order against the petitioner was
issued on the same day in the evening.
20.    In my opinion, once again this argument is without merit because what we
have to see is whether Enquiry Officer has arrived at his findings and conclusions
according to law.     Once the Enquiry Officer has taken care to give detailed
findings and conclusions and which findings and conclusions are validly linked to
the evidence which has been led in this case, then, the findings and conclusions of
WPC-312/1995                                                              Page 17 of 18

the Enquiry Officer cannot be set aside on the grounds of alleged mala fides. Even
if, allegedly mala fide exists, once charges are otherwise duly proved in the
enquiry proceedings, then it is not the law that even after charges are proved,
merely because mala fide exists, the valid findings and conclusions of the Enquiry
Officer have to be set aside. This argument urged on behalf of the petitioner is also
accordingly rejected.
21.    No other issue is pressed or urged before me.
22.    In view of the above there is no merit in the petition, which is accordingly
dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
MAY 14, 2013                                         VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J.
dkg/ib
WPC-312/1995                                                             Page 18 of 18


