*             IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                         FAO(OS) 458/2009
%                                       Reserved on: 11th January, 2013
                                        Pronounced on: 15th March, 2013
RECKITT BENKISER INDIA LTD                                ...... Appellant
                          Through:       Mr. Aman Lekhi, Senior Advocate
                                        with Ms. Shikha Sachdev, Advocate.
                     Versus
WYETH LTD.                                                ..... Respondent
                          Through:       Mr. Pravin Anand, Advocate with
                                         Mr. Vaishali Mittal, Advocate and
                                         Ms. Abhilasha Nautiyal, Advocate.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJIV KHANNA
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE S.P. GARG
  To be referred to the Reporter or not?
VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
1.            Reference has been made to this Full Bench, by a Division
Bench of this court, vide the reference order dated 8.10.2010 in this
FAO(OS), for this larger Bench to consider as to whether a Division Bench
of this court in the case of Dabur India Ltd. Vs. Amit Jain & Anr. 2009
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 1 of 67

(39) PTC 104 (Del) (DB) has correctly held that publication abroad by
existence of the design in the records of the Registrar of designs which is
open for public inspection cannot be said to be “prior publication” as per the
meaning of the term as found in Sections 4(b) and 19(1)(b) of the Designs
Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as „the Act‟). The Division Bench of this
court observes that it concurs with the view of learned Single Judge of
Calcutta High Court in the case of Gopal Glass Works Ltd. Vs. Assistant
Controller of Patents & Designs 2006 (33) PTC 434 (Cal.) as stated in
paras 39 and 40 of the judgment, as per which the learned Single Judge of
the Calcutta High Court holds that mere publication of designs,
specifications, drawings and /or demonstrations by the patent office in a
foreign country would not in itself amount to publication for rendering a
design registered in India liable to cancellation. The reference order doubts
the correctness of the ratio in the judgments in the cases of Dabur India Ltd.
and Gopal Gas Wors Ltd. for the reason that the said judgments are stated
to have overlooked the provision of Section 44 of the Act which provides
that a design which is registered abroad in a Paris Convention country, and
to which convention India is a signatory, gets priority over an Indian
registered design, provided that the person who gets the designs registered
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 2 of 67

abroad in a Paris convention country, within six months of the date of the
application made in the said convention country abroad, applies and gets
registration in India.
2.            In order to answer the reference with clarity it would be
necessary first to crystallize the various issues/aspects, so that not only each
of them can be approached independently, but also the inter-play and inter-
relation of those issues as regards points which are common to those
issues/aspects can be noticed. The issues/aspects as crystallized would be as
under:-
(i)    When Section 19(1) (a) of the Act provides for cancellation of a
design registered in India on account of a design previously registered in
India, whether the said provision has to be read literally only i.e only a
design registered in India can be basis for cancellation of a subsequent
design registered in India and not a design registered abroad in a convention
country or whether the provision of Section 19(1) (a) takes within its sweep
and includes a previous design registered abroad in a convention country for
cancellation of a design registered in India. Putting it differently, is a design
previously registered abroad in a convention country a ground under Section
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                               Page 3 of 67

19(1) (a) of the Act for cancellation of a design subsequently registered in
India.
(ii)   If under Section 19(1)(a) a design registered in a convention country
abroad is a ground for cancellation of a design registered in India, is this rule
absolute or the rule falls in those circumstances where the design registered
abroad is not applied to be got registered India within a period of six months
of making of the application in a convention country abroad. Be it noted
that the issue of design registered abroad alongwith its prior publication can
be under certain circumstances a basis of cancellation of a design which is
registered in India, however, that is the subject matter of Section 19(1)(b)
and not 19(1)(a), because the aspect of prior publication is within the subject
matter of Section 19(1)(b) as stated in the immediately following issue.
(iii)  If a design registered in a convention country abroad is not a ground
for cancellation of a design registered in India under Section 19(1)(a), then,
whether the registration abroad entitles cancellation of a design registered in
India because the registration abroad conclusively amounts to prior
publication as per that expression found in Section 19(1)(b) read with
Section 4(b) of the Act.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 4 of 67

(iv)   What     is   the    meaning     of    the   expression       “publication
abroad”/“published abroad”, for it then to be argued that on account of such
publication abroad, the design registered in India becomes liable to
cancellation in terms of Section 19(1)(b) of the Act.
3.           An offshoot of the aforesaid issues (iii) and (iv) above is that
whether in all circumstances and all cases, the record of the Registrar of
Designs open to public inspection abroad should be held to be prior
publication so that on the basis cancellation can be applied under Section
19(1)(b) of the Act for the design registered in India, and if, the record of the
Registrar of Designs in a convention country abroad is to be taken as a basis
for cancellation of a design registered in India, whether it is an unqualified
rule or whether it has to be examined as per the facts of each case that record
of the Registrar of Designs in a convention country abroad does or does not
amount to prior publication in terms of the expression in Section 19(1)(b)
and Section 4(b) of the Act.
4.           In order to deal exhaustively with the aforesaid issues which
call for our answers, it would be necessary to refer to various relevant
Sections of the Act. One way would be to quote and deal with the different
Sections of the Act when we take up for discussion a specific issue as stated
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                               Page 5 of 67

above and another way can be to set out all the relevant Sections of the Act
at the outset and thereafter refer to the language of such whichever Section is
necessary when we take up the discussion qua a particular issue. We would
prefer to take the second course of action of reproducing all the Sections
which will come into play for discussion in the present judgment at the
outset because for the issues which have to be considered, the language not
only of one particular Section or but also of various other Sections jointly
will come into play, and also because of the fact that inter-play of Sections
will have to be noticed when we deal with a specific issue. The relevant
Sections with necessary underlining/emphasis are therefore reproduced
below:
    “Section 2(d) “design” means only the features of shape,
    configuration, pattern, ornament or composition of lines or colours
    applied to any article whether in two dimensional or three dimensional
    or in both forms, by any industrial process or means, whether manual,
    mechanical or chemical, separate or combined, which in the finished
    article appeal to an are judged solely by the eye; but does not include
    any mode or principle of construction or anything which is in
    substance a mere mechanical device, and does not include any trade
    mark as defined in clause (v) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
    Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 or property mark as defined
    in section 479 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any artistic
    work as defined in clause (c) of section 2 of the Copyright Act, 1957
    (14 of 1957);.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 6 of 67

  (g) “original”, in relation to a design, means originating from the
  author of such design and includes the cases which though old in
  themselves yet are new in their application;
  Section 4. Prohibition of registration of certain designs.- A design
  which-
  (a) is not new or original; or
  (b) has been disclosed to the public anywhere in India or in any other
  country by publication in tangible Form or by use or in any other way
  prior to the filing date, or where applicable, the priority date of the
  application for registration; or
  (c) is not significantly distinguishable from known designs or
  combination
  of known designs; or
  (d) comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter, shall not be
  registered.
  Section 5. Application for registration of designs.-
  (1) The Controller may, on the application of any person claiming to
  be the proprietor of any new or original design not previously
  published in any country and which is not contrary to public order or
  morality, register the design under this Act.
  Provided that the Controller shall before such registration refer the
  application for examination, by an examiner appointed under sub-
  section (2) of section 3, as to whether such design is capable of being
  registered under this Act and the rules made thereunder and consider
  the report of the examiner on such reference.
  xxxx                    xxx                xxxx              xxxx
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                          Page 7 of 67

  (6) A design when registered shall be registered as of the date of the
  application for registration.
  Section 6. Registration on to be in respect of particular article
  (1) A design may be registered in respect of any or all of the articles
  comprised in a prescribed class of articles.
  Section 7. Publication of particulars of registered Design
  The Controller shall, as soon as may be after the registration of a
  design, cause publication of the prescribed particulars of the design to
  be published in such manner as may be prescribed and thereafter the
  design shall be open to public inspection.
  Section 11. Copyright on registration
  (1) When a design is registered, the registered proprietor of the design
  shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, have copyright in the design
  during ten years from the date of registration.
  (2) If, before the expiration of the said ten years, application for the
  extension of the period of copyright is made to the Controller in the
  prescribed manner, the Controller shall, on payment of the prescribed
  fee, extend the period of copy-right for a second period of five years
  from the expiration of the original period of ten years.
  Section 17. Inspection of registered designs
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 8 of 67

  (1) During the existence of copyright in a design, any person on
  furnishing such information as may enable the Controller to identify
  the design and on payment of the prescribed fee may inspect the design
  in the prescribed manner.
  (2) Any person may, on application to the Controller and on payment
  of such fee as may be prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any
  registered design.
  Section 18. Information as to existence of copyright
  On the request of any person furnishing such information as may
  enable the Controller to identify the design, and on payment of the
  prescribed fee, the Controller shall inform such person whether the
  registration still exists in respect of the design, and, if so, in respect of
  what classes of articles, and shall state the date of registration, and the
  name and address of the registered proprietor.
  Section 19. Cancellation of registration
  (1) Any person interested may present a petition for the cancellation of
  the registration of a design at any time after the registration of the
  design, to the Controller on any of the following grounds, namely:-
  (a) that the design has been previously registered in India; or
  (b) that it has been published in India or in any other country prior to
  the date of registration; or
  (c) that the design is not a new or original design; or
  (d) that the design is not registrable under this Act; or
  (e) it is not a design as defined under clause (d) of section 2.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                               Page 9 of 67

  (2) An appeal shall lie from any order of the Controller under this
  section to the High Court, and the Controller may at any time refer any
  such petition to the High Court, and the High Court shall decide any
  petition so referred.
  Section 22. Piracy of registered design
  (I) During the existence of copyright in any design it shall not be
  lawful for any person-
  (a) for the purpose of sale to apply or cause to be applied to any article
  in any class of articles in which the design is registered, the design or
  any fraudulent or obvious imitation thereof, except with the license or
  written consent of the registered proprietor, or to do anything with a
  view to enable the design to be so applied; or
  (b) to import for the purposes of sale, without the consent of the
  registered proprietor, any article belonging to the class in which the
  design has been registered, and having applied to it the design or any
  fraudulent                           or                           obvious
  imitation thereof, or
  (c) knowing that the design or any fraudulent or obvious imitation
  thereof has been applied to any article in any class of articles in which
  the design is registered without the consent of the registered proprietor,
  to publish or expose or cause to be published or exposed for sale that
  article.
  2. (1) If any person acts in contravention of this section, he shall be
  liable for every contravention-
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                            Page 10 of 67

  (a) to pay to the registered proprietor of the design a sum not
  exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees recoverable as a contract debt,
  or
  (b) if the proprietor elects to bring a suit for the recovery of damages
  for any such contravention, and for an injunction against the repetition
  thereof, to pay such damages as may be awarded and to be restrained
  by injunction accordingly:
  Provided that the total sum recoverable in respect of any one design
  under clause (a) shall not exceed fifty thousand rupees:
  Provided further that no suit or any other proceeding for relief under
  this subsection shall be instituted in any court below the court of
  District Judge.
  (3) In any suit or any other proceeding for relief under subsection (2),
  ever ground on which the registration of a design may be cancelled
  under section 19 shall be available as a ground of defence.
  (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the second proviso to sub-
  Section (2), where any ground or which the registration of a design
  may be cancelled under section 19 has been availed of as a ground of
  defence and sub-section (3) in any suit or other proceeding for relief
  under sub-section (2), the suit or such other proceedings shall be
  transferred by the Court in which the suit or such other proceeding is
  pending, to the High Court for decision.
  (5) When the court makes a decree in a suit under sub-section (2), it
  shall send a copy of the decree to the Controller, who shall cause an
  entry thereof to be made in the register of designs.
  Section 44. Reciprocal arrangement with the United Kingdom and
  other convention countries or group of countries of
  intergovernmental organisations
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                            Page 11 of 67

  (1) Any person who has applied for protection for any design in the
  United Kingdom or any of other convention countries or group of
  countries or countries which are members of inter-governmental
  organisations, or his legal representative or assignee shall, either alone
  or jointly with any other person, be entitled to claim that the
  registration of the said design under this Act shall be in priority to
  other applicants and shall have the same date as the date of the
  application in the United Kingdom or any of such other convention
  countries or group of countries or countries which are members of
  inter-governmental organisations, as the case may be:
  Provided that-
  (a) the application is made within six months from the application for
  protection in the United Kingdom or any of such other convention
  Countries or group of countries or countries which are members of
  inter-governmental organisations, as the case may be; and
  (b) nothing in this section shall entitle the proprietor of the design to
  recover damages for piracy of design, design happening prior to the
  actual date on which the design is registered in India.
  (2) The registration of a design shall not be invalidated by reason only
  of the exhibition or use of or the publication of a description or
  representation of the design in India during the period specified in this
  section as that within which the application may be made;
  (4) Where it is made to appear to the Central Government that the
  legislature of the United Kingdom or any such other convention
  country or a country which is member of any group of countries or
  inter-governmental organisation as may be notified by the Central
  Government in this behalf has made satisfactory provision for the
  protection of designs registered in India, the Central Government may,
  by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the provisions of this
  section, with such variations or additions, if any, as may be set out in
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 12 of 67

    such notification, shall apply for the protection of designs registered in
    the United Kingdom or that other convention country or such country
    which is member of any group of countries or intergovernmental
    organisation, as the case may be.
    Explanation- (1) For the purposes of this section, the expression
    “convention countries”, “group of countries” or “inter-governmental
    organisation” means, respectively, such countries, group of countries
    or inter-governmental organisation to which the Paris Convention for
    Protection of Industrial Property, 1883 as revised at Stockholm in 1967
    and as amended in 1979 or the Final Act, embodying the results of the
    Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, provided for the
    establishment of World Trade Organisation applies.
    Explanation- (2) Where more than one application for protection
    referred to in sub-section (1) have been made for similar protections in
    the United Kingdom or one or more convention countries, group of
    countries or countries which are members of inter-governmental
    organisations, the period of six months referred to in clause (a) of that
    sub-section, shall be reckoned from the date of which the earlier or the
    earliest application, as the case may be, of such applications has been
    made.”
Section 19(1)(a): Whether a design registered abroad can be a ground
for cancellation of a design registered in India
5(i).         On a literal interpretation of Section 19(1)(a), it is clear that it is
only a design which is registered in India which can cause cancellation of a
design which is again registered in India i.e a design registered abroad on a
literal construction of Section 19(1)(a) is not a ground for cancellation of a
design registered in India. The issue is that should a literal construction
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                 Page 13 of 67

prevail or should it be held that a design registered abroad should be
included in the sweep of Section 19(1)(a) for cancellation of the design
registered in India. In order to appreciate this issue, we would at this stage
reproduce Section 51A of the erstwhile Designs Act, 1911 which dealt with
cancellation of registration, and which provision is similar to the present
Section 19 of the 2000 Act. The earlier Section 51A reads as under:-
     “Section 51A. Cancellation of registration-
     (1) Any person interested may present a petition for the cancellation of
     the registration of a design-
     (a) at any time after the registration of the design, to the High Court on
     any of the following grounds, namely:
     (i) that the design has been previously registered in India; or
     (ii) that it has been published in India prior to the date of registration;
     or
     (iii)        that the design is not a new or original design; or
     (b) within one year from the date of the registration, to the Controller
     on either of the grounds specified in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of Clause
     (a).
     (2) An appeal shall lie from any order of the Controller under this
     section to the High Court, and the Controller may at any time refer
     any such petition to the High Court, and the High Court shall decide
     any petition so referred.”
(ii)      When we compare Section 51A of the 1911 Act with Section 19 of
the 2000 Act, it becomes clear that the parliament has brought in prior
publication abroad by including this aspect in Section 19(1)(b) of the 2000
Act for cancellation of a design registered in India, whereas previously
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                  Page 14 of 67

under Section 51A (1)(a)(ii) of the 1911 Act the factum of prior publication
abroad was not a ground for cancellation of a design registered in India.
There is hence a conscious departure by the legislature while enacting
Section 19(1)(b) of the 2000 Act than as compared to Section 51A(1)(a) (ii)
of the 1911 Act, however, there is no change in the language of Section
51A(1)(a)(i)    of the 1911 Act when we compare the same with the
equivalent provision of Section 19(1)(a) in the 2000 Act i.e both under the
1911 Act and the present 2000 Act it is only a prior registration in India (and
not abroad) which is a ground for cancellation of a design which is
subsequently registered in India. There is therefore a marked change in
approach of the legislature while dealing with the separate aspects viz. one
of cancellation of a design registered in India on the ground of registration in
India which has remained the unchanged, and second as regards cancellation
because of prior publication and which expression has been extended to
mean prior publication not only in India but also abroad. In Gopal Glass
Works Ltd.’s case the learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court has
rightly noticed this conscious act of the legislature, and this is stated in paras
28 and 29 of the said judgment, which paras read as under:-
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                Page 15 of 67

     “28.     It is significant that prior to the enactment and enforcement
     of the 2000 Act prior registration or publication of the design in
     India was a ground for cancellation of a registered design, but no
     prior registration or publication abroad. Parliament in its wisdom
     deemed it expedient to add prior publication in a country other than
     India as a ground for cancellation of a registered design, but nor
     prior registration in a country other than India.
     29.      Parliament has thereby consciously differentiated between
     prior registration in India and prior registration abroad. No such
     difference has, however, been made in the case of prior publication.
     Prior publication either in India or abroad is a ground for
     cancellation of a registered design.”
6.            Therefore, we cannot ignore this specific mandate of the
legislature whereby no change has been brought about to the language of the
earlier provision of Section 51A (1)(a)(i) of the 1911 Act, and there being an
identical provision in Section 19(1)(a) of the 2000 Act.           Therefore, a
registration of a design abroad cannot be a ground included under Section
19(1)(a) of the Act for cancellation of a design registered in India.
7.            The question which then immediately arises is whether the
provision of Section 44, with its sub-Sections (1) and (2), requires any
change to be brought about in the aforesaid interpretation which we have
given to Section 19(1) (a) that a foreign registration cannot be a ground for
seeking cancellation of an Indian registration.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 16 of 67

8(i).         On a close reading of Section 44 (1) and (2), and taking note of
the provision of Section 5(6) of the Act which provides that registration is
effective from the date of the application for registration, it is clear that the
design registered abroad which is talked off under Section 44, and which has
priority by giving the date of the application for registration in India the
earlier date of the application made in a convention country, the same does
not mean that it is the foreign registered design which brings about
cancellation of the Indian registered design on the ground of priority. What
we mean to say is that it is not as if the foreign registered design continues to
be a foreign registered design by virtue of Section 44(1) of the Act, because
on registration in India the foreign registered design becomes a design
registered in India, albeit having a priority date of the date of the application
made in a convention country abroad. This becomes clear when we note an
all important expression found under Section 44(1), and which is “the
registration of the said design under this Act”, and which shows that a
design registered abroad after making of an application within six months of
the date of application made in the convention country abroad, after its
registration in India actually does not remain a foreign registered design but
it becomes a design registered in India, of course with the earlier priority
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                               Page 17 of 67

date. Putting it in other words, the date of registration in India is taken as
the date of application made in the convention country abroad, inasmuch as,
by virtue of provision of Section 5(6) of the Act a design which is registered
in India will be registered as the date of the application for registration in
India; and by virtue of Section 44(1) the date of application for registration
of the foreign design registered in India (for which an application was earlier
made in a convention country abroad) is to be taken as a date when the
application was made in the convention country abroad. Neatly put what we
are stating is actually the design which is registered abroad in fact becomes a
design registered in India on complying of the requirement of making the
application within six months in India from the date of the application being
made in the convention country abroad, and therefore, the design registered
abroad becomes a design registered in India with an earlier priority date
being the earlier date of the application made abroad, and thereby foreign
registered design on becoming an Indian registered design is therefore an
Indian registered design for seeking cancellation of a design registered in
India having a subsequent priority date.         Section 19(1)(a) accordingly
sufficiently provides for this when it talks of cancellation of one design
subsequently registered in India when there exists a previously design
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 18 of 67

registered in India. Therefore, the language of Section 44(1) does not bring
about, nor is required to bring about, any widening of the sweep of Section
19(1)(a) for including within Section 19(1)(a) cancellation of an Indian
registered design on account of a registered design in a convention country
abroad.
8(ii).       Issue No.1 is answered accordingly by holding that Section
19(1)(a) of the Act has to be interpreted literally, and only a previously
registered Indian design can be a ground for cancellation of subsequently
registered design in India, and a foreign registered design cannot under
Section 19(1)(a) be a ground for seeking cancellation of a design registered
in India. Of course, the issue of a design registered abroad, subject to its
prior publication, can be under certain circumstances a basis of cancellation
of a design which is registered in India, however, that is a subject matter of
Section 19(1)(b) and not 19(1)(a), which aspect we will deal with while
taking up issue Nos.3 and 4 of para 2 above.
Effect of failing to apply in India for registration within six months of
making of an application abroad.
9.           The language of sub-Sections (1) and (2) of Section 44 leaves
no manner of doubt that if any person who has applied for registration in a
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                            Page 19 of 67

convention country abroad fails to make an application for registration of the
design registered abroad in India within six months of having made the
application abroad in a convention country, then in such a case the said
person who has registered his design abroad will lose his entitlement to
priority which is claimed on the basis of date of application made in a
convention country abroad, and the date of registration in such a case of
having made an application after six months in India would be the date of
the application made in India (and which is after the six months period of the
date of the application made abroad) with the consequent effect that in the
meanwhile if there is registration of a similar/same design in India in the six
months period (or till the foreign owner makes an application in India) then
such Indian applicant will then get priority to the application of the owner of
the foreign registered design made after the six months period of the date of
application made in a convention country abroad. Thus, such registration of
a foreign registered design after the six months period will become a design
which is to be taken as a subsequently registered in India to a design which
is registered in India on an application being made in the interregnum six
months period, and therefore, the foreign registered design cannot be a
ground for cancellation of an Indian registered design under Section 19(1)(a)
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 20 of 67

because the foreign registered design will have the date of application for
registration not as the priority date of an application made abroad in a
convention country but will only be of that date which is the date of
application made in India for registration being a date after the six months
period of the application made abroad for registration of the design.
10.            Thus issue No.2 is answered by holding that a person who fails
to apply in India within six months of making of an application in a
convention country abroad, then, such an owner of a foreign registered
design, though would have appropriate entitlement in the convention country
in which registration is applied and granted, however, in India the
registration in a convention country abroad will have no effect of destroying
the priority date of an application made for registration in India within the
interregnum six months period. Putting it differently, whereas the foreign
registered design owner in the convention country in which his design is
registered may take necessary action in such foreign country on the basis of
registration if the Indian registered owner of the design seeks to sell articles
in that country in which the design is registered by the foreigner, however, in
India, it will be the Indian registered owner who will be entitled to bring an
action for infringement of the design under Section 22 of the Act. Of
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 21 of 67

course, we must hasten to add that if there is prior publication abroad before
the registration In India by a third party, then in such a case the foreign
registered holder will be able to challenge the registration in India i.e in
effect, both the Indian registered design owner and the foreign registered
design owner can simultaneously market their products in India with the
design, and none of them can successfully maintain an action for
infringement under the Act.
Meaning of prior publication under Sections 19(1)(b) read with Section
4(b) and whether documents existing in the record of Registrar of
Designs in a convention country abroad which are open to public
inspection results in prior publication:
11.           The expressions 'published' or 'publication' are not defined in
the Act. Various judgments have however defined these expressions found
in the Designs Act. Some judgments define publication as being opposed to
one which is kept secret, whereas other judgments define publication as
something which is available in public domain i.e available as of right to any
member of the public. We are of course looking into the issue of publication
by means of existence in public domain by publication in a paper (which
expression “paper‟ is taken to mean any other medium where the design can
be judged by the eye) inasmuch as, it was not (and could not be) disputed by
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 22 of 67

both the parties before us that once there is actual use of the design by
making an article out of the same, which is commercially exploited and put
in public use („by use‟ as stated in Section 4(b) of the Act), there would
surely be publication.        The issue of publication is accordingly being
specifically looked into from the point of view of whether publication by
means of publishing in a paper form available in public generally including
of their availability in the office of the Registrar of Designs.
12(i).        Let us therefore see what should be the meaning which should
be ascribed to the expression „published‟ or „publication‟ when we use such
expressions qua „published‟ or „publication‟ in paper form or by depiction in
any form which is visible to naked eye without the same having been put in
the form of an article.
       We have already in this regard reproduced the definition of design as
per Section 2(d) of the Act and the definition of expression „original‟ as per
Section 2(g) of the Act above, and which sections will be of relevance for
discussion of „publication‟.
(ii)   When we read the definition of a „design‟ under Section 2(d) we find
that there are inter alia four important aspects in the same. The first aspect is
that the design is a design which is meant to produce an article as per the
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 23 of 67

design by an industrial process or means. The second aspect is that design is
not the article itself but the conceptual design containing the features of a
shape, configuration, pattern, composition of lines etc. Third aspect is the
judging of the design which is to be put in the form of finished article solely
by the eye. Fourthly, the design which is the subject matter of the Act is not
an artistic work which falls under the Copyright Act or a trademark which
falls under the Trademarks Act.
(iii)  More clarity is given to the meaning of the word design when we look
at the definition of „original‟ as found under Section 2(g). The definition of
the expression „original‟ shows that the design though is not new because
such design exists in public domain and is otherwise well-known, however,
the design is original because it is new in its application i.e new in its
application to a specific article. Therefore, for seeking registration under the
Act it is not necessary that the design must be totally new, and it is enough
that the existing design is applied in a new manner i.e to an article to which
that design has not been applied before.
(iv)    So far as the expression „new‟ is concerned, it is well known i.e it is
something which comes into existence for the first time and therefore a new
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 24 of 67

design which comes into existence for the first time obviously will be
entitled to copyright protection.
13(i).        When we see the provision of Section 4(b) we find that a design
which is already disclosed by publication in India or abroad will not be
registered, however, the bar for registration of a design which is disclosed to
the public in India or abroad is accompanied by the language which requires
publication „in a tangible form or by use or in any other way‟.       It is this
language and the fascicle of expressions „tangible form‟ or „use‟ or „in any
other way‟ which requires to be understood and interpreted so as to
understand the meaning of the word „publication‟.
(ii)   So far as the expression „by use‟ is concerned, there would be no
difficulty because obviously use of the design would be by translating the
same into a finished article by an industrial process or means. The real
difficulty which arises actually is qua the expressions „tangible form‟ or „in
any other way‟. These two expressions on a normal literal interpretation are
much wider than the expression „use‟ (the design having been translated to
an article). Publication in a paper form or publication as being visible to the
naked eye without the same having been put on an article is very much
otherwise included in these wide expressions. The question thus is to what
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 25 of 67

extent should there be publication for the same to be in „tangible form‟ or „in
any other way‟ for being included within the language of „publication‟ as
found in Sections 4(b) and 19(1)(b). Before we answer this question, we
would however like to refer to the ratios of the judgments in the cases of
Gopal Glass Works and Dabur India Ltd. cases.
14.          In Gopal Glass Works’s case, the design in question was
registered in India with respect to glass. The owner of the design registered
in India had purchased it from a German company. However, the design
which was sold to the Indian owner was also found to be registered in the
name of one other company M/s. Vegla Vereinigte Glassworke GMBH in
UK. Though from the illustration in the form of drawings downloaded from
the website of United Kingdom Patent Office depicted the design that may
be applied to glass sheets, however, two important conclusions are made
clear from the reading of the judgment and which are that firstly that the
patterns found in the design registered in the UK Patent Office may be the
same but the illustrations did not give the same visual effect for being
understood and applied to the article. The judgment in the case of Gopal
Glass Works has laid emphasis on applying of the design to an article in
terms of the definition of design under Section 2(d) of the Act, and on
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 26 of 67

account of lack of factual clarification and evidence led by the person who
opposed the Indian owner of the registered design it was held that it cannot
be said in the facts of that case that mere existence of papers downloaded
from the UK Patent Office will not amount to prior publication. It was
accordingly held that not only the papers downloaded from the UK Patent
Office did not have necessary clarity for being applied to any article, but
also there was no evidence of manufacture of glass sheets by anyone with
the design in question. Secondly, admittedly at no point of time even though
the design was registered in the UK Patent Office, there was ever any
manufacture of glass sheets by anyone other than the Indian registered
design owner. Some of the relevant paragraphs of the judgment in Gopal
Glass Works relating to the factual matrix read:-
       “4. For production of glass sheets of the design registered as
      Design No. 190336, two rollers are required. The rollers are
      manufactured by M/s. DORN BAUSCH GRAVUREN GMBH of
      Germany, hereinafter referred to as the German Company.
      According to the petitioner the rollers are not only used for
      manufacture of glass sheets, but for various other articles
      including plastic, rexin and leather.
      5. The appellant claims to have placed orders on the German
      Company, for supply of the rollers for launching a design of
      figured glass with new and novel features, not produced before by
      any one else.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                           Page 27 of 67

     6. On or about 29th October, 2002 the appellant applied to the
     Controller of Patent and Designs under Section 51 of the Designs
     Act, 2000, hereinafter referred to as the said Act, for registration
     of the said design in Class 25-01. The said design was duly
     registered on 5th November, 2002 and was to remain valid for a
     period of 10 years from date of its registration.
     10. It is alleged that the respondent No. 2 and/or its associate IAG
     Co. Ltd. started imitating the said registered design, as a result
     whereof the appellant was constrained to file a suit being Civil
     Suit No. 1 of 2004 against the respondent No. 3 and its associate
     IAG Co. Ltd. in the District Court at Mehsana. The appellant
     obtained an interim order of injunction restraining IAG Co. Ltd.
     from infringing the copyright of the appellant in the said
     registered design.
     11. In the meanwhile, the respondent No. 3 as counterblast to the
     aforesaid notice, filed an application under Section 19 of the said
     Act, before the respondent No. 1 for cancellation of registration of
     Design No. 190336 in the name of the appellant, mainly on the
     ground of prior publication of the design in India and abroad and
     on the ground of the design not being new or original.
     12. The respondent No. 3 relied on inter alia a catalogue of the
     German Company, a letter dated 10th September, 2003 of the
     German Company addressed to M/s. IAG Co. Ltd. stating that the
     said German Company had developed Design No. 2960-9010 in
     the year 1992, and a document downloaded from the internet from
     the official website of the Patent Office of the United Kingdom on
     22nd September, 2004 which shows that the same design had
     been registered in the United Kingdom in the name of M/s. Vegla
     Vereinigte Glaswerke Gmbh some time in 1992.
     15. A Liaison Executive of the appellant also filed an affidavit
     stating that he visited Germany, and upon enquiry ascertained that
     M/s. Vegla Vereinigte Glaswerke Gmbh had never manufactured
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 28 of 67

     glass sheets of the design registered as Design No. 2022468 in the
     United Kingdom.
     16. In the proceedings before the respondent No. 1, the appellant
     questioned the admissibility of the materials alleged to have been
     downloaded from the United Kingdom Patent Office website, in
     evidence, in the absence of any corroborative evidence regarding
     the authenticity of the same.
     17. It was emphatically argued that the German Company did not
     apply the design in question on glass sheets. The catalogue of the
     German Company did not depict the application of the design on
     glass sheets. As such the catalogue as also the letter of the
     German Company dated 10th September, 2003 to M/s. IAG
     Company Ltd. were of no relevance.
The ratio decidendi of the judgment in Gopal Glass Works is as under:-
     18. The respondent No. 1 framed three issues. The first issue was
     whether the design was not new or original in view of the fact that
     the design had been published before the date of registration and
     the registered proprietor was not the owner of the design. The
     second issue was whether the design had been published outside
     India as well as in India, prior to the date of application and the
     third issue was whether the registered design was in public
     domain due to sale/use of the design prior to the date of
     application of the registered proprietor.
     30. Under the law presently in force in India, specifications,
     drawings and/ or demonstrations in connection with registration
     of a design do not per se constitute publications which prohibit
     future registration of that design. Had publication of design
     specifications by a registering authority, particularly a registering
     authority in a foreign country, in connection with registration of a
     design, in itself, amounted to prior publication, that would hit all
     future applications in India for registration of designs, prior
     registration in India would not separately have been made a
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 29 of 67

     ground for cancellation of a registered design. Moreover, it is
     significant that Parliament consciously, made publication in a
     country other than India a ground of cancellation, in addition to
     publication in India, but expressly restricted the embargo of prior
     registration to registration in India. Registration in a country other
     than India has not been made a ground for the cancellation of a
     registered design.
     33. The respondent No. 1 failed to appreciate that a design is
     solely judged by the eye. The visual appeal of a pattern, ornament
     or configuration on leather or rexin would not be the same as the
     visual appeal of that pattern, ornament or configuration on glass.
     34. In order to destroy the novelty of a design registration, prior
     disclosure whether by publication or use or any other way, must
     be of the pattern, shape and/or configuration applied to the
     same article. The use of the embossing roller, to emboss a
     pattern ornament or configuration on a glass sheet, a material
     totally different in composition, nature, fragility, durability and
     look from leather, rexin or even plastic, in itself, involves
     inventive ingenuity.
     37. The embossing rollers manufactured by the German Company
     are only the device for producing the impugned design. It is
     immaterial that the embossing rollers were not developed by the
     appellant. Furthermore, in relation to designs, the expression
     "original" include designs which though old in themselves are
     new in their application. The brochures of the German Company
     do not contain any photograph or illustrations of the impugned
     design on glass.
     38. The respondent No. 1 has apparently not considered the
     definition of "original" in Section 2(g) of the 2000 Act. The
     reasoning on the basis of which the respondent No. 1 arrived at
     his impugned finding that the design was not new or original is
     misconceived.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 30 of 67

     39. The next question, in issue before this Court, is whether the
     finding of the respondent No. 1 that the document downloaded
     from the internet from the website of the Patent Office of the
     United Kingdom, might be taken as prior publication of the
     impugned design, is legally sustainable.
     40. It is true that publication has not been defined in the 2000 Act.
     Yet, for reasons discussed above, mere publication of design
     specifications, drawings and/or demonstrations by the Patent
     Office of the United Kingdom, or for that matter, any other
     foreign country, in connection with an application for registration,
     would not, in itself, amount to publication that would render a
     design registered in India liable to cancellation.
     41. To constitute prior disclosure by publication to destroy the
     novelty of a registered design, the publication would have to be,
     in tangible form, of the design applied to the same article.
     Prior publication of a trade catalogue, brochure, book, journal,
     magazine or newspaper containing photographs or explicit picture
     illustrations that clearly depict the application of the design on the
     same article, with the same visual effect would be sufficient.
     42. When the novelty of an article is tested against a prior
     published document, the main factor required to be adjudged is
     the visual effect and the appeal of the picture illustration.
     43. If the visual effect of the pattern, the shape or the combination
     of the pattern, shape, dimension, colour scheme, if any, are not
     clear from the picture illustrations, the novelty cannot be said to
     have been destroyed by prior publication, unless there are clear
     and unmistakable directions to make an article which is the same
     or similar enough to the impugned design.
     45. The illustrations in the form of drawings downloaded
     from the website of the United Kingdom Patent Office depict
     the patterns that may be applied to glass sheets. The patterns
     may be same but the illustrations do not give the same visual
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                               Page 31 of 67

      effect as the samples of the glass sheets produced by the
      appellant in Court. There are also no clear unmistakable
      instructions or directions for production of glass sheets of the
      pattern illustrated.
      46. The visual effect and/or appeal of a pattern embossed into
      glass sheets by use of embossing rollers could be different from
      the visual effect of the same pattern etched into glass sheets
      manually. The respondent No. I has not considered these factors.
      47. The order impugned considered with the materials on record,
      including in particular the computer print-outs clearly reveals that
      the respondent No. 1 has only compared the pattern and/or
      configuration and considered the visual appeal thereof, but not the
      visual appeal of the pattern and/or configuration on the article. In
      other words, the respondent No. 1 has not considered the visual
      appeal of the finished product.
      48. There are no material on record to show that the design had
      previously been applied to glass sheets. On the other hand, an
      affidavit was sworn on behalf of the appellant by a Liason
      Executive affirming that he had ascertained that the proprietor of
      the design registered in the United Kingdom had never
      manufactured glass sheets of the design registered.”
                                        (emphasis is added by us)
15.           A reading of the aforesaid paras shows that the following ratio
can be culled out from the judgment in Gopal Glass Works’ case:-
(i)    The issue of originality of design has to be necessarily looked at in
terms of the article to which it applies and there may be lack of clarity as to
existence of prior publication unless the publication is totally clear i.e it is
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 32 of 67

only completely understood for its effect only when the same is actually put
on the article.
(ii)   Primacy was given to the Indian registered design because the design
which was registered in the U.K Patent Office was never used qua the article
in question viz the glass sheet and the documents downloaded from the
internet of the U.K. Patent Office could not be said to have much clarity for
being treated as a prior publication qua the specific article in question viz the
glass sheet.
(iii)  A foreign registered design cannot be the basis for cancellation under
Section 19(1)(a) of a design registered in India unless there is application of
a design to an article which is put into public domain/use or unless there
would have been complete and sufficient clarity in the documents
downloaded through internet from the U.K. Patent Office that it can be held
that there is a clear cut clarity qua prior „publication‟.
(iv)   In the facts of that case since there was no clarity from the design
downloaded from U.K Patent office it was held that there was no prior
publication.
16.            Besides the aforesaid ratio, it needs to be noted on the reading
of the judgment in Gopal Glass Works that though there are observations
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                               Page 33 of 67

when such observations are read only in a particular para of the judgment or
only in a particular line of a judgment, then, there may be an indication that
existence of registration in a foreign country would not be a ground to hold
prior publication, however, when such observations are read in context of
entire judgment it was found that those observations are made in the facts of
the case because there was lack of sufficient clarity and evidence of what
actually was the depiction and the effect of the design registered in U.K
Patent Office qua the specific article in question being the glass sheets.
Also, the observations of lack of prior publication in facts of that case were
made with respect to a design having to be put on an article as differentiated
from lack of clarity in a design merely by the same existing in public
records, because in the facts of that case the design registered abroad had not
been put in use in glass sheets.
17(i)        The Division Bench of our High Court in the case of Dabur
India Ltd. has not referred to the facts of Gopal Glass Works case while
concurring with paras 39 and 40 of the judgment in Gopal Glass Works case
by reproducing those paragraphs in para 25 in the judgment of the Division
Bench. The relevant paras of the judgment of Division Bench are paras 24
to 26 which read as under:-
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 34 of 67

   “24. Counsel for the Respondent Defendant submitted that the very
   design in respect of which the registration has been granted in
   favour of the plaintiff is already in the public domain and has been
   published earlier. The Respondents have relied upon the Design
   Registration Nos. 319582 and 263373 issued by the US Patent
   Office to contend that there is no novelty as far as the plaintiff's
   designs are concerned. In the first place it must be noticed that the
   reliance upon a design registered in the US cannot satisfy the
   requirements of Section 19 of the present Act which specifies the
   ground on which cancellation can be granted. Section 19 reads as
   under:
        “19. Cancellation of registration.- (1) Any person interested
        may present a petition for the cancellation of the registration
        of a design at any time after the registration of the design, to
        the Controller on any of the following grounds, namely:
        (a) that it has been previously registered in India;
        (b) that it has been published in India or in any other country
        prior to the date of registration;”
   25. We find that the Calcutta High Court has in Gopal Glass Works
   Ltd. v. Assistant Controller of Patents and Designs
   (2007)1CALLT290(HC) explained the position, with which we
   concur, as under:
       39. The next question in issue before this Court is whether
       the finding of the Respondent No. 1 that the document
       downloaded from the internet from the website of the Patent
       Office of the United Kingdom might be taken as prior
       publication of the impugned design, is legally sustainable.
       40. It is true that publication has not been defined in the 2000
       Act. Yet, for reasons discussed above, mere publication of
       design specifications, drawings and/or demonstrations by the
       Patent Office of the United Kingdom, or for that matter, any
       other foreign country, in connection with an application for
       registration, would not, in itself, amount to publication that
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 35 of 67

         would render a design registered in India liable to
         cancellation.
     26. The mere fact that there may have been a registration in the U.S
     in respect of similar bottles and caps cannot come in the way of the
     plaintiffs seeking an order restraining the Respondent from
     infringing its registered design.”
(ii)    The observations of the Division Bench if taken literally may seem to
hold that registration abroad of a design taken in itself without anything
further cannot be a ground for claiming prior publication in an infringement
action. The question is, is this the law and did the Division Bench at all
intend to say that existence of papers open to public inspection in a Registrar
of Designs office abroad by that fact itself without anything further cannot
be a ground under any circumstances for cancellation of an Indian registered
design.
18.            We have extensively quoted the reasoning and ratio in the case
of Gopal Glass Works and various facets and factual matrix which led to the
conclusion.     It will not be correct to read only few paragraphs of the
judgment in isolation. In the case of Gopal Glass Works, the Court took
into consideration several aspects before reaching its conclusions and para
40 contains one of the aspects. The Division Bench of this Court in its
decision in case of Dabur India Ltd. has referred to only paras 39 and 40 of
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 36 of 67

Gopal Glass Works’s case. It is therefore necessary to clarify and elucidate
upon the expression „publication‟ as dilated upon in the case of Gopal Glass
Works and to what extent and when the registration abroad will result in
publication abroad which is specifically covered in Sections 4(b) and
19(1)(b) of the 2000 Act.
19(i)         In our opinion the expression „tangible form‟ refers to a specific
physical form or shape as applied to an article and not the mere ability to
replicate, convert and give a physical shape to the design, though of course
to fall under the expression „tangible form‟ it is not necessary that the article
should have been used, but the expression „in any other way‟ takes some of
its colour from the words „used‟ or „tangible form‟.           The principle of
Nositur a Sociis will be applicable.         Section 4(b) therefore, not only,
requires publication but it should be publication by use, in tangible form or
in any other way. The expression „any other way‟ here is wider in context
and takes into its ambit a design which has been created though not still put
to use or exists in tangible form but at the same time it is guided by the
words “use” and “tangible form”.            Thus, to disqualify a claim for
registration or cancel registration of a design in India, the publication abroad
should be by use, in tangible form, or in some other way, means that the
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                               Page 37 of 67

design should not be a factum on paper/document alone, but further that the
design on paper should be recognizable i.e. have the same impact in the
public as a furnished article will appeal when judged solely by the eye (see
Section 2(d)). Putting it differently if the design is on paper then it must
exist upon a piece of paper in such a way that the shape or other features of
the article are made clear to the eye. The visual impact should be similar to
when we see the design on a physical object i.e. an object in tangible form/in
use. As noted otherwise in the present judgment, registration of a design is
article specific and thus-depending on the facts of each case registration or
publication of design of a particular article may or may not necessarily result
in rejection or cancellation of registration of the same or similar design on
another article. The Act protects the original artistic effort not in form of an
idea or on its own as an artistic work, but is an embodiment in a
commercially produced artefact. Thus the primary concern is what the
finished article is to look like. [see observations of the Supreme Court in
Bharat Das Tools Ltd. (infra)].
(ii)   Registration in a foreign country is one aspect but what can entail
rejection of an application for registration in India or cancellation of
registration in India, is prior publication and not registration ipso facto in a
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 38 of 67

foreign country.      Moreover, such publication should be of the nature
delineated in sub-section 4(b). Registration abroad perse cannot be a ground
for cancellation or rejection of a design in India but the registration in India
can be impugned if the design is not “new and original” or is already
published abroad as stipulated in Section 4(b). In some cases of registration
abroad, the same not by itself a ground for rejection/cancellation in India,
yet can lead to cancellation if it can be shown and proved that the claim in
India is not “new and original” as there was publication abroad and which
publication abroad is a publication within the meaning of Section 4(b). In
such cases registration can be refused or cancelled.
       New, original or novelty of the pattern or design when replicated or
applied or fully understood by the eye for being applied to an article is a sine
qua non to avail and get benefit of the rights under the Act. This underlying
principle is accentuated as well as protected when Section 4(b) and 19
stipulate and provide for rejection/cancellation of registration of a design
which has been published in any country prior in point of time. Though
publication in India or abroad are enlisted as separate grounds under Section
4 and 19 of the Act, they are in a way interlinked and intertwined with the
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 39 of 67

question of whether design is new or original for determining the meaning of
“design” as understood and as defined in Section 2(d) of the Act.
(iii)  Registration abroad is one aspect and publication abroad in terms of
Section 4(b) is another aspect.     There can be and will be cases when
registration abroad, may have resulted in publication of a design as
stipulated in Section 4(b). In such cases there would be publication abroad,
not because the design is registered abroad but because the conditions
mentioned in Section 4(b) are satisfied. The observations of the Division
Bench in Dabur India Ltd.’s case cannot be read to mean that
though conditions of Section 4(b) are satisfied, the registration of design
cannot or should not be cancelled although the design has been registered
abroad.    Registration abroad and publication abroad are two distinct
parameters, each having their own consequences. When registration abroad
results in publication under Section 4(b), the said provision gets attracted
and necessary consequences as envisaged in Section 4 and 19 will follow.
20.           In our opinion, most of the confusion or lack of clarity qua the
meaning of the words “published” or “publication” will be removed when
we refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Bharat Das
Tools Ltd. vs. Gopal Glass Work’s Ltd., 2008 (10) SCC 657.                This
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                            Page 40 of 67

judgment of the Supreme Court is the judgment which has been passed in an
appeal against the judgment of the learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High
Court in Gopal Glass Work’s case. A reference to various paragraphs of
the Supreme Court‟s judgment shows that the Supreme Court has taken note
of the fact that though design is specifically qua an article, however,
publication of a design in a paper form, may amount to prior publication,
however, each case has to be necessarily seen and decided as per the facts of
that case. The facts of each case must show sufficient amount of clarity qua
the design which must necessarily exist in a public record of a Registrar of
Designs Office and must have sufficient clarity attached to them before the
same can be treated as prior publication. Therefore, really the issue is no
longer res integra as to meaning of word “published” or “publication” as
found in Sections 19(1)(b) and 4(b) of the Act because Supreme Court has
held that existence of documents in public record such as the Office of the
Registrar of Designs, will or will not, depending on facts of each particular
case be evidence of prior publication. At this stage, it would be relevant to
refer to the relevant paras of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case
of Bharat Das Tools Ltd. and which paras 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35,
36, 37, 41, 45, 46 and 47 read as under:
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                           Page 41 of 67

     “26. In fact, the sole purpose of this Act is protection of the
    intellectual property right of the original design for a period of ten
    years or whatever further period extendable. The object behind this
    enactment is to benefit the person for his research and labour put in
    by him to evolve the new and original design. This is the sole aim
    of enacting this Act. It has also laid down that if design is not new
    or original or published previously then such design should not be
    registered. It further lays down that if it has been disclosed to the
    public anywhere in India or in any other country by publication in
    tangible form or by use or in any other way prior to the filing date,
    or where applicable, the priority date of the application for
    registration then such design will not be registered or if it is found
    that it is not significantly distinguishable from known designs or
    combination of known designs, then such designs shall not be
    registered. It also provides that registration can be cancelled under
    Section 19 of the Act if proper application is filed before the
    competent authority i.e. the Controller that the design has been
    previously registered in India or published in India or in any other
    country prior to the date of registration, or that the design is not a
    new or original design or that the design is not registerable under
    this Act or that it is not a design as defined in Clause (d) of
    Section 2. The Controller after hearing both the parties if satisfied
    that the design is not new or original or that it has already been
    registered or if it is not registerable, cancel such registration and
    aggrieved against that order, appeal shall lie to the High Court.
    These prohibitions have been engrafted so as to protect the original
    person who has designed a new one by virtue of his own efforts by
    researching for a long time. The new and original design when
    registered is for a period of ten years. Such original design which
    is new and which has not been available in the country or has not
    been previously registered or has not been published in India or in
    any other country prior to the date of registration shall be protected
    for a period of ten years. therefore, it is in the nature of protection
    of the intellectual property right. This was the purpose as is evident
    from the statement of objects and reasons and from various
    provisions of the Act. In this background, we have to examine
    whether the design which was registered on the application filed by
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 42 of 67

    the respondent herein can be cancelled or not on the basis of the
    application filed by the appellant. In this connection, the law of
    Copyright and Industrial Designs by P.Narayanan (Fourth Edition),
    Para 27.01 needs to be quoted.
      “27.01. Object of registration of designs. The protection given
      by the law relating to designs to those who produce new and
      original designs, is primarily to advance industries, and keep
      them at a high level of competitive progress.
      Those who wish to purchase an article for use are often
      influenced in their choice not only by practical efficiency but
      the appearance. Common experience shows that not all are
      influenced in the same way. Some look for artistic merit. Some
      are attracted by a design which is a stranger or bizarre. Many
      simply choose the article which catches their eye. Whatever
      the reason may be one article with a particular design may sell
      better than one without it: then it is profitable to use the design.
      And much thought, time and expense may have been incurred
      in finding a design which will increase sales". The object of
      design registration is to see that the originator of a profitable
      design is not deprived of his reward by others applying it to
      their goods.
      The purpose of the Designs Act is to protect novel designs
      devised to be applied to (or in other words, to govern the shape
      and configuration of) particular articles to be manufactured and
      marketed commercially. It is not to protect principles of
      operation or invention which, if profitable at all, ought to be
      made the subject- matter of a patent. Nor is it to prevent the
      copying of the direct product of original artistic effort in
      producing a drawing. Indeed the whole purpose of a design is
      that it shall not stand on its own as an artistic work but shall be
      copied by embodiment in a commercially produced artefact.
      Thus the primary concern, is what the finished article is to
      look like and not with what it does and the monopoly provided
      for the proprietor is effected by according not, as in the case of
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                               Page 43 of 67

       ordinary copyright, a right to prevent direct reproduction of the
       image registered as the design but the right, over a much more
       limited period, to prevent the manufacture and sale of article of
       a design not substantially different from the registered design.
       The emphasis therefore is upon the visual image conveyed by
       the manufactured article.”
    27. As mentioned above, the Assistant Controller primarily has
    taken into consideration the two evidence, (i) that the design was
    registered way back 1992 by the German company on the roller to
    be used either on glass, or rexin or on leather, therefore it is not
    new and original and (ii) that the same design has been obtained in
    United Kingdom as is evident from the downloading of Patent
    website of the United Kingdom. On the basis of this two evidence,
    the Assistant Controller has held that the design which was
    registered on the application filed by the respondent herein was not
    a new and original. therefore, on the application filed by the
    appellant, the Assistant Controller of Patents and Designs
    cancelled that design of the respondent.
    28. Now, we shall examine to what extent the view taken by the
    Assistant Controller can be sustained and whether the view taken
    by learned Single Judge was correct or not. Now, coming to the
    first issue which has been framed by the Assistant Controller, the
    Assistant Controller found that M/s.Dornbusch Gravuren Gmbh, a
    German Company published a brochure bearing distinctive number
    2960-910 for the first time on 10.9.1993 and the registered
    proprietor took the user's right and got it registered. The Assistant
    Controller found that it is not the inventive ingenuity of the
    respondent and found that in order to register the design it should
    be new or original and the Assistant Controller found that there is
    insufficient evidence of originality and therefore, he came to the
    conclusion that the design is not a new and original one registered
    prior to the date of registration. therefore, the question is whether
    the design is new and original.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 44 of 67

    29. Section 4 which is couched in the negative terms, says that the
    design which is not a new or original then such design cannot be
    registered. therefore, the question is the design which has been
    prepared by the German Company and which has been sold to the
    respondent which became the proprietor of it, is a new or original
    or not. In this connection, the burden was on the complainant
    to show that the design was not original or new. We have no
    hesitation in recording a finding that the burden was not
    discharged by the complainant. It only tried to prove on the basis
    of the letter of the German company that they produced the rollers
    and sold in market but it was nowhere mentioned that these rollers
    have been reproduced on the glass sheets by the German company
    or by any other company. The expression, "new or original"
    appearing in Section 4 means that the design which has been
    registered has not been published anywhere or it has been made
    known to the public. The expression, "new or original" means that
    it had been invented for the first time or it has not been reproduced
    by anyone.
    30. The respondent company purchased the rollers from the
    German company and got it registered with the registering
    authority that by these rollers they are going to produce the design
    on the glass sheets. Design has been defined in Section 2(d) which
    means that a feature of shape, configuration, pattern, ornament or
    composition of lines or colours applied to any article whether in
    two dimensional or three dimensional or in both forms, by any
    industrial process. That means that a feature or a pattern which is
    registered with the registering authority for being produced on a
    particular article by any industrial process whether manual,
    mechanical or chemical or by any other means which appears in a
    finished article and which can be judged solely by eye appeal. The
    definition of design as defined in Section 2(d) read with
    application for registration and rule 11 with form 1 makes it clear
    that the design which is registered is to be applied to any finished
    article which may be judged solely by eye appeal. A conjoined
    reading of these three provisions makes it clear that a particular
    shape or a particular configuration is to be registered which is
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 45 of 67

    sought to be produced on any article which will have visual appeal.
    Such design once it is registered then it cannot be pirated by any
    other person. But the question is whether it is new or original.
    31. In the present case, the complainant relied on the
    correspondence of the German company which produced the
    rollers and sold it to the respondent herein and it gave the
    proprietary right to the present respondent company. 'Proprietor' as
    defined in Section 2(j) of the Act means that any person who
    acquires the design or right to apply the design to any article, either
    exclusively of any other person or otherwise, means, in the respect
    and to the extent in and to which the design or right has been so
    acquired. therefore, this right to reproduce this design on an article
    has been given by the German company to the respondent. But
    again the question is whether the complainant had discharged their
    burden to show that this design is not new or original. For this
    purpose, they only banked upon the letter of the German company
    which prepared these rollers and there is no evidence to show that
    the design which was reproduced on glass sheets was either
    produced by any other agency. therefore, the expression that ' new
    or original' in this context has to be construed that whether this
    design has ever been reproduced by any other company on the
    glass sheet or not.
    32. There is no evidence whatsoever produced by the complainant
    either before the Assistant Controller or before any other forum to
    show that this very design which has been reproduced on the glass
    sheet was manufactured anywhere in the market in India or in
    United Kingdom. There is no evidence to show that these rollers
    which were manufactured or originally designed by the company
    was marketed by this company to be reproduced on glass sheets in
    India or even in United Kingdom. This proprietorship of this
    design was acquired by this respondent from the German company
    and there is no evidence on record to show that these rollers were
    used for designing them on the glass sheets in Germany or in India
    or in United Kingdom.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 46 of 67

    33. What is required to be registered is a design which is sought to
    be reproduced on an article. This was the roller which was
    designed and if it is reproduced on an article it will give such
    visual feature to the design. No evidence was produced by the
    complainant before the Assistant Controller that anywhere in any
    part of the world or in India this design was reproduced on glass or
    it was registered anywhere in India or in any part of the world. The
    German company only manufactured the roller and this roller
    could have been used for bringing a particular design on the glass,
    rexine or leather but we are concerned here with the reproduction
    of the design from the roller on glass which has been registered
    before the registering authority. therefore, this design which is to
    be reproduced on the article i.e. glass has been registered for the
    first time in India and the proprietary right was acquired from the
    German company. We have gone through the letter of the German
    company and it nowhere says that this was reproduced on a glass
    sheet. No evidence was produced by the complainant that this
    design was reproduced on a glass sheet in Germany or in India.
    The contents of the letter are very clear. It shows that it was
    designed in 1992 and was marketed in 1993. But there is no
    evidence to show that this design was reproduced on glass sheet
    anywhere in Germany.
    35. The expression,' design' has come up for interpretation in
    English courts. The expression, design is almost pari materia with
    the definition of design in the Indian context. The expression,
    'design' in the English Act which is known as the Registered
    Designs Act, 1949 reads as under:
       “In this Act the expression,' design' means features of shape,
       configuration, pattern or ornament applied to an article by any
       industrial process, being features which in the finished article
       appeal to and are judged solely by the eye, but does not
       include
       (a) a method or principle of construction or
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                            Page 47 of 67

      (b) features of shape or configuration which
      (i) are dictated solely by the function which the article has to
      perform, or
      (ii) are dependent upon the appearance of another article of
      which the article is intended by the author of the design to
      form an integral part.
      The history of this definition has been detailed by Russel-
      Clarke and Howe on Industrial Designs (Seventh Edition) at
      para 3.11 at page 74 which reads as under:
      3-11. This definition contains a cumulative series of
      requirements, many of which have been the subject of judicial
      decision and analysis. The historical process by which this
      definition has evolved is of importance to its present day
      interpretation and application. Some of the more important
      embellishments to the definition, such as those dealing with
      eye appeal and methods or principles of construction, have
      found their way into the pre-2001 statutory definition as a
      result of the explicit adoption such requirements were held to
      be implicit in the earlier and less elaborate statutory
      definitions of "design". This manifests an intention by the
      legislature to adopt and make explicit the principles developed
      in those cases.
      Xx xx xx
      3.13. The words of the section are: "...design means features
      of shape configuration, pattern or ornament applied to an
      article...." Thus a registrable design, as defined by the RDA
      (A), must have reference to some specific article to which it is
      to be applied. The design to be registered " is a shape,
      configuration or pattern to be applied a particular specified
      article". It can be readily seen that a particular pattern of
      surface ornamentation could be applied to wide range of
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                           Page 48 of 67

      different articles. An application for registration was not in
      respect of the pattern as such, but in respect of its
      application to the specific article named. If it was desired to
      register the same design, e.g. a surface pattern or
      decoration, in respect of a series of different articles (apart
      from the special case of articles which together form a set),
      then a separate application had to be made in respect of
      each article, and each application to register was
      numbered separately and treated as a separate and
      distinct application.
      In the case of designs consisting of features of shape or
      configuration, there may of course be cases where the design
      is intrinsically applicable only to a specific kind of article.
      The article itself does not, however, constitute the design. In
      Dover v. Nurnberger Celluloid Waren Fabrik Gebruder Wolff,
      Buckley L.J. said:
      Design means, therefore, a conception or suggestion or idea of
      a shape or of a picture or of a device or of some arrangement
      which can be applied to an article by some manual,
      mechanical or chemical means. It is a conception, suggestion,
      or idea, and not an article, which is the thing capable of being
      registered.... It is a suggestion of form or ornament to be
      applied to a physical body.
      [Pugh v. Riely Cycle Co Ltd. (1912) 29 R.P.C. 196]
      Accordingly, it is submitted that a design is an idea or
      conception as to features of shape, configuration, pattern or
      ornament applied to an article. Although that idea, while still
      in the author's head, may be potentially capable of
      registration, in fact it must be reduced to visible form to
      be identifiable, and until it is so reduced there is nothing
      capable of registration, It may be so rendered either by its
      being embodied in the actual article, or by its being placed
      upon a piece of paper in such a way that the shape or
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                            Page 49 of 67

      other features of the article to be made are clear to the
      eye. Whenever the means of identification (under some of the
      old Acts, provision was made whereby a mere verbal
      description could in some cases be accepted as sufficient), as
      soon as the idea is reduced to a form which is identifiable,
      there is something which is a "design", and which, if new or
      original, may be registrable.”
    36. Similarly our attention was also invited to para 27.07 of the law
    of Copyright and Industrial Designs by P. Narayanan (Fourth
    Edition) which reads as under:
       “27.07. Design as a conception or idea "Design means a
       conception or suggestion or idea of a shape or of a picture or
       of a device or of some arrangement which can be applied to
       an article by some manual, mechanical or chemical means
       mentioned in the definition clause. It is a suggestion of form
       or ornament to be applied to a physical body". It is a
       conception, suggestion or idea, and not an article, which is
       the thing capable of being registered. It may according to the
       definition clause, be applicable to any article whether for the
       pattern or for the shape or configuration or for the ornament
       thereof (that is to say of the article) or for any two or more of
       such purposes. The design, therefore, is not the article, but is
       the conception, suggestion, or idea of a shape, picture, device
       or arrangement which is to be applied to the article, by some
       one of the means to be applied to a physical body.
       A design capable of registration cannot consist of a mere
       conception of the features mentioned in the definition, or in
       the case of an article in three dimensions, of a representation
       of such features in two dimensions It must, in such a case, in
       order to comply with the definition, consist of the features as
       they appear in the article to which they have been applied by
       some industrial process or means. An applicant for
       registration of a design has to produce a pictorial illustration
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 50 of 67

        of the idea or suggestion which he has to establish as new or
        original;"
    Therefore, the concept of design is that a particular figure
    conceived by its designer in his mind and it is reproduced in some
    identifiable manner and it is sought to be applied to an article.
    therefore, whenever registration is required then those
    configuration has to be chosen for registration to be reproduced in
    any article. The idea is that the design has to be registered which
    is sought to be reproduced on any article. therefore, both the
    things are required to go together, i.e. the design and the design
    which is to be applied to an article.
    37. In the present case, the design has been reproduced in the
    article like glass which is registered. This could have been
    registered with rexin or leather. therefore, for registration of a
    particular configuration or particular shape of thing which is
    sought to be reproduced on a particular article has to be applied.
    As in the present case the design sought to be reproduced on a
    glass-sheet has been registered and there is no evidence to show
    that this design was registered earlier to be reproduced on glass in
    India or any other part of the country or in Germany or even for
    that matter in United Kingdom, therefore, it is for the first time
    registered in India which is new and original design which is to
    be reproduced on glass sheet. therefore, the submission of
    learned senior counsel for the appellant, Mr. Gupta cannot be
    accepted that this design was not new and original.
    41. One has to be very cautious unless two articles are
    simultaneously produced the Court then alone the Court
    will be able to appreciate. But in the present case no design
    reproduced on the glass-sheets was either produced before the
    Assistant Controller or before the High Court or before us by the
    appellant to appreciate the eye appeal. The appellant could have
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                           Page 51 of 67

    produced the design reproduced on glass-sheet it manufactured in
    United Kingdom or Germany. That could have been decisive.
    45. The next evidence which was lead by the appellant was a
    website had been downloaded from the United Kingdom Patent
    Office effecting patent that may be applied to glass sheets. No
    evidence has been produced to show that M/s.Vegla Vereinigte
    Glaswerke Gmbh had manufactured this design in glass sheet or
    not. It is only a design downloaded from the website of the Patent
    office in U.K. and it is not known whether it was reproduced on
    glass-sheet in U.K. or not. In this connection, the Assistant
    Controller has only observed that he has made a visual comparison
    of the U.K. registered design No. 2022468 with the impugned
    design No. 190336 and he was satisfied that both the designs make
    same appeal to the eye and there was sufficient resemblance
    between the two designs. therefore, the Assistant Controller held
    that the impugned design was prior published and it could not be
    said to be new or original. The Assistant Controller further
    observed that the proprietor of this design had not been able to
    make a difference between the U.K. design and the present design.
    This was not accepted by learned Single Judge of the Calcutta
    High Court and for the good reason. It was observed by learned
    Single Judge as under:
        “The illustrations in the form of drawings downloaded from
        the website of the United Kingdom Patent Office depict the
        patterns that may be applied to glass sheets. The patterns
        may be same but the illustrations do not give the same visual
        effect as the samples of the glass sheets produced by the
        appellant in Court. There are also no clean unmistakable
        instructions or directions for production of glass sheets of
        the pattern illustrated.
        The visual effect and/or appeal of a pattern embossed into
        glass sheets by use of embossing rollers could be different
        from the visual effect of the same pattern etched into glass
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                          Page 52 of 67

         sheets manually. The respondent No. 1 has not considered
         these factors.
         The order impugned considered with the materials on
         record, including in particular the computer print outs
         clearly reveals that the respondent No. 1 has only compared
         the pattern and/or configuration considered the visual appeal
         thereof, but not the visual appeal of the pattern and/or
         configuration on the article. In other words, the Respondent
         No. 1 has not considered the visual appeal of the finished
         product.
         There are no materials on record to show that the design had
         previously been applied to glass sheets. On the other hand,
         an affidavit was sworn on behalf of the appellant by a
         Liaison Executive affirming that he had ascertained that the
         proprietor of the design registered in the United Kingdom
         had never manufactured glass sheets of the design
         registered.”
    From this it appears that in fact the pattern of the design which is
    reproduced on the glass-sheet and the design and the pattern which
    was reproduced on the glass-sheet of the United Kingdom was not
    common.
    46. The affidavit sworn on behalf of the respondent herein, the
    liaison Executive that he had ascertained from the proprietor of the
    design registered in United Kingdom and they have never
    manufactured glass-sheet of the design registered. This affidavit
    evidence of the Liaison Executive of the respondent company has
    remained un-rebutted. Secondly, the learned Assistant Controller
    has not properly compared the two designs that on what
    comparison he found that the same configuration or pattern are
    identical with that of the impugned design. Simply by saying
    visually one can liable to commit the mistake but if the comparison
    is to be judged whether the pattern of the United Kingdom and that
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                            Page 53 of 67

    of the present pattern is three dimension or not. Both the designs
    were placed before us as was done before the High Court also.
    Learned Single Judge recorded its finding after seeing both the
    designs that there is distinguishable difference between the two.
    Similar attempt was made before us to show that both the designs
    i.e. one that is published in United Kingdom and the impugned
    design are identical.
    47. We have seen the original glass pattern produced before us
    and the photograph of the pattern produced on record. If the
    complainant was serious about the same, it could have produced
    the pattern which was reproduced on the glass-sheet in the United
    Kingdom and the pattern which is reproduced on the glass-sheet by
    the rollers of the design produced before us. If these two glass-
    sheets were placed before learned Single Judge or
    before us we would have been able to record the
    finding. The finding recorded by the Assistant Controller is most
    inconclusive and it does not give us any assurance that it was a
    proper comparison of the two patters by the Assistant Controller.
    Learned Single Judge of the Calcutta High Court had occasion to
    go through both the patterns and found that there is no comparison.
    Likewise, the glass-sheets were placed before us with all
    dimensions along with a copy of the print out of the United
    Kingdom and we are of opinion that there is no comparison
    between the two. From the visual appeal placed before us, learned
    Single Judge has rightly concluded that there is no comparison of
    pattern or configuration of two designs. We fully agree with the
    view taken by learned Single Judge. Hence on this count also the
    view taken by the Assistant Controller does not appear to be
    correct and the view taken by learned Single Judge of the Calcutta
    High Court is correct.” (emphasis is added by us).
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                          Page 54 of 67

21.           We have reproduced a large number of paragraphs both of the
judgments, of the learned Single Judge in Gopal Glass work’s case, and of
the Supreme Court in the appeal from the judgment of Gopal Glass Work’s
case in Bharat Das Tools Ltd. because, it is only on the reading of these
paras it becomes clear that the Supreme Court in no manner laid down an
absolute rule that there can never be prior publication although in the public
record of the Registrar of Design abroad a particular design is found to be
registered. The Supreme Court in fact has specifically held that facts in each
case have to be very minutely examined and Courts have to be extremely
cautious by thoroughly scrutinizing the evidence in each case for deciding
whether the public record available in Registrar of Design abroad could or
could not be taken as prior publication, and in the peculiar facts of the case
before the Supreme Court when we refer to paragraphs 45 to 47 it becomes
clear that the Supreme Court approved the view of the learned Single Judge
of the Calcutta High Court in Gopal Glass Work’s case because even the
Supreme Court found that sufficient evidence was not led on behalf of the
objector to the registered design and that the documents downloaded through
internet from the website of U.K. Patent Office did not add that amount of
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                            Page 55 of 67

clarity for the same to be said to be prior publication for seeking cancellation
on the basis of such alleged prior publication of a design registered in India.
22.           What has been observed by the Supreme Court in the case of
Bharat Das Tools Ltd. is reinforced by the following paragraphs of
Russell-Clarke and Howe on Industrial Designs VIIIth Edition:
       What counts as “published” for the purpose of calling into 3-097
       question the novelty of a later design registration? This is
       broader than the word at first suggests. It is by no means
       limited to the publishing of a design in a printed publication,
       although it includes that. In practical terms, there are two
       main ways in which a design can be published: by prior use of
       the design, by selling or displaying to the public articles to
       which the design has been applied; and by paper publications
       of one sort or another. It is not, in fact, necessary that
       publication should be on paper; an oral disclosure, provided it
       is non-confidential, will amount to publication.
       Re-registration of the same design for different articles, or
       a similar design for same or different articles
       A special exception existed to the general rule that the novelty 3-105
       of a design will be destroyed by the prior registration or
       publication of that design as applied to any kind of article. By
       S.4(1) of the RDA(A), the proprietor of a registered design
       was entitled to apply for registration of the same design, or a
       design with modifications or variations not sufficient to affect
       its identity, in respect of another article. His own previous
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                  Page 56 of 67

      registration, or the publication of his design as registered, does
      not then destroy the novelty of his new design registration in
      respect of the new article, but his term of protection is limited
      to the term of the original design. This, in effect, gave the
      proprietor of a design registration the ability to extend the
      scope of the registration during its lifetime to cover further
      articles, although in formal terms each application to protect
      his design on a new article will be a separate application
      leading to a separate design registration. It appears that his
      application for registration of the design on the new article
      must precede his actual use of the design on the new article.
      This is because, if he uses the design on an article which falls
      outside the scope of his earlier registration, then that will not 3-106
      count as a publication “of the registered design”, which is all
      that s.4(1) of the RDA(A) shields him against as regards the
      novelty of his new application.
         A person who makes an application to register a design and
      finds that it has previously been registered in respect of a
      different article was allowed to buy up the earlier design
      registration while his own application was still pending, and if 3-107
      he did so he could take advantage of this rule in the same way
      as if he had himself been the owner of the earlier registration
      all along.
         The same rule applied to the registration (whether in respect
      of the same article or a different article) of a design which is
      not exactly the same as the earlier registered design, but has
      “modifications or variations not sufficient to alter the character
      or substantially to affect the identity thereof”. However, this
      provision has been interpreted narrowly so that practically any
      significant change or difference between the earlier and later
      design will destroy the protective effect of this provision. For
      an applicant to rely on s.4(1)(b), the subject of his application
      must have substantial identity with his prior published design.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                  Page 57 of 67

      In Sebel Ltd’s Application (No.1), it was held that substitution
      in the old design of a different stand did substantially alter the
      identity of the article (a rocking horse), and that the subsection
      did not apply. Since the stand had already been published in
      an advertisement showing it applied to another horse, it was
      held that design failed to qualify for novelty under s.1, the said
      stand being a mere trade variant. In Sebel Ltd’s Application
      (No.2), a design was held not to fall within s.4 because the
      character of the design was different from the character of the
      applicant‟s earlier design. Thus it seems that the applicant‟s
      own earlier design may be sufficiently similar to destroy the
      novelty of his later application for protection of his modified
      design, and yet too different to allow him to take advantage of 3-108
      the protection of RDA(A) s.4(1). This is an odd and
      unfortunate result if it is indeed correct.
           Publication in documents
      In cases of publication of a design by prior use as applied to an
      article, normally the only questions which arise are whether it
      has been published at all (i.e whether the articles to which it
      has been applied have been disclosed to the public), and
      whether the design is similar enough to the design in suit to
      destroy the latter‟s novelty. But where the novelty of a design
      is tested against a prior published document, a number of 3-109
      additional questions can arise which do not arise in the case of
      a prior use.
        First, it may not be clear whether or not the document
      discloses a design as applied to an article at all. A trade
      catalogue containing photographs or illustrations of articles to
      which a design has been applied may be a clear enough case.
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                  Page 58 of 67

      But the publication in a document of a pattern or picture does 3-110
      not as such destroy the novelty of a design which consists of
      applying that pattern or picture to an article. For it to destroy
      the novelty of such a design, the paper publication must
      suggest explicitly or implicitly by context that the pattern or
      picture should be applied to an article.
           Secondly, the pattern (if it is two-dimensional) or shape (if
      it is three-dimensional) of the design may not be clear from the
      document. Particularly in a case where it involves a written
      description rather than an explicit picture or illustration, there 3-111
      may be room for argument as to the precise nature of the
      design which the document discloses, before one can go on to
      ask whether or not it is similar enough to the later design to
      destroy novelty.
          Thirdly, a paper publication may be shielded from
      destroying the novelty of a later design registration by the
      special provisions of subss.6(4)-(5) of the RDA(A). These
      provisions allowed the owner of copyright in an artistic work
      to exploit his work so long as he did not apply it industrially to
                                                                          3-118
      an article, without his own exploitation of it counting against
      the novelty of his own later application for a design
      registration covering the artistic work as applied to an article.
          Does the document disclose a design applied to an
      article?
       In order to destroy the novelty of a design registration, an
      earlier design must be published “in respect of the same or any
      other article”.     Mere publication of the pattern which
      constitutes the design was therefore not sufficient to destroy
      the novelty of a design registration, which consisted of the
      application of that pattern to an article. In principle, the same
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                   Page 59 of 67

      holds true of the publication of a shape, although it is less easy
      to envisage cases where the publication of a shape does not
      implicitly convey the article to which that shape is to be
      applied. Thus, novelty may reside in the application of an old
      shape or pattern to new subject-matter. This was first laid
      down in the leading case of Saunders v Wiel. There, the 3-119
      design consisted of the handle of a spoon made to represent
      Westminster Abbey seen from a particular point of view. The
      design had actually been copied from a photograph of the
      Abbey.
        The validity of the design was upheld, Bowen L.J. saying
         “It seems to me that the novelty and originality in the
      design, within this section, is not destroyed by its being taken
      from a source common to mankind…The novelty may consist
      in the applicability to the article of manufacture of a drawing
      or design which is taken from a source to which all the world
      may resort. Otherwise, it would be impossible to take any
      natural or artistic object and to reduce it into a design
      applicable to an article of manufacture, without also having
      this consequence following, that you could not do it at all in
      the first place unless you were to alter the design so as not to
      represent exactly the original; otherwise there would be no
      novelty in it, because it would be said that the thing which was
      taken was not new. You could not take a tree and put it on a
      spoon, unless you drew the tree in some shape in which a tree
      never grew, nor an elephant unless you drew it and carved it of
      a kind which had never been seen. An illustration, it seems to
      me, that may be taken about this is what we all know as the
      Apostles spoons. The figures of the Apostles are figures 3-120
      which have been embodied in sacred art for centuries, and
      there is nothing new in taking the figures of the Apostles, but
      the novelty of applying the figures of the Apostles to spoons
      was in contriving to design the Apostles‟ figures so that they
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                  Page 60 of 67

      should be applicable to that particular subject-matter. How
      does a building differ from that? In no sense it seems to me.
          It should be recalled that under the 1949 Act, if a pattern
      (or shape) has been published in respect of any article, the
      publication will destroy the novelty of any design which
      consists of the application of that pattern (or shape) to an
      article of any kind, however different it is from the kind of
      article to which the publication suggests that the design should
      be applied. However, the publication will not invalidate such
      later design registrations if it does not suggest the application
      of the pattern (or shape) to an article at all. Thus, a series of
      pictures published in a fine art catalogue would not destroy the
      novelty of a later design consisting of the application of one of 3-121
      those pictures to, say, the back of a chair, because a painting or
      picture simpliciter is not an “article”. But the same pictures
      published in a catalogue of patterns for application to
      wallpaper would destroy the novelty of such a later design
      registration, because wallpaper is an article.
        What design is disclosed by a prior published document?
      Assuming that a prior published document does satisfy the
      requirement that it discloses a design, i.e a shape or pattern, as
      applied or to be applied to an article, the next question may be
      what is the shape or pattern which it discloses? In some cases
      this will be clear, for instance where the publication contains
      explicit pictures or illustrations. However, it may be less clear
      and the disclosure may consist in whole or in part of written
      text which needs to be interpreted, or general instructions
      which can be put into practice in a variety of ways. In such
      cases the test to be applied is that borrowed from the hpre- 3-122
      1977 patent law of anticipation, i.e that the prior art document
      must contain “clear and unmistakable directions” to
      make an article with the shape or pattern which is the same as ,
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                  Page 61 of 67

      or similar enough to the registered design in suit to deprive it
      of novelty.
        This was laid down in Rosedale Associated Manufacturers
      Ltd v Airfix Ltd. Lord Evershed M.R. said
       “In this respect the test of prior publication of an alleged
      invention should, in my judgment, be no less applicable in the
      case of a registered design, and as regards the former, I
      venture to cite once more the oft-quoted language of Lord
      Westbury in Hills v Evans: ‘The antecedent statement must, in
      order to invalidate the sub-sequent patent, be such that a
      person of ordinary knowledge of the subject would at once
      perceive and understand and be able practically to apply the
      discovery without the necessity of making further
      experiments.‟ By a like reasoning, to my mind, if a document
      is to constitute prior publication, then a reader of it, possessed 3-123
      of ordinary knowledge of the subject, must from his reading of
      the document be able at least to see the design in his mind‟s
      eye and should not have to depend on his own originality to
      construct the design from the ideas which the document may
      put into his head.”
        On the same point Romer L.J. said:
        “In Flour Oxidising Co v Carr & Co Parker J. (as he then
      was) said: „Where the question is solely a question of prior
      publication it is not, in my opinion, enough to prove that an
      apparatus described in an earlier specification could have been
      used to produce this or that result. It must also be shown that
      the specification contains clear and unmistakable directions so
      to use it.‟ These observations by Parker J. were cited with
      approval by Lord Dunedin in British Thomson Houston Co v
      Metropolitan-Vickers Electrical Co, and again (when
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                  Page 62 of 67

        delivering the judgment of the Judicial Committee) in Pope
        Alliance Corporation v Spanish River Pulp & Paper Mills, Ltd.
        In the latter case and at the same page Lord Dunedin posed the
        test as follows: „would a man who was grappling with the
        problem solved by the Patent attacked, and having no
        knowledge of that Patent, if he had had the alleged anticipation 3-124
        in his hand, have said “that gives me what I wish”? It is true
        that these citations were related to anticipation of inventions,
        but it seems to me that they apply by analogy to alleged
        anticipation by “paper publications” of registered designs.”
           It is not permissible to make a mosaic of a number of prior
        documents for the purpose of attacking novelty. If the attack
        on novelty is to succeed, the design must be disclosed in the
        single prior document. If, however, one document contains a
        reference to another document, the two may be read together.
23.              In view of the above discussion, the following conclusions in
our opinion emerge:-
(i)     Existence of a design registered abroad in a convention country is not
a ground under Section 19(1)(a) for cancellation of a design registered in
India.
(ii)    The provision of Section 44 does not have the effect of changing the
literal interpretation of Section 19(1)(a) inasmuch as under Section 44, the
foreign registered design becomes an Indian registered design, although, the
date of registration of the foreign registered design which is registered in
India     will relate back and have retrospective effect from the date of
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                                  Page 63 of 67

application first made in the convention country abroad. Once, the foreign
registered design becomes registered in India, the very fact that it is an
Indian registered design it will be a previously registered design in India,
and by virtue of the priority rule the same will be a ground for cancellation
of a design subsequently registered in India on an application made after the
date of the priority date given of the application made abroad for registration
of the design in a convention country.
(iii)  The benefit of foreign registered design after its registration in India
for seeking cancellation of an Indian registered design under Section
19(1)(a) will only be available if the application for registration in India is
made within six months of the date of the application made in the
convention country abroad, notwithstanding there may be prior publication
in this interregnum six month period.
(iv)   In case, the application for registration in India is not made within the
statutory permissible period of six months of having made the application
abroad, then, the design registered in India in the meanwhile in six months
period cannot be cancelled under Section 19(1)(a), though, the foreign
registered design owner on proving of prior publication can have an
effective defence to the infringement action filed by the Indian registered
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 64 of 67

design owner and which defence against an infringement action is available
vide Section 22 relying on the ground of prior publication under Section
19(1)(b) read with Section 4(b) of the Act.
(v)    What is publication is essentially a question of fact to be decided as
per the evidence led in each case. Existence of a design in the publication
record/office of a Registrar of design abroad may or may not depending on
the facts of each case amount to prior publication and there would be prior
publication only if the prior registered design is made public and has that
much necessary clarity as applied to a specific article capable of judged by
the visual appearance or the eye of the mind, that by use of the said
knowledge and information in the public record of the Registrar of design
office, an article can be made using that design which will be a piracy or
violation of that design i.e putting it differently unless and until there is
complete clarity and understanding to the naked eye or the eye of the mind
of the foreign registered design as found in the public record of the Registrar
of design qua a specific article, it cannot be said that such public record will
amount to prior publication.
24.          We therefore answer the reference that the ratio in the case of
Dabur India Ltd. by the Division Bench of this Court that existence of
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                              Page 65 of 67

public record in the office of Registrar of design in a convention country
abroad may or may not amount to prior publication inasmuch existence of a
design in a public record of Registrar of design in a convention country
abroad may or may not, depending on the facts of a particular case, amount
or not amount to publication abroad, and which depends on the complete
clarity available to the eye of the design found in the public record so that it
can be said to be understood for being applied to a specific article. Each
case has to be necessarily judged by putting the subject design with the
articles side by side with the prior publication material and only after
thoroughly scrutinizing the same any finding can be given of existence or
non-existence of prior publication.
25.           So far as the merits of the present case of existence of prior
publication in the facts of the present case are concerned, we find that
Division Bench has approved the decision of the learned Single Judge of
existence of prior publication in the facts of the present case because the
spatula in question was found in actual use prior to registration in India, and
with respect to which the relevant observations are made by the Division
Bench in paras 12 and 15 of the judgment/reference order of the Division
Bench dated 8.10.2010.        We may, of course, hasten to add that any
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                             Page 66 of 67

observations made in an interim order are always prima facie in nature and
are made only for the purpose of disposing of an interim injunction, and the
issue of prior publication in the facts of the present case will be finally
decided uninfluenced by any observations qua the factual aspects made at
the interim stage as to existence of the spatula abroad after evidence is led
by both the parties in this case.
26.          Let the parties appear before the learned Single Judge on 17th
April, 2013 for further proceedings in the suit.
                                                  VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
                                                   SANJIV KHANNA, J
                                                         S.P. GARG, J
MARCH 15, 2013
ib/Ne/ak
FAO (OS) No.458/2009                                           Page 67 of 67


