*            IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                         WP(C) No.4483/1996
%                                                      February 20, 2013
       MS. USHA BHANDARI                                   ..... Petitioner
                    Through: Dr. Surat Singh, Sr. Adv. with Mr. Biswarup
                                 Mukherjee, Adv.
                          versus
       NEW GREEN FIELD SCHOOL & ORS.                       ..... Respondents
                    Through: Mr. Nitesh Kr. Singh, Adv. for
                                 Ms. Avnish Ahlawat, Adv. for R- 3 & 4.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
To be referred to the Reporter or not? Yes
VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J (ORAL)
1.           This writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India impugns the order of the Delhi School Tribunal dated 29.8.1996. By
the order dated 29.8.1996, the Delhi School Tribunal upheld the order dated
21.10.1995 of the disciplinary authority imposing a major penalty of
removal from service of the petitioner/teacher from the respondent
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                   page 1 of 20

No.1/school.    The disciplinary authority in its order dated 21.10.1995
accepted the findings of the enquiry officer dated 10.2.1995 by which the
enquiry officer found all the seven charges as proved against the petitioner.
2.           The seven articles of charges against the petitioner read as
under:-
                    “Article I
             That the said Smt. Usha Bhandari while functioning as
         assistant teacher (a) refused to sign the duty chart on 6.1.1993,
         (b) disobeyed the direction regarding class arrangement on
         13.1.1993, (c) refused to receive the intimation on 19.1.1993
         for not attending the assembly, (d) refused to explain the
         reasons as to why she managed to get the first bell rung five
         minutes before the schedule time on 5.2.1993, and (e) refused
         to acknowledge the direction regarding arrangements on
         14.7.1993 and 21.7.1993.         Smt. Usha Bhandari thereby
         displayed disobedience and misconduct and lack of devotion to
         duty unbecoming for the teacher and indulged in gross
         indiscipline. She thus violated the provisions of Rule 123 of
         Delhi School Education Act and Rules, 1973 relating to code of
         conduct.
                    Article II
             That Smt. Usha Bhandari misguided the parents of Deepa
         Bhatia student of V-D and took them to Uslain Convent School
         at L-271 DDA Kalkaji Flats and declared Deepa successful in
         that school and demanded and accepted an amount of `550/-
         and thus acted in a way prejudicial to the interests of the school
         of which she is an employee. She thus exhibited lack of
         integrity and acted in malafide manner and violated the
         provisions of Rule 123 of Delhi School Education Act & Rules,
         1973 relating to code of conduct.
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                 page 2 of 20

                 Article III
           That Smt. Usha Bhandari has been running a school in the
       name of Uslain Convent School at the premises mentioned in
       Article II above without the permission and knowledge of the
       school authorities where she has been working. She has been
       giving the impression to the parents of students of said Uslain
       Convent School that that school is a b ranch of new Green Field
       School, Kalkaji, (Alaknanda). She thus used her personal
       influence for personal ends and displayed moral turpitude and
       thus violated Rule 123 of Delhi School Education Act & Rules,
       1973 relating to code of conduct.
                 Article IV
           That Smt. Usha Bhandari utilized the stationery of new
       Green Field School, Kalkaji, (Alaknanda) in the said Uslain
       Convent School without information, knowledge and
       permission of authorities or New Green Field School Kalkaji
       and thus acted in the interest detrimental to the interests of the
       school of which she is an employee. She thus displayed moral
       turpitude and acted in a manner unbecoming of an employee
       and exhibited lack of integrity and thus violated Rule 123 of
       Delhi School Education Act & Rules, 1973 relating to code of
       conduct.
                 Article V
           That Smt. Usha Bhandari (a) refused to receive the Memo
       wherein she was asked to explain in the presence of other staff
       members on 27.7.1993 as to why she left the school early
       without permission on 22.7.1993 and 23.7.1993, (b) abused the
       Principal, Headmistress and other superiors on 28.7.1993 after
       noticing that there was a cross mark in the departure column on
       27.7.1993 and (c) refused to note down the orders for taking
       class arrangement on 28.7.1993. Smt. Usha Bhandari thus
       displayed disobedience, misbehaved with superiors and
       indulged in gross indiscipline and thus violated the provisions
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                              page 3 of 20

          of Rule 123 of Delhi School Education Act & Rules, 1973
          relating to code of conduct.
                     Article VI
          That on 28.7.1993 Smt. Usha Bhandari bluntly refused to
          receive the memorandum dated 27.7.1993 from the Manager of
          the New Green Field School, Kalkaji and misbehaved with the
          Manager in the presence of the Principal and the Headmistress.
          She thus displayed disobedience and exhibited indiscipline and
          acted in a manner unbecoming of an employee and thus
          violated Rule 123 of Delhi School Education Act & Rules,
          1973 relating to code of conduct.
                     Article VII
          That on 28.7.1993, Mrs. Usha Bhandari who was served with
          suspension order dated 28.7.1993 by the Manager refused to
          accept the said order in the presence of the Principal and the
          Headmistress and left the school at 12.30 P.M. by marking the
          time as 1.30 P.M. and abused Mr. Sareen, an employee of the
          school, who had taken the register to her for marking departure
          time. Smt. Usha Bhandari thus displayed disobedience and
          misconduct unbecoming of a teacher and indulged in gross
          indiscipline and thus violated Rule 123 of Delhi School
          Education Act & Rules, 1973.”
3.            A reading of the articles of charges shows that essentially the
petitioner refused to perform extra duties of taking classes when she was
asked to do so, left school early on two occasions, got the bell rung early by
five minutes on one occasion and that too when the ringing of the bell was
not in her purview of duties, misled parents of the students of the school to
get admission in Uslain Convent School which was run benami by her in a
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                 page 4 of 20

flat belonging to her sister and finally by using the stationery of the school
for the Uslain Convent school.
4.           Before one proceeds to the facts and issues in the present case
let us keep in mind what is the scope of a proceeding under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India in a case like the present. This Court under Article
226 of the Constitution of India does not sit as an appellate Court to
reappraise the findings of facts and conclusions as arrived at by the enquiry
officer and the disciplinary authority.     This Court can interfere with the
findings and conclusions of the enquiry officer and the disciplinary authority
only if the findings are perverse /arbitrary in violation of the Article 14 of
the Constitution, or are violative of the law or the rules of the concerned
organization and finally if the same are violative of the principles of natural
justice. As the discussion hereafter will show, that, none of the aforesaid
three factors are found to exist in the present case and therefore the writ
petition must fail.
5.           So far as the findings of the enquiry officer are concerned, the
findings are detailed findings and conclusions which run into as many as 31
pages.   I must put on record that the enquiry officer has done a very
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                 page 5 of 20

thorough job and has very systematically and analytically proceeded to
examine each of the charges and has thereafter given his findings by
reference to the evidence (both oral and documentary) which has been led in
the case. With respect to each of the charges of the petitioner having not
accepted extra duties or refusing to receive the notice whereby she had
denied to take up extra duties, are duly supported by the evidence of the
witnesses in whose presence the events took place. These witnesses are
either the administrative staff of the school or the teachers of the school or
the principal of the school. The issue with regard to the petitioner not
accepting the extra duties and refusing to acknowledge the directions of the
principal are found by a notice of the same date and the records which are
found in the school registers which show such facts as charged to be
existing. The petitioner except routinely denying these charges has led no
evidence to the contrary.
6.           The most important aspect is that the petitioner in spite of
having been given an opportunity to step into the witness box and explain
her case, deliberately refused to step into the witness box and did not appear
as a witness in the case. Surely, a person who does not have courage of
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                 page 6 of 20

conviction to depose in her own case, ought not to be believed by this Court
and has thus rightly been disbelieved by the enquiry officer and the
disciplinary authority.
7.            So far as the aspect of the petitioner wrongly taking some
students to the Uslain Convent School by representing that the said school is
the branch of the respondent No.1/school, the respondent No.1/school before
enquiry officer led the evidence of the parents of those students who
deposed that it was the petitioner who took them to Uslain Convent School
by representing as if the said school was a part of the respondent
No.1/school.    Before the enquiry officer there is documentary evidence of
the stationery of the respondent No.1/school being utilized by the Uslain
Convent School and there were also rubber stamps of the respondent
No.1/school with respect to admission of students in the Uslain Convent
school. The petitioner herself admits that the school was being run in a flat
which was owned by her sister. The petitioner herself filed the documents
pertaining to admission of the students in Uslain Convent School. The
respondent No.1/school led the evidence of two parents. First was one Smt.
Shakuntla Bhatia, mother of the student/Deepa Bhatia, and she showed and
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                               page 7 of 20

proved the acceptance by the petitioner of `550/- on behalf of the Uslain
Convent School. The respondent No.1/school also led the evidence of one
Sh.Satinder Walia who deposed that his wife had worked in Uslain Convent
School for 2-3 months who confirmed the contents of its complaint with
respect to the petitioner utilizing the stationery which depicted the rubber
stamp of the respondent No.1/school for Uslain Convent School.
8.           A reference to the detailed order of the enquiry officer shows
that on behalf of the respondent No.1/school evidence was led of as many as
fifteen witnesses who were the teachers and employees of the school. No
evidence has been led by the petitioner to show how so many employees
would have any personal grudge or grievance against the petitioner. In fact,
during the course of the hearing, I have put it to counsel for the petitioner
whether any pleadings were made before the enquiry officer with respect to
any assumed malice which the teachers and employees of the school, who
had deposed in the enquiry proceedings, had against the petitioner, but on
behalf of the petitioner nothing was shown with respect to any such
pleadings being made before the enquiry officer. Further, there is no reason
why the parent of a student would in any manner have any grudge or malice
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                               page 8 of 20

against the petitioner as no conflict of interest is shown of the said parent,
Smt. Shakuntla Bhatia, mother of Deepa Bhatia (student), with the
petitioner.    Similarly, no malice of any nature existed or could be proved
against Sh.Satinder Walia who also deposed on the aspect of the petitioner
using the stationery of the respondent No.1/school for the Uslain Convent
School.
9.             A conspectus of the aforesaid facts shows the following:-
i)    Each and every charge, may be the issue of ringing of a school bell 5
      minutes earlier, are very grave charges and each of these charges were
      duly proved before the enquiry officer by means of depositions of
      witnesses and the school records.
ii)   The petitioner led no documentary evidence except routinely denying
      the charges. Though the petitioner had claimed that she was not well to
      take extra classes, however, this noting was not given when memos
      were sent to her for taking of extra classes. Also, no medical record
      was thereafter filed with regard to her illness for refusing to take extra
      classes.
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                   page 9 of 20

iii) The witnesses who have deposed before enquiry officer cannot in any
     manner be said to be motivated against the petitioner or can be said to
     have any malice against the petitioner, and nor has any malice or any
     grudge been proved on record by the petitioner against the said
     witnesses.
iv) The petitioner had no courage of conviction to step into the witness box
     and explain her case or stand the test of cross-examination, though she
     utilized the opportunity of cross-examining of the witnesses of the
     respondent No.1/school.
10.           A reading of the report of the enquiry officer shows from pages
1 to 8 thereof that on the basis of one medical certificate or the other,
repeated adjournments were taken on dates fixed before the enquiry officer,
and the enquiry officer in spite of objections of the respondent No.1/school
accommodated the petitioner and gave many many adjournments.
11.           In view of all the aforesaid facts, I am of the opinion that
neither is there any illegality or perversity in the report of the enquiry officer
and nor can the petitioner claim that the principles of natural justice were
violated. So far as the aspect of violation of principles of natural justice are
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                    page 10 of 20

concerned, the present is not a case of the principles of natural justice being
violated inasmuch as no hearing was given, and at best, there would only be
a facet of principles of natural justice which allegedly may not have been
followed, however, no prejudice is shown and therefore there cannot be any
issue raised by the petitioner of violation of the principles of natural justice
in view of judgment of Supreme Court in the case of State Bank of Patiala
& Ors. Vs. S.K.Sharma, 1996 (3) SCC 364.
12.          It is urged on behalf of the petitioner that order of the
disciplinary authority is vitiated because of the principle that no one can be a
judge in his own cause and once there was a likelihood of bias, actual bias
need not be proved. This principle is sought to be brought into play by
making allegations that the memorandums issued against the petitioner were
signed by Smt. Ved Kumari who was the manager of the school and who
also issued the seven articles of charges. It is argued that Smt. Ved Kumari
who was the manager of the school gave evidence with respect to Articles 6
and 7 and appeared in the enquiry proceedings as witness No. 14 on behalf
of the school.    It is argued that since Smt. Ved Kumari was therefore
personally interested in the enquiry proceedings, and this aspect goes to the
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                   page 11 of 20

root of the matter, the enquiry proceedings are vitiated because there was not
only a reasonable likelihood of bias of Smt. Ved Kumari, but also Smt. Ved
Kumari became a judge in her own cause because she was a member of the
disciplinary committee.       Reliance is placed in this regard upon two
judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Arjun Chaubey vs. Union
of India & Ors., AIR 1984 Supreme Court 1356 and Rattan Lal Sharma vs.
Managing Committee, Dr. Hari Ram Higher Secondary School & Ors.,
AIR 1993 Supreme Court 2155.
13.           In the judgment of Arjun Chaubey (supra), the following
paragraphs are relied upon:-
          “7. The order of dismissal dated June 15, 1982 which was
          issued by Respondent 3 recites that he was fully satisfies
          that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an inquiry into
          the appellant’s conduct as provided by the Rules and that he
          had come to the conclusion that the appellant was not fit to
          be retained in service and had, therefore, to be dismissed.
          Evidently, Respondent 3 assessed the weight of his own
          accusations against the appellant and passed a judgment
          which is one of the easiest pass, namely that he himself was
          a truthful person and the appellant a liar. In doing this,
          Respondent 3 violated a fundamental principle of natural
          justice.
          8. The main thrust of the charges against the appellant
          related to his conduct qua Respondent 3. Therefore, it was
          not open to the latter to sit in judgment over the explanation
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                 page 12 of 20

       offered by the appellant and decide that the explanation was
       unture. No person can be a judge in his own cause and no
       witness can certify that his own testimony is true. Any one
       who has a personal stake in an inquiry must keep himself
       aloof from the conduct of the inquiry.
       9. The order of dismissal passed against the appellant stands
       vitiated for the simple reason that the issue as to who,
       between the appellant and Respondent 3, was speaking the
       truth was decided by Respondent 3 himself.
       10. In The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohammad Nooh,
       (1958) 1 SCR 595 observed, while speaking for the
       majority, that the roles of a judge and a witness cannot be
       played by one and the same person and that it is futile to
       expect, when those roles are combined, that the judge can
       hold the scales of justice even. We may borrow the
       language of Das, C.J., and record a finding on the facts of
       the case before us that the illegality touching the
       proceedings which ended in the dismissal of the appellant is
       “so patent and loudly obtrusive that it leaves an indelible
       stamp of infirmity” on the decision of Respondent 3.
       11. Mr. Mridul, appearing on behalf of the respondent,
       contended that though this may be the true legal position, the
       appellant does not deserve the assistance of the Court since,
       he was habitually guilty of acts subversive of discipline.
       This argument does not impress us.
       12. In the first place, to hold the appellant guilty of habitual
       acts of indiscipline is to assume something which remains
       unproved. Secondly, the illegality from which the order of
       dismissal passed by Respondent 3 suffers is of a character so
       grave and fundamental that the alleged habitual
       misbehaviour on the part of the appellant cannot cure or
       condone it.
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                page 13 of 20

          13. In the result, we allow the appeal and set aside the
          judgment of the High Court. The order dated June 15, 1982
          whereby the appellant was dismissed from service is set
          aside. In order, however, to avoid needless complications in
          working out the mutual rights and obligations of the parties,
          we direct that the appellant, who is due to retire within about
          six months, shall be treated as having retired from service
          with effect from April 1, 1984. He shall be paid the arrears
          of his salary due until March 31, 1984, on the basis of the
          salary last drawn by him on June 15, 1982, without taking
          into account the increments which he might have earned
          subsequent to that date. The provident fund and gratuity
          shall also be paid to the appellant as calculated in
          accordance with the rules, as if no order or dismissal was
          passed against him. The appellant may not and shall not
          rejoin his duties. He will be treated as on leave between
          now and March 31, 1984.”
14.          In the judgment of Rattan Lal Sharma (supra), para 11 is
relied upon which reads as under:-
           “11.     In the instant case, Charge No.12 states that a
           particular sum on account of amalgamated fund for the
           month of December was given to the appellant by Shri
           Maru Ram who was teacher in charge of the amalgamated
           fund. In the enquiry committee comprising of the three
           members, the said Shri Maru Ram was taken as one of the
           members and the himself deposed to establish the said
           Charge No.12 and thereafter again joined the enquiry
           committee and submitted a report holding the appellant
           guilty of some of the charges including the said Charge No.
           12. Shri Maru Ram was interested in establishing the said
           charge. From the charge itself, it is apparent that he had a
           pre-disposition to decide against the appellant. It is really
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                   page 14 of 20

        unfortunate that although the appellant raised an objection
        before the enquiry committee by clearly indicating that the
        said Shri Maru Ram was inimical towards him and he
        should not be a member in the enquiry committee, such
        objection was reject on a very flimsy ground, namely, that
        since the said Shri Maru Ram was one of the members of
        the Managing Committee and was the representative of the
        teachers in the Managing Committee it was necessary to
        include him in the enquiry committee. It is quite apparent
        that the enquiry committee could have been constituted
        with other members of the Managing Committee and the
        rules of the enquiry are not such that Shri Maru Ram being
        teacher’s representative was required to be included in the
        said inquiry committee so that the doctrine of necessity may
        be attracted. If a person has a pecuniary interest, such
        interest, even if very small, disqualifies such person. For
        appreciating a case of personal bias or bias to the subject
        matter the test is whether there was a real likelihood of a
        bias even though such bias has not in fact taken place. De
        Smith in his Judicial Review of Administrative Action,
        (1980) at page has observed that a real likelihood of bias
        means at least substantial possibility of bias. In R.V.
        Sunderland Justices, (1901) 2 KB 357 (373) it has been
        held that the Court will have to judge the matter as
        reasonable man would judge of any matter in the conduct of
        his own business. In R. V. Sussex Justices, (1924) 1 KB
        256 (259) it has been indicated that answer to the question
        whether there was a real likelihood of bias depends not
        upon what actually was done but upon what might appear to
        be done. In Halsbury Laws of England (4th Edn.) Vol. 2,
        para 551, it has been indicated that the test of bias is
        whether a reasonable intelligent man, fully apprised of all
        the circumstances, would feel a serious apprehension of
        bias. The same principle has also been accepted by this
        Court in Manak Lal v. Dr. Prem Chand, 1957 SCR 575.
        This Court has laid down that the test is not whether in fact,
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                              page 15 of 20

           a bias has affected the judgment; the test always is and must
           be whether a litigant could reasonably apprehended that a
           bias attributable to a member of the Tribunal might have
           operated against him in the final decision of the Tribunal. It
           is in this sense that it is often said that justice must not only
           be done but must also appear to be done.”
15.           There is no quarrel to the principle of law that once there is a
reasonable likelihood of bias, the order of the disciplinary authority can be
vitiated depending on the facts of a particular case.           It also cannot be
disputed that no one can be a judge in his own cause. The issue however is
that whether at all in the facts of this case it can be said that the order of the
disciplinary authority must fail because Smt. Ved Kumari, the manager of
the school was a judge in her own cause and there was implicit and
reasonable likelihood of bias as she was member of the Disciplinary
Committee.
16            The fact of the matter is that though Smt. Ved Kumari, the
manager of the school was earlier a member of the disciplinary committee,
and had issued the chargesheet containing the articles of charges, and had
appeared as a witness in the case, however, when the order of the
disciplinary authority was passed, she was removed from the disciplinary
committee and the disciplinary committee did not comprise of Smt. Ved
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                     page 16 of 20

Kumari. This aspect is made clear by para 6 of the counter affidavit which
is filed by the respondent No.1/school, and the same reads as under:-
               “6. That on 5.2.95, the Management Committee of
               Respondent No.1, reconstituted the disciplinary authority
               in the case of Petitioner as under:-
                  i.      Shri B.P.Sinha     Chairman
                  ii.     Shri A.Biswas      Director New Green Field
                                             School, Saket, New Delhi.
                  iii.    Directorate of     Nominee.
                          Education
                  iv.     Mrs. Versha        Head Mistress New Green
                          Verma              Field School, Saket, New
                                             Delhi.
                  v.         Mrs. Manju          Teacher-Member.”
                             Arora
            It is therefore clear that Smt. Ved Kumari therefore was not part
of the disciplinary committee which passed the impugned order dated
21.10.1995 against the petitioner. Once Smt. Ved Kumari was not part of
the disciplinary committee, then, there does not arise the question of
applicability of the principle of no one being a judge in his own cause and of
an issue of the likelihood of bias affecting the orders passed by the
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                  page 17 of 20

disciplinary authority. In both the cases which were relied upon on behalf of
the petitioner the member(s) of the disciplinary authority who was/were to
decide the case were judges in their own cause because that/those member(s)
of the disciplinary authority had made charges against the charged official
and which were enquired into and punishment imposed by the same
authority which made the charges. In the case of Arjun Chaubey (supra),
the respondent No.3 in that case, had made various charges against the
charged official and it was the respondent No.3 which had passed the
punishment order and therefore it was held that the order of the disciplinary
authority was vitiated because the disciplinary authority was judge in his
own cause. In the case of Rattan lal Sharma (supra), similarly one Sh.
Maru Ram against whom it was alleged that there was reasonable likelihood
of bias because he was inimical towards the charged official, and, it was
found as a matter of fact that it was Sh. Maru Ram who had charged the
charged official of having been given monies by Maru Ram and which
aspect was in question, and Sh. Maru Ram was part of the enquiry
committee which went into the allegations against the charged official.
Sh.Maru Ram was therefore found to have a pecuniary interest in the subject
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                page 18 of 20

matter of the enquiry and therefore he was held to be disqualified to be a
member of the enquiry committee. Accordingly, Supreme Court held that
the enquiry was vitiated as there was a reasonable likelihood of bias against
Sh. Maru Ram.
17.          As already stated above, since Smt. Ved Kumari was not part of
the disciplinary committee which finally passed the impugned order against
the petitioner, the enquiry proceedings cannot be said to be vitiated either on
account of the principle of a person being a judge in his own cause or on the
issue of a reasonable likelihood of bias against a member of the disciplinary
authority.
18.          For the sake of completion, I must note that though the
petitioner had argued that the Delhi School Tribunal which passed the
impugned order did not consider this aspect, however, in view of the
aforesaid facts even assuming the Delhi School Tribunal did not consider
this matter, the same will not make any difference inasmuch as the above
stated facts show there is no question of the order of the disciplinary
authority being violative of the principle that no one can be a judge in his
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                  page 19 of 20

own cause and that there existed a likelihood of bias of a member of the
disciplinary authority.
19.          In view of the aforesaid, there is no reason why this Court
should exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.    In fact, the report of the enquiry officer dated
10.2.1995 is a detailed report discussing all the depositions of the witnesses,
the documents filed, analysis of the evidence as also the facts and thereafter
ending with rationale conclusions given with respect to holding the
petitioner guilty qua each article of charges. The writ petition is therefore
dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
                                                   VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
FEBRUARY 20, 2013
ak
WP(C) No.4483/1996                                                  page 20 of 20


