*             IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                           RFA No.465/2010
%                                               28th February, 2012
GULAB CHAUDHARY                                      ..... Appellant
                            Through:    Ms. Deepika, Adv.
                     versus
GOVINDER SINGH DAHIYA &ANR.                          ..... Respondents
                            Through: Mr. Ajay Dahiya, Adv. for R-1.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE VALMIKI J.MEHTA
  To be referred to the Reporter or not?
 VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J (ORAL)
1.            The challenge by means of this Regular First Appeal (RFA)
filed under Section 96 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (CPC) is to the
impugned judgment of the Trial Court dated 15.1.2010 dismissing the suit
filed by the appellant/plaintiff/sister for declaration, possession and
injunction with respect to the property of the father, late Sh. Bhagwan
Singh.
2.            The appellant/plaintiff in the plaint pleaded that she was the
daughter of late Sh. Bhagwan Singh and was entitled to one-fourth share in
the suit property bearing no. 6301/1A(2), Kamla Nagar, Delhi.               The
RFA No.465/2010                                                 Page 1 of 16

appellant/plaintiff/sister also prayed for possession of the suit property to
the extent of her one-fourth share. Direction was also sought against the
defendant no.2/respondent no.2/Municipal Corporation of Delhi to mutate
one-fourth share of the property in the name of the appellant/plaintiff, and
injunction was prayed for restraining the respondent no.1/defendant no.1
from transferring etc the suit property. The appellant/plaintiff claimed that
the father-Bhagwan Singh died on 25.11.1987 leaving behind, besides the
appellant/plaintiff-the daughter and the defendant no.1-son, two other
daughters namely, Smt. Daya and Smt. Kamla. It was pleaded in the plaint
that in 1987, in around the time of death of her father the respondent
no.1/defendant no.1 told her of a Will executed in his name by the father.
It is pleaded that till 2006, i.e. for 19 years, the appellant/plaintiff took no
action because she only came to know in May, 2006 that the Will was a
manipulation done by the defendant no.1/respondent no.1.                     The
appellant/plaintiff claimed to have sent the legal notice dated 3.5.2006 and
thereafter in the absence of response filed the subject suit.
3.            The respondent no.1/defendant no.1contested the suit on two
basic grounds. The first was that the suit was barred by limitation and the
second was that the respondent no.1/defendant no.1 became the owner of
the suit property by virtue of a registered Will dated 20.9.1986 executed by
RFA No.465/2010                                                  Page 2 of 16

the father, and which was registered with the sub-Registrar at Sonepat,
Haryana on 29.9.1986.
4.            After completion of pleadings, the Trial Court framed the
following issues:
          “1.   Whether the suit has not been valued for the purpose of court fees
                and pecuniary jurisdiction? (OPD)
          2.    Whether the suit is barred by limitation? (OPD)
          3.    Whether the Will dated 29.9.1986 of late Sh. Bhagwan Dass is
                genuine as per the pleadings in the Written Statement? If yes, its
                effect upon the relief for declaration sought for by the plaintiff in
                the plaint? (OP Parties)
          4.    Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of possession as
                asked for in the plaint? (OPP)
          5.    Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of permanent and
                mandatory injunction as asked for in the plaint? (OPP)
          6.    Relief.”
5.            The Trial Court held the suit to be within limitation, however,
dismissed the suit by holding that the father-late Sh. Bhagwan Singh had
executed a Will dated 29.9.1986, Ex.PW2/1, bequeathing the suit property
in favour of the respondent no.1/defendant no1. The reasoning of the Trial
Court to uphold the Will dated 29.9.1986 is on the basis of following
observations:-
              “I have given my careful consideration to the aspects raised before
              me. Firstly the Will in dispute dated 29.9.1986 which is Ex.PW2/1
              is a registered document and proved by PW2 is admissible in
              evidence. Secondly it is not disputed that late Sh. Bhagwan Singh
              who had executed the Will, was highly qualified having studied in
RFA No.465/2010                                                         Page 3 of 16

            London and was a retired Class-I Gazetted Officer from the Indian
            Railway Services. Thirdly it has been duly proved by the
            defendant that both the attesting witnesses namely Mahender Singh
            S/o Late Sh. Swaroop Singh and Sh. Sukhbir Singh S/o Late Sh.
            Kali Ram have expired whose death certificate are Ex.DW3/A &
            Ex.DW3/B have been duly proved by the witness from the Sub
            Registrar Office (Death & Birth) Sonepat, Haryana. Both the said
            witnesses were from the same village as that of the testator, the
            witness Mahender Singh being the close relative of the deceased
            testator being the first cousin. Fourthly the plaintiff has not denied
            the signatures of her father on the Will rather she has admitted the
            same. The relevant portion of her cross-examination is as under:
                             “...... It is correct that in the written
                             statement as well as in my previous
                             affidavit/ evidence I have not denied the
                             signatures of my father on the Will exhibit
                             PW­2/1....”
            This being so, the signatures of the testator have been duly
            admitted by both the parties. Fifthly it has been pleaded by the
            plaintiff in the plaint that at the time of execution of the Will her
            father was not in a proper state of mind and could not distinguish
            between right and wrong and it is probable that the defendant no.1
            took the signatures of Bhagwan Singh with malafide intention. She
            has not produced any evidence on record to substantiate the
            aforesaid allegations rather in her cross-examination she has
            deposed that she had never stated/ pleaded that her father was not
            in sound mental health at the time of execution of the Will. The
            relevant portion of his cross-examination is as under:
                             “...... I have not stated/ pleaded that my
                             father was not in sound mental health at
                             the time of the execution of the Will......”
            This being so the probability of the defendant no. 1 having induced
            his father seems remote. Sixthly it is alleged by the plaintiff that
            her father was highly educated having studied in London and could
            not have written the Will in Hindi and that too without mentioning
            the details of the various properties. In this regard, it is an admitted
            case that the testator was a Class-I, Gazetted Officer and was
            working in Indian Railways. The plaintiff has admitted that her
            mother had studied till class 5th and his father used to normally
RFA No.465/2010                                                          Page 4 of 16

            converse in Hindi to her. She has also deposed that her father knew
            both Hindi and English as well. The relevant portion of his
            cross-examination is reproduced as under:
                            “...... My mother had studied till fifth
                            standard. My father used to normally
                            converse in Hindi. My father knew Hindi
                            language. He knew both Hindi and English
                            languages well......”
            This being so, the apprehension of the plaintiff that her father
            would not have written the Will in Hindi and the Will could not
            have been written by some other person, does not hold any merit,
            more so the plaintiff has failed to lead any evidence in this regard.
            Seventhly it had also been stated that the signatures of the attesting
            witnesses had not been proved. As observed herein above the
            factum of death of both the attesting witness has been duly proved.
            Both the attesting witnesses belong to the same village and
            Mahender Singh was a close relative to the testator being his
            cousin and his signatures have been duly identified by DW1.
            However, in so far as DW2 is concerned she has identified the
            signatures of Mahender Singh only on the basis of what has been
            written on the Will whereas she has never seen him writing and
            signing. Therefore, her testimony in so far as the identification of
            Mahender Singh cannot be taken as authentic in view of the fact
            that there is no dispute in so far as the signatures of the testator are
            concerned. The apprehensions of the plaintiff that the Will
            might be bearing the signatures and thumb impression of some
            other person, or that some other person might have been presented
            before the Sub Registrar before, is unfounded since the only
            evidence on record is the oral testimony of PW1 which does not
            find any corroboration or support from any other independent/
            circumstantial evidence. Eighthly it is also alleged by the plaintiff
            that the property in question has been purchased from the common
            funds of his father and his three brothers and he did not have right
            to execute the said Will. The same also does not seem to be very
            convincing since she has not examined any of the brothers of late
            Sh. Bhagwan Singh to prove and substantiate the aforesaid
            allegations nor any other close relative has been examined. Lastly
            it is argued that the Will in question has not been got probated by
            the defendant no.1 and therefore, no mutation could have been
            effected. The legal position in this regard is very clear. The
RFA No.465/2010                                                         Page 5 of 16

             provisions of Section 213 of the Indian Succession Act requiring
             probate do not apply to the Wills made outside Bengal and the
             local limits of the ordinary jurisdiction of the High Courts of
             Madras and Bombay except where such Wills relate to property
             situated in the territories of Bengal or within the aforesaid local
             limits. This view has also been reiterated in the case of Murlidhar
             Dua & Ors. Vs. Shashi Mohan reported in 68 (1997) DLT 284
             and Santosh Kakkar vs. Ram Prasad & Ors. reported in 71
             (1998) DLT 147. The Will in the present case dated 29.9.1986 was
             executed at Sonepat Haryana and therefore, the defendant no.1
             does not require any probate in respect of the same.
             ..…             …..            …..
                             Therefore, in view of my aforesaid discussion, I
             hereby hold that the Will of late Sh. Bhagwan Singh dated
             29.9.1986 is a genuine document and the plaintiff who is the
             daughter of the testator would not be entitled to any share in
             property bearing no. 6301/1A at Kamla Nagar as shown in the red
             colour in the site plan. Issue is decided against the plaintiff and in
             favour of the defendant no.1.”
6.           Learned counsel for the appellant/plaintiff argued the same
aspects which were also argued before and dealt with by the Trial Court. It
is argued that the father was an educated person who had studied in
London, and had worked at a senior position in the Railways, and therefore,
the Will which is prepared in Hindi is an unnatural document and hence a
fabricated document. It is also argued that the Will is a fabrication because
it does not contain names of the daughters of the deceased. It is also
argued that the Will wrongly refers to the defendant no.1/respondent no.1
as an Advocate. It is argued that the Will therefore propounded by the
defendant no.1/respondent no.1, Ex.PW2/1, is not a genuine document and
RFA No.465/2010                                                        Page 6 of 16

the impugned judgment be set aside.
7.            In my opinion, the arguments urged on behalf of the
appellant/plaintiff have no merits and the appeal therefore is bound to fail.
Before I advert to the aspect of validity of the Will, let me turn to the issue
of limitation, inasmuch as, I am of the opinion that the Trial Court has
fallen into a grave and clear error in holding the suit to be within limitation.
I agree with the arguments urged on behalf of the respondent
no.1/defendant no.1 that the suit was time-barred and this argument can be
raised as per Order 41 Rule 22 CPC without filing any necessary
objections/appeal.
8.            In my opinion, the suit which was filed on 2.11.2006 seeking
rights in the suit property for declaration and injunction was clearly barred
by time inasmuch as form of the suit cannot conceal the real nature of the
suit, and which was really a suit for partition and possession of the property
which belonged to the father. A suit for possession of an immovable
property is covered by Article 65 of the Limitation Act, 1963 and as per
which, the suit for recovery of an immovable property has to be filed
within 12 years of the date the possession of the property becomes adverse
to that of the appellant/plaintiff. In the present case, the suit was ex facie
barred by limitation, and in fact need not even have gone for trial inasmuch
RFA No.465/2010                                                 Page 7 of 16

as the appellant/plaintiff in the plaint itself admits that the respondent
no1/defendant no.1 immediately after the death of the father, Sh. Bhagwan
Singh in the year 1987 proclaimed himself to be the owner of the suit
property on the basis of a Will.               This admission is made by the
appellant/plaintiff in para 4 of the plaint which reads as under:-
             “4.     That after the death of the father of the plaintiff, the
             plaintiff was told by the defendant no.1 that their late father had
             made a „WILL‟ of the above said properties in the name of the
             defendant no.1. The plaintiff believing the words of the defendant
             no.1 did not ask for the “WILL” left behind or any share in the
             properties of their late father, assuming that th3e defendant no.1
             will take probate or letter of administration regarding the
             properties and then the plaintiff will file her objections.”
9.           The aforesaid para 4 of the plaint shows that in and around the
year 1987 itself the appellant/plaintiff was put to notice of the ownership of
the defendant no.1/respondent no.1. The fact that ownership was claimed
on the basis of the Will, is the reason for claiming the ownership, however,
the claim of ownership, i.e. a claim adverse to the appellant/plaintiff was
thus known to the appellant/plaintiff in the year 1987 itself.             A suit for an
immovable property thus ought to have been filed within 12 years of 1987
i.e. at the very maximum by the year 1999, however, the subject suit
admittedly was filed only on 2.11.2006, i.e. after 19 years. No doubt
remains of the appellant/plaintiff being aware of the claim of ownership of
the suit property inasmuch as there are depositions in the affidavits by way
RFA No.465/2010                                                          Page 8 of 16

of evidence filed on behalf of the defendant no.1/respondent no.1 as DW1
and sister of the parties, Smt. Kamla Chaudhary as DW2 which state that
all the legal heirs of late Sh. Bhagwan Singh, including the
appellant/plaintiff were made aware of the execution of the registered Will
of the father. The relevant depositions which have been made in this
regard are in para 4 of the affidavit by way of evidence filed by the
defendant no.1/respondent no.1 and para 4 of the affidavit by way of
evidence of Smt. Kamla Chaudhary. Para 4 of the deposition of Smt.
Kamla Chaudhary reads as under:
             “4. That all the legal heirs (including the plaintiff) were aware of
             the execution of the registered will of my father due to which we
             all three sisters never claimed any share in the properties after the
             death of my father. After the death of my father, my brother
             (defendant no.1) is in continuous, peaceful and exclusive
             possession of the suit property. The will in question is the genuine
             will of my father.”
10.          There is not even a single question which is put in the cross-
examinations of either DW1 or DW2 that the appellant/plaintiff was not
aware of the claim of ownership of the defendant no.1/respondent no.1
immediately after death of the father.            In fact, the sister-Smt. Kamla
Chaudhary deposed that all the three sisters did not claim any share in the
property after the death of the father inasmuch as all the sisters, including
the appellant/plaintiff, were aware of the registered Will executed by the
father. Not only the fact that the appellant/plaintiff was aware right from
RFA No.465/2010                                                        Page 9 of 16

the year 1987 of the claim of ownership of the defendant no.1/respondent
no.1 on the basis of the Will, Ex.PW2/1, the defendant no.1/respondent
no.1 had acted pursuant thereto and got the property mutated in the
property tax records in his name. This mutation in the property tax records
took place right in the year 1989 or so, and therefore there was
proclamation to the world at large that the defendant no.1/respondent no.1
was claiming exclusive rights in the suit property. I also note that none of
the other two sisters have supported the appellant/plaintiff. In my opinion,
therefore the suit was clearly barred by limitation as it was filed more than
12 years after the claim of ownership was made by the respondent
no.1/defendant no.1 of the suit property. After the expiry of the period of
limitation, the respondent no.1/defendant no.1 became complete owner of
the property by virtue of law of prescription contained in Section 27 of the
Limitation Act, 1963. I therefore hold that the Trial Court was totally
unjustified in holding the suit to be within limitation merely because the
appellant/plaintiff claimed to have derived knowledge of fabrication of the
Will in the year 2006. Obviously, this self-serving statement in the plaint
of knowing of the fabrication of the Will in May, 2006 had no force
because para 4 of the plaint itself talks of the appellant/plaintiff becoming
aware of the Will soon after the death of the father. A mere self-serving
RFA No.465/2010                                                Page 10 of 16

averment of the appellant/plaintiff waiting for a probate to be filed, cannot
arrest the period of limitation, inasmuch as, as per Section 9 of the
Limitation Act, 1963 when once time has begun to run, no subsequent
disability or inability in view of the suit stops him.
11.           At this stage, I may also state that the suit was also barred
because no declaration can be claimed when a person can ask for further
and proper relief, but fails to do so.       Though the appellant/plaintiff has
pleaded causes of action of declaration and injunction, really, the suit is one
for   partition   and    possession    of    the  disputed  property.       The
appellant/plaintiff therefore could not file the suit for declaration and
injunction, and which suit was barred by Section 34 of the Specific Relief
Act, 1963 read with Section 41(e) thereof. Not only the further reliefs of
partition and possession were to be claimed as per Section 34, but the
alternative and efficacious remedy was of partition and possession, making
the suit filed as not maintainable in view of Section 41(e) of the Specific
Relief Act, 1963. Further, the appellant/plaintiff was out of possession and
which is why the relief of possession has been asked for. Once ouster has
been established, and which has clearly been established in the facts of the
present case on account of the issue of limitation being decided against the
appellant/plaintiff, the subject suit, without specifically paying Court fees
RFA No.465/2010                                                Page 11 of 16

with respect to the share of the appellant/plaintiff, was also barred.
Therefore, in addition to the suit being barred by limitation, the suit was
also barred by virtue of the provisions of Sections 34 and 41(e) of the
Specific Relief Act, 1963 and also on account of not being properly valued
for the purposes of Court fees and jurisdiction and not paying Court fees on
the relief of possession.
12.           The next issue is as to whether the deceased Bhagwan Singh
left behind the Will, Ex.PW2/1. I must, immediately at this stage itself,
state that even assuming that there was no valid Will, Ex.PW2/1, even then
the suit was bound to be dismissed as also the present appeal, inasmuch as,
I have held that the suit was barred by limitation, i.e. even assuming there
was proved that there was no valid Will, Ex.PW2/1, the suit for possession
as filed by the appellant/plaintiff claiming her share in the suit property was
bound to be dismissed.
13.           In my opinion, there is nothing illegal or unnatural about the
Will, Ex.PW2/1.         The Trial Court has already noted that the
appellant/plaintiff does not dispute that the signatures on the Will were of
the father. The appellant/plaintiff also did not dispute that no pleadings
were made with respect to the unsoundness of the mind of late Sh.
Bhagwan Singh. The relevant admissions in this regard are contained in
RFA No.465/2010                                                 Page 12 of 16

following portion of the cross-examination of the appellant/plaintiff:-
             “It is correct that in the written statement as well as in my previous
             affidavit/evidence I have not denied the signatures of my father on
             the Will exhibit PW-2/1, I have also not stated/pleaded that my
             father was not in sound mental health at the time of the execution
             of the Will.”
14.          Therefore, the Trial Court was fully justified in holding that
the deceased Bhagwan Singh was in sound state of mind and the disputed
Will bore the signatures of late Bhagwan Singh. It is also relevant to note
that there is no cross-examination by the appellant/plaintiff that the Will
was not properly attested. The Will has been exhibited, and no objection
was raised at the time of exhibition of the Will, possibly because the
appellant/plaintiff had admitted the signatures of the father on the Will.
15.          At the first blush, it appeared out of place as to why the father,
who was highly educated and held a senior position in the Railways, would
make a Will in Hindi. However, the answer is not far to seek. The
deceased father-Bhagwan Singh, at the time when the Will was made, was
living at Sonepat in Haryana along with the defendant no.1/respondent
no.1. In Sonepat, Haryana the local language prevalent is Hindi. I must
also take judicial notice of the fact that pleadings in Courts in Haryana are
contained in Hindi language, and the usual language with respect to legal
documents including Wills which are executed at Sonepat, Haryana is
Hindi.   The deceased therefore living at Sonepat would only have an
RFA No.465/2010                                                          Page 13 of 16

assistance of a deed writer who would have made the Will in Hindi and
therefore, there is nothing strange that the Will was made in Hindi. After
all, it is not the case of the appellant/plaintiff that the deceased father did
not know Hindi. In fact the father used to converse with his wife (mother
of parties) in Hindi as she was educated only upto Class IV. I therefore
hold that there is nothing unnatural in the Will having been drafted in
Hindi.
16.            So   far   as  the  objection     raised   on   behalf   of    the
appellant/plaintiff that the Will does not contain the name of the daughters,
all I can say is that obviously a Will is preferable when details are given,
however, lack of the names of the daughters in the Will cannot, in any
manner, whittle down the validity of the Will in the facts of the present
case, where none of the other sisters have claimed any rights in the suit
property and in fact, one of the sisters has deposed in support of the
respondent no.1/defendant no.1.        The fact that after the name of the
respondent no.1/defendant no.1 in the Will, the word Advocate has been
written, obviously, the same is a mistake by the typist or the draftsman of
the Will, however too much emphasis cannot be laid on this minor typing
mistake in the Will so as to invalidate the claim of the respondent
no.1/defendant no.1 on the basis of this Will, Ex.PW2/1.
RFA No.465/2010                                                  Page 14 of 16

17.           I may also note that the admitted fact, which has come on
record, is that the deceased father, Sh. Bhagwan Singh at the time when the
Will was executed, was living with the respondent no.1/defendant no.1 at
Sonepat, Haryana. The Will also mentions the fact of the respondent
no.1/defendant no.1/son taking care of all the needs of the father. The Will
also notes that all the sisters have been married off and are settled in their
homes. These facts in my opinion show that there is nothing unnatural
about the Will, Ex.PW2/1 by which the suit property was bequeathed to the
son/defendant no.1 who was living with and taking care of the father.
18.           A civil case is decided on balance of probabilities.          The
balance of probabilities clearly show that the suit was ex facie barred by the
limitation and the respondent no.1/defendant no.1 was the owner of the suit
property by virtue of the provisions of Section 27 of the Limitation Act,
1963 read with Article 65 thereof. Even the Will relied upon was a validly
executed Will and no challenge was laid to it for about 19 years after the
death of the father. As already stated above, none of the other sisters have
supported the appellant/plaintiff, and in fact one of the sisters, Smt. Kamla
Chaudhary has deposed in favour of the respondent no1/defendant no.1.
Obviously, the suit was nothing but an endeavour to harass and unsettle the
defendant no.1/respondent no.1 after 19 years of the death of the father, and
RFA No.465/2010                                                 Page 15 of 16

during which period he had acted as an owner of the suit property.
19.           The Supreme Court in the recent judgment in the case of
Ramrameshwari Devi and Others v. Nirmala Devi and Others (2011) 8
SCC 249, has held that in certain dishonest litigations, actual costs must be
imposed. The Supreme Court has held that unless actual costs are imposed
a dishonest litigant will take unnecessary benefit of the false litigation. In
this case, I take into account the state of mind of the respondent
no.1/defendant no.1, who suddenly after 19 years of the death of the father,
late Sh. Bhagwan Singh, and surely 19 years is a very long period of time,
was faced with the suit claiming rights in the suit property. The respondent
no.1/defendant no.1 has also incurred costs of litigation. Accordingly, I
deem it fit that the appeal should be dismissed with costs of `25,000/-.
20.           In view of the above, there is no merit in the appeal, and
which is therefore dismissed with the aforesaid costs. Costs be paid within
a period of 2 months from today. Trial Court record be sent back.
                                              VALMIKI J. MEHTA, J
FEBRUARY 28, 2012
ak
RFA No.465/2010                                                Page 16 of 16


