        *      IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
%                                     Date of Decision: 06.08.2013
+       W.P.(C) 7856/2012 and CM No.19738/2012
        PRIYANKA GUPTA                                  ..... Petitioner
                          Through:Mr.K.K.Jha, Advocate
                          versus
        UNION OF INDIA & OTHERS                         ..... Respondents
                          Through:Mr.Roshan Lal Goel, Advocate for R.1
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.K.JAIN
                          JUDGMENT
V.K.JAIN, J. (ORAL)
        The petitioner before this Court passed out her 10+2 from West Bengal
Council of Higher Education with second division. In the aforesaid examination,
she obtained 35 marks out of 100 marks in chemistry. A perusal of her mark sheet
would show that she had opted for two language subjects (English B and Hindi A),
3 Compulsory Elective (Biology, Mathematics and Physics) and one Optional
Elective i.e Chemistry. She obtained 35 out of 100 marks in theory and 38 out of
100 marks in practical in Chemistry. She was declared passed in second division.
The mark sheet also shows the following requirement with respect to the pass
marks:-
W.P.(C)7856/2012                                                       Page 1 of 7

               “Clause 2(b)
               In Laboratory-based subjects of 200 marks other than Music, Fine
               Arts & Crafts, Computer Science (Revised Syllabus) and Modern
               Computer Applications pass mark is 48 in theoretical paper and 12 in
               practical paper. In Music and Fine Arts & Crafts pass mark is 27
               (out of 90) in theoretical paper and 33 (out of 110) in practical paper.
               In Computer Science (Revised Syllabus) and Modern Computer
               Applications pass mark is 42 (out of 140) in theoretical paper and 18
               (out of 60) in practical paper.”
               It would, thus, be seen that every candidate was required to obtain
        atleast 48 marks in theory paper of Chemistry which admittedly is an
        laboratory based subject. The mark sheet issued to the petitioner by Bengal
        Council of Higher Education therefore means that she had passed in the
        language subjects as well as Compulsory Elective but not in Chemistry,
        which is the optional elective, she having obtained 35 marks in the theory as
        against requirement of a minimum 48 marks.
        2.     The petitioner before this Court appeared in the entrance examination
        of MBBS examination in B.P.Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Nepal in
        October 2006 and completed her MBBS course from the said Institute in the
        year 2011. After passing out her MBBS examination from B.P.Koirala
        Institute of Health Sciences, Nepal, the petitioner applied to the respondent
W.P.(C)7856/2012                                                               Page 2 of 7

        Medical Council of India for issuance of eligibility certificate which permits
        a person to appear in the screening test to be conducted for being registered
        as the medical practitioner. The application of the petitioner, however, was
        rejected by the Medical Council of India on the following grounds:-
               “       On scrutiny of mark-sheet it is noted that you have failed in
               the subject of Chemistry theory at 12th class.
                       As per regulations of the Council, the candidate has to pass
               separately each subject of Physics, Chemistry, Biology & English for
               admission to MBBS course.
                       Accordingly, your request for grant of Eligibility Certificate is
               regretted and your application is rejected.”
        3.     Being aggrieved from the refusal to grant eligibility certificate
        required under Section 13(4B) of the Indian Medical Council Act 1956, the
        petitioner is before this Court by way of this writ petition seeking declaration
        of the said impugned letter to be violative of her fundamental rights under
        Article 14, 19(1)(g) and 21 of the Constitution and a direction to MCI to
        permit her to appear in the Screening Test.
        4.     Section 13(4)(b) of Indian Medical Council Act 1956 reads as under:-
               “A person who is a citizen of India shall not, after such date as may
               be specified by the Central Government under sub-section (3), be
               eligible to get admission to obtain medical qualification granted by
               any medical institution in any foreign country without obtaining an
W.P.(C)7856/2012                                                                Page 3 of 7

               eligibility certificate issued to him by the Council and in case any
               such person obtains such qualification without obtaining such
               eligibility certificate, he shall not be eligible to appear in the
               screening test referred to in sub-section (4A)”
        5.     Admittedly, B.P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Nepal is a
        medical institution in Nepal and, therefore, without obtaining eligibility
        certificate from Medical Council of India, the petitioner cannot appear in the
        Screening Test.          Though the persons who had acquired medical
        qualifications from Foreign Medical Institutes or had obtained admission in
        Foreign Medical Institutions before commencement of the Indian
        Medical(Amendment) Act, 2001 are not required to obtain eligibility
        certificate and are only required to qualify the Screening Test prescribed for
        enrolment on any State Medical Register or for entering his name in the
        Indian Medical Register, admittedly, the petitioner took admission and got
        MBBS degree only after the aforesaid amendment Act had already come
        into force. Therefore, eligibility certificate was a pre-requisite condition for
        the petitioner to appear in the Screening Test.
        6.     The learned counsel for the Medical Council of India has drawn my
        attention to Eligibility Certificate Regulations 2002 framed by Medical
        Council of India under Section 33 of the Indian Medical Council Act and
        Clause 2(f) of the said Regulation provides that `qualifying examination’
W.P.(C)7856/2012                                                            Page 4 of 7

        means the examination to be qualified to become eligible for admission to
        MBBS course in India, as prescribed in the Graduate Medical Education
        Regulations 1997. Similarly, the Screening Test Regulations 2002 which
        also have been framed by Medical Council of India, in exercise of the
        powers conferred by Section 33 of Indian Medical Council of India, also
        gives the same meaning to the expression `qualifying examination.’
        Therefore, before a person can seek eligibility certificate or appear in the
        Screening Test, he must have passed out qualifying examination, as
        prescribed for the Graduate Medical Education 1997.
        7.     Regulation 4 contained in Chapter II of the Medical Council of India
        Regulations on Graduate Medical Education, 1997, to the extent it is
        relevant reads as under:-
               “The higher secondary examination or the Indian School Certificate
               Examination which is equivalent to 10+2 High Secondary
               Examination after a period of 12 years study, the last two years of
               study comprising of physics, Chemistry, Biology and Mathematics or
               any other elective subjects with English at a level not less than the
               core course for English as prescribed by the National Council for
               Educational Research and Training after the introduction of the
               10+2+3 years educational structure as recommended by the National
               Committee on education.”
W.P.(C)7856/2012                                                             Page 5 of 7

               It would, thus, be seen that in order to be admitted to a medical course,
        a person is necessarily required to pass out Higher Secondary Examination
        or Indian School Certificate Examination equivalent to 10+2, Higher
        Secondary Examination with Chemistry, Physics                 and Biology as
        compulsory subjects and either mathematics or any other elective subjects
        along with English, in the said examination. If a person has not opted for
        physics, chemistry or biology, he is not eligible to be admitted to a Medical
        course. Consequently, the petitioner ought to have passed out chemistry,
        biology and physics besides passing out mathematics or any other elective
        subject and English at a level not less than the core course for English.
        Since, as per the Rules of West Bengal Council of Higher Education, it was
        necessary for the petitioner to have obtained at least 48 marks in theory in
        chemistry subjects, she did not pass out in the said subject though she did
        pass out in the remaining five subjects. The petitioner having not passed out
        chemistry, her marks in theory being less than 48, she is not eligible for
        admission to MBBS course in terms of Regulation 4(2)(a) contained in
        Chapter II of the Medical Council of India Regulations on Graduate Medical
        Education 1997.      Since the qualifying examination for the purpose of
        eligibility as well as the Screening Test are the same as for the purpose of
W.P.(C)7856/2012                                                           Page 6 of 7

        admission to MBBS, the petitioner is not eligible either for issue of an
        eligibility certificate or to sit in the Screening Test.
        8.     Learned counsel for the petitioner states that the admission test for the
        purpose of admission to B.P. Koirala Institute of Health Sciences, Nepal was
        also conducted by MCI and the eligibility of the petitioner ought to have
        been checked at that time. This, however, is strongly disputed by the learned
        counsel for the respondent MCI.
               However, I find no specific averment in the writ petition to this effect
        and even otherwise there is no material on record to show that the aforesaid
        examination was conducted by MCI.
        9.     For the reasons stated hereinabove, I find no merit in the petition and
        the same is accordingly dismissed. The original mark sheets, which the
        petitioner had filed in the Court be returned to him, under acknowledgement,
        after retaining its photocopies from both sides, on record.
                                                                 V.K. JAIN, J
        AUGUST 06, 2013/ks
W.P.(C)7856/2012                                                            Page 7 of 7


