*IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+ Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406, 3093, 3094, 3095, 3096, 3097, 3098,
  3099, 3100, 3101, 3102, 3103, 3104, 3105, 3106, 3107,
 3108, 3109, 3110, 3111, 3112, 3113, 3114, 3115, 3116 &
                               3117 of 2009
                           Reserved on      : 26th November, 2009
%                          Date of Decision: 10th December, 2009
#      NITIN KUMAR & OTHERS                       ..... Petitioners
!                                  Through: Mr. Mohit Mudgil, Adv.
                           Versus
       NCT OF DELHI THROUGH ITS STANDING COUNSEL &
       ANR.                                        ..... Respondents
                                  Through: Mr. O.P. Saxena, APP.
                                          Mr. Jayant Sud, Adv. for R-2.
*      CORAM:
        HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.K. JAIN
       1.     Whether the Reporters of local papers
              may be allowed to see the judgment?               Yes
       2.     To be referred to the Reporter or not?            Yes
       3.     Whether the judgment should be
              reported in the Digest?                           Yes
: V.K. JAIN, J.
1.     These are petitions under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure seeking quashing of the complaint case filed
by respondent No.2 against the petitioner under Section 138 of
Negotiable Instruments Act. The complaints were filed against a
company Tip Info Centre Pvt. Ltd. & Others, including the
petitioner.      It has been alleged in the petitions that the
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                           Page 1 of 16

petitioner is neither a Signatory to the cheque in question nor
had he handed over to the complainant.             It has been further
alleged that the petitioner had resigned as a Director of this
company on 10th August, 2007, much prior to the issue of cheque
in question.
2.     A perusal of the complaint would show that accused No.1 is
a private limited company. Accused No.4 Nitin Kumar was
alleged to be a Director and share holder of accused No.1. It
has been further alleged in the complaint that the accused,
towards payment of legally recoverable debt, issued the cheque
in question to the complainant, which, when presented, was
dishonored. It has been generally alleged in the complaint that
“the accused has been actively involved in the affairs of accused
No.1 and is a necessary party to the offence.”
3.     It is an admitted case that cheque in question has not been
signed by the petitioner.         It is also an admitted case that the
petitioner is not the Managing Director of accused No.1 Tip Info
Centre Pvt. Ltd.         Though the petitioner claims that he had
resigned as a Director of the company with effect from 10th
August, 2007 and his resignation was also accepted by the Board
of Director in its meeting held on the very same day, certified
copy of form 32 has not been filed by the petitioner. Therefore,
for the purpose of the present petition I proceed on the
assumption that the petitioner was a Director of accused No.1
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                       Page 2 of 16

Tip Info Centre Pvt. Ltd on the date offene under Section 138 of
Negotiable Instruments Act was committed by accused No.1.
4.     In the present case, there is no specific averment that the
petitioner was in-charge of and responsible to the company for
conduct of the business of the company.          There is no such
factual averment in the complaint as would indicate that the
petitioner was in-charge and responsible to the company for
conduct of its business. There is no allegation in the complaint
that the petitioner was in overall control of the day-today
business of the company nor are there any such factual
averment from which such a control can be inferred. There is no
such particular in the complaint, from which it may be inferred
that he was involved in day to day affairs of the company. There
is no allegation in the complaint that he was party to any
decision to issue cheque in question or to get it dishonoured.
Thus, the complaint contains no such particulars as would
enable the Court to draw an inference that he was a person in-
charge of and responsible to the company for conduct of its
business. Admittedly, the cheque in question was not signed by
the petitioner. Admittedly, he was not the Managing Director or
Joint Managing Director of the company at the time when
offence under section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act
was committed by the company.         There is no averment in the
complaint that the offence has been committed with the consent
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                   Page 3 of 16

or connivance of the petitioner or is attributable to any
negligence on his part. Therefore, the case cannot be brought
within the purview of sub-section 2 of section 142 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act.
5.     The learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has referred to
„N. Rangachari v. BSNL‟.             In the case before the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court, it was alleged in the complaint that accused
No.2 and 3 were Directors of the company and were Incharge of
and responsible to the company for conduct of its business. In
that case, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, noticing the above
referred allegations in the complaint, refused to interfere with
the decision of the High Court in declining to exercise its
jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
for quashing the complaint. However, in the present case, there
is no specific allegation that the petitioner was present Incharge
of and responsible to accused No.1 Tip Info Centre Pvt. Ltd for
conduct of its business at the time when the offence under
Section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act was committed by the
company. This judgment, therefore, is of no help to the
respondent.
6.     The learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has next referred
to a decision of this court in Sameer Karnani v. State 2009(1)
LRC 327(Delhi).        In that case, it was alleged in para 5 of the
complaint that the petitioner was a Director of accused No.1
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                     Page 4 of 16

company and was responsible for its day to day business and,
therefore, liable for the acts committed for and on behalf of the
company. The learned Single Judge of this Court noticing that
the complaint did not assign any role to the petitioner, indicate
that that he was engaged in the day to day affairs and
management of the company, allowed the petition filed by him
and quashed the proceedings initiated against him.               This
judgment is of no help to the respondent.
7.     The learned counsel for respondent No.2 has also referred
to the decision of this court in Crl. M.C. No.2700/2007 decided
on 22nd September, 2008. In that case, as regards accused Nos.
2-4, partners of accused No.1, it was specifically alleged that
they were responsible to run the business and day-to-day
financial and administrative activities of accused No.1. In these
circumstances, it was held that prima facie there was substantial
compliance with the provisions of section 141 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act.        However, in the present case, there is no
specific averment that the petitioner was running the day-to-day
business of accused No.1 and was responsible for its financial
and administrative activities.        A general allegation that the
accused has been actively involved in the affairs of accused
No.1, to my mind does not constitute necessary ingredient
envisaged under section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                    Page 5 of 16

8.     In S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Vs. Neeta Bhalla and
another (2005) 8 SCC 89 the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, inter alia,
held as under:-
           “19. In view of the above discussion, our
           answers to the questions posed in the reference
           are as under:
           (a) It is necessary to specifically aver in a
           complaint under Section 141 that at the time the
           offence was committed, the person accused was
           in charge of, and responsible for the conduct of
           business of the company. This averment is an
           essential requirement of Section 141 and has to
           be made in a complaint. Without this averment
           being made in a complaint, the requirements of
           Section 141 cannot be said to be satisfied.
           (b) The answer to the question posed in sub-para
           (b) has to be in the negative. Merely being a
           director of a company is not sufficient to make
           the person liable under Section 141 of the Act. A
           director in a company cannot be deemed to be in
           charge of and responsible to the company for the
           conduct of its business. The requirement of
           Section 141 is that the person sought to be made
           liable should be in charge of and responsible for
           the conduct of the business of the company at
           the relevant time. This has to be averred as a
           fact as there is no deemed liability of a director
           in such cases.”
9.    In     Sabitha     Ramamurthy    and   Another     vs.   R.B.S.
Channabasavaradhya (2006) 10 SCC 581, it was alleged in the
complaint that the accused being the company and all the
Directors are responsible for the clearance of liability under
section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. Holding that the
statutory requirement contained in section 141 of         Negotiable
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                     Page 6 of 16

Instruments Act had not been complied with, the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court observed that though it may not be necessary for
the complaint to specifically reproduce the wording of the
section, what is required is a clear statement of fact so as to
enable the court to arrive at a prima facie opinion that the
accused are vicariously held liable.     It was held that before a
person can be vicariously liable strict compliance with the
statutory requirement would be insisted in a case where the
court is required to issue summons which would put the accused
to some sort of harassment. It was held that in terms of section
200 of Cr.PC the complainant is bound to make statement on
oath as to how the offence has been committed and how the
accused persons are responsible therefor. It was observed that
in the event ultimately the prosecution is found to be frivolous or
otherwise malafide the court may direct registration of the case
against the complainant for malafide prosecution of the accused.
10.    In N.K. Wahi vs. Sekhar Singh & others (2007) 9 SCC 481,
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, inter alia,held as under:-
           “5. To launch a prosecution, therefore, against
           the alleged Directors there must be a specific
           allegation in the complaint as to the part played
           by them in the transaction. There should be
           clear and unambiguous allegation as to how the
           Directors are incharge and responsible for the
           conduct of the business of the company. The
           description should be clear. It is true that
           precise words from the provisions of the Act
           need not be reproduced and the court can
           always come to a conclusion in facts of each
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                    Page 7 of 16

           case. But still in the absence of any averment or
           specific evidence the net result would be that
           complaint would not be entertainable.”
       In the case before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court it was
alleged in the complaint that accused Nos. 2 to 12 were the
Directors/persons responsible for carrying out the business of
the company and the liability of the accused persons was joint
and several.        The order of the High Court, quashing the
complaint on such allegations was upheld by the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court.
11.    In K.K. Ahuja vs. V.K. Vora and Anr., 2009 (3) JCC (NI) 194,
the appellant before the Hon‟ble Court had impleaded 9 persons
as accused. They included, the company, its Chairman, four
Directors,     Vice-President      (Finance), General Manager     and
Deputy General Manager. It was alleged in the complaint that
"at the time of the commission of offence, accused 2 to 9 were
in-charge of and responsible for the conduct of day to day
business of accused No. 1" and therefore they were deemed to
be guilty of offence under Section 138 read with Section 141 of
the Act and Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code. The appellant
also alleged that “respondents 2 to 9 were directly and actively
involved in the financial dealings of the company” and that the
accused had failed to make payment of the cheques which were
dishonoured. In the pre- summoning evidence, the appellant
“reiterated that accused 2 to 9 were responsible for the conduct
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                    Page 8 of 16

of day to day business of first accused company at the time of
commission of offence”.
       The Hon‟ble Supreme Court after considering its earlier
decisions on the subject, inter alia, observed as under:
              “The prevailing trend appears to require
              the complainant to state how a Director
              who is sought to be made an accused, was
              in charge of the business of the company,
              as every director need not be and is not in
              charge of the business of the company. If
              that is the position in regard to a director,
              it is needless to emphasise that in the case
              of non-director officers, there is all the
              more the need to state what his part is
              with regard to conduct of business of the
              company and how and in what manner he
              is liable.
              The Hon‟ble Court further observed as under:
              “The scheme of the Act, therefore is, that a
              person who is responsible to the company
              for the conduct of the business of the
              company and who is in charge of business
              of the company is vicariously liable by
              reason      only     of his   fulfilling  the
              requirements of Sub-section (1). But if the
              person responsible to the company for the
              conduct of business of the company, was
              not in charge of the conduct of the
              business of the company, then he can be
              made liable only if the offence was
              committed with his consent or connivance
              or as a result of his negligence.
              11. The criminal liability for the offence by
              a company under Section 138, is fastened
              vicariously on the persons referred to in
              Sub-section (1) of Section 141 by virtue of
              a legal fiction. Penal statutes are to be
              construed strictly. Penal statutes providing
              constructive vicarious liability should be
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                       Page 9 of 16

              construed much more strictly. When
              conditions are prescribed for extending
              such constructive criminal liability to
              others, courts will insist upon strict literal
              compliance. There is no question of
              inferential      or     implied   compliance.
              Therefore, a specific averment complying
              with the requirements of Section 141 is
              imperative.”
12.    On the question as to who would be persons responsible to
the company for conduct of its business, the Hon‟ble Court inter
alia held as under:
              “A company though a legal entity can act
              only through its Board of Directors. The
              settled position is that a Managing
              Director is prima facie in charge of and
              responsible for the company's business and
              affairs and can be prosecuted for offences
              by the company. But insofar as other
              directors are concerned, they can be
              prosecuted only if they were in charge of
              and responsible for the conduct of the
              company's business. A combined reading
              of Sections 5 and 291 of Companies Act,
              1956 with the definitions in clauses (24),
              (26), (30), (31), (45) of Section 2 of that Act
              would show that the following persons are
              considered to be the persons who are
              responsible to the company for the conduct
              of the business of the company :
              (a) the managing director/s;
              (b) the whole-time director/s;
              (c) the manager;
              (d) the secretary;
              (e) any person in accordance with whose
              directions or instructions the Board of
              directors of the company is accustomed to
              act;
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                         Page 10 of 16

              (f) any person charged by the Board with
              the responsibility of complying with that
              provision (and who has given his consent
              in that behalf to the Board); and
              (g) where any company does not have any
              of the officers specified in clauses (a) to
              (c), any director or directors who may be
              specified by the Board in this behalf or
              where no director is so specified, all the
              directors.
              It follows that other employees of the
              company, cannot be said to be persons
              who are responsible to the company, for
              the conduct of the business of the
              company.
              15. Section 141 uses the words "was in
              charge of, and was responsible to the
              company for the conduct of the business of
              the company". It is evident that a person
              who can be made vicariously liable under
              Sub-section (1) of Section 141 is a person
              who is responsible to the company for the
              conduct of the business of the company
              and in addition is also in charge of the
              business of the company. There may be
              many directors and secretaries who are
              not in charge of the business of the
              company at all. The meaning of the words
              "person in charge of the business of the
              company" was considered by this Court in
              Girdhari Lal Gupta v. D.N. Mehta [1971 (3)
              SCC 189] followed in State of Karnataka v.
              Pratap Chand [1981 (2) SCC 335] and
              Katta Sujatha v. Fertiliser & Chemicals
              Travancore Ltd. [2002 (7)SCC655] . This
              Court held that the words refer to a person
              who is in overall control of the day to day
              business of the company. This Court
              pointed out that a person may be a director
              and thus belongs to the group of persons
              making the policy followed by the
              company, but yet may not be in charge of
              the business of the company; that a person
              may be a Manager who is in charge of the
              business but may not be in overall charge
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                     Page 11 of 16

              of the business; and that a person may be
              an officer who may be in charge of only
              some part of the business.
              16. Therefore, if a person does not meet
              the first requirement, that is being a
              person who is responsible to the company
              for the conduct of the business of the
              company, neither the question of his
              meeting the second requirement (being a
              person in charge of the business of the
              company), nor the question of such person
              being liable under Sub-section (1) of
              Section 141 does not arise. To put it
              differently, to be vicariously liable under
              Sub-section (1) of Section 141, a person
              should fulfill the 'legal requirement' of
              being a person in law (under the statute
              governing companies) responsible to the
              company for the conduct of the business of
              the company and also fulfill the 'factual
              requirement' of being a person in charge of
              the business of the company.”
13.    The legal position under Section 141 of Negotiable
Instruments Act was summarized as under:
              “(i) If the accused is the Managing Director
              or a Joint Managing Director, it is not
              necessary to make an averment in the
              complaint that he is in charge of, and is
              responsible to the company, for the
              conduct of the business of the company. It
              is sufficient if an averment is made that the
              accused was the Managing Director or
              Joint Managing Director at the relevant
              time. This is because the prefix `Managing'
              to the word `Director' makes it clear that
              they were in charge of and are responsible
              to the company, for the conduct of the
              business of the company.
              (ii) In the case of a director or an officer of
              the company who signed the cheque on
              behalf of the company, there is no need to
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                         Page 12 of 16

              make a specific averment that he was in
              charge of and was responsible to the
              company, for the conduct of the business
              of the company or make any specific
              allegation about consent, connivance or
              negligence. The very fact that the
              dishonoured cheque was signed by him on
              behalf of the company, would give rise to
              responsibility under Sub-section (2) of
              Section 141.
              (iii) In the case of a Director, Secretary or
              Manager (as defined in Section 2(24) of
              the Companies Act) or a person referred to
              in clauses (e) and (f) of Section 5 of
              Companies Act, an averment in the
              complaint that he was in charge of, and
              was responsible to the company, for the
              conduct of the business of the company is
              necessary to bring the case under Section
              141(1). No further averment would be
              necessary in the complaint, though some
              particulars will be desirable. They can also
              be made liable under Section 141(2) by
              making necessary averments relating to
              consent and connivance or negligence, in
              the complaint, to bring the matter under
              that Sub-section.
14.    It was contended by the learned counsel for the respondent
that since M/s Tip Info Centre Pvt. Ltd. Is a private limited
company with only two Directors and the meeting of the Board
of Directors cannot be held without at least two Directors
attending it, this case ought to be treated differently from the
case of a Director in a public limited company. In my view, since
section 141 of Negotiable Instruments Act does not make any
distinction between Director of a private limited company and
Director of a public limited company, it would not be permissible
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                       Page 13 of 16

for the court to draw such a distinction. It is not necessary that
if there are two Directors in a private limited company both of
them would, in every case, necessarily be the persons in-charge
and responsible to the company for conduct of its business. It is
quite possible that the affairs of a private limited company
having only two Directors, is managed only by one of them who
acts as its Managing Director and the other person despite
attending the meeting of the Board of Directors is not involved in
day-to-day affairs and business of the company.        To take an
example, a private limited company may have only two Directors
one of them being the husband and the other being the wife or
one of being the father and the other being the daughter. The
company may be managed only by the male Director and the
female despite being one of the two Directors of the company
may not be involved in its day-to-day affairs, she having been
made a Director only on account of her relationship with the
male     Director    who    controls the affairs of the  company.
Therefore, it cannot be said, as a general rule, that if there are
only two Directors in a private limited company both of them
would be persons in-charge of and responsible to the company
for conduct of the business of the company. As emphasized by
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court a penal statute attracting vicarious
criminal liability must be construed strictly and there must be
strict compliance with the statutory provisions before such a
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                   Page 14 of 16

liability can be fastened.        If merely attending Board Meetings
attracts criminal liability under Section 141 of Negotiable
Instruments Act, a large number of Directors even though not
involved in the day to day management of the company, and not
having any control on its affairs, may have to face harassment of
a criminal trial. This definitely could not have been the intention
behind enactment of Section 141 of Negotiable Instruments Act.
15.     In Smt.Bina Sharma vs. H.D.F.C.Bank Ltd. 2009 (4)
JCC(NI) 257, the petitioner was a Director in a private limited
Company M/s Vardan Agrotech Pvt. Ltd. The allegation against
her was that being Director of the company she was responsible
to the company for conduct of its business, and that being in-
charge of day-to-day affairs of the company, she along with other
Directors was jointly and severally liable for the acts and the
liabilities of the company. A learned single Judge of this Court
rejected the contention of the respondent that there is a
distinction between a public limited company and a private
limited company, so far as Directors are concerned.             It was
noted that in the matters of criminal liability under section 141
of Negotiable Instruments Act, no distinction can be made
between the Director of a public limited company and                the
Director of a private limited company and in case such a
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                      Page 15 of 16

distinction is made that would be reading something in the
statute which does not exist.
16.    For the reasons given in the preceding paragraphs, I hold
that no offence under section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act
is made out against the petitioner from the averments made in
the complaint.        The petitions are, therefore, allowed to the
extent that the order whereby the petitioner was summoned for
the commission of the offence under section 138 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act read with section 141 thereof, is
hereby set aside.          The learned Magistrate shall, however,
proceed with the complaint, to the extent it relates to other
accused persons.
                                                  (V.K.JAIN)
                                                    JUDGE
DECEMBER 10, 2009
AG/RS
Crl.M.C.Nos. 1406 & 3093-3117 of 2009                    Page 16 of 16


