    IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                           Judgment reserved on: May 27, 2019
                           Judgment delivered on: July 01, 2019
+   W.P.(C) 7163/2017
    DHARMENDER AGGARWAL
                                                                   ..... Petitioner
                           Through:   Mr. J.K. Bhola, Adv.
                    versus
    NORTH DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION AND
    ANR
                                                              ..... Respondents
                           Through: Mr. Rajan Sabharwal, Standing
                                      Counsel with Ms. Dipti Jain, Advs. for
                                      R1.
                                      Ms. Monika Arora, Mr. Kushal
                                      Kumar and Mr. Praveen Singh,
                                      Advs. for SDMC.
    CORAM:
    HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V. KAMESWAR RAO
                             JUDGMENT
  V. KAMESWAR RAO, J
  1.        The present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner
  challenging letter dated July 13, 2017 and order dated May 18,
  2017 passed by the respondent Nos.4 and 3 respectively. Vide
  the impugned letter / order, the petitioner was debarred as
  Engineer / Structural Engineer for a period of two years with
  effect from the date of issuance of the circular i.e July 10, 2017.
  2.        The case of the petitioner in the writ petition is that he
  was granted license by respondent No.2 South Delhi Municipal
  W.P.(C) No. 7163/2017                                         Page 1 of 8

Corporation as “Engineer” (License No. E-1943) and as
“Structural Engineer” (License No.SE/0138). The validity of
the licenses were uptil December 31, 2017. It is the case of the
petitioner that upon the issuance of the licenses in the year 2014,
his services have been impeccable.         There was no complaint
regarding the working/services provided by the petitioner under
the aforesaid licenses.      That there was a construction of
residential building at property bearing No.4085, Gali Mandir
Wali, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi for which he had applied for sanction
of building plans online through its President, who was the
authorized signatory. He had applied for sanction of building
plans as per the given rules and regulations, bylaws etc. There
was in existence a single storied structure at site at the time of
sanctioning of building plans. The authorized signatory of the
owner of the said property had certified that there is no
construction carried out after date of sanctioning of building
plans i.e. February 08, 2017.
3.        It is the case of the petitioner that the, authorized
representative filed an undertaking / affidavit stating that the
sanction of the building plans was for construction of building at
the given site and also to demolish the existing structure before
commencement of construction work.           It is his case that the
President has also given an undertaking in terms of the guidelines
issued by the respondents for intimation to them before starting
the construction. It is averred that after the plans were sanctioned
in the name of the owner on February 08, 2017, the engagement
of the petitioner was over / came to an end. It is his case that at
W.P.(C) No. 7163/2017                                       Page 2 of 8

the time when the plans were sanctioned, he had clearly informed
the owners in writing that the date of construction has to be
communicated to him, otherwise he would not be in a position to
carry out the services of supervision of construction in the
property, if being undertaken by him. After some time, petitioner
came to know that the respondents are contemplating to take
some action against him for violation of some conditions. Upon
enquiries, he came to know about a show cause notice being
issued to him (which was never served on him). The petitioner
with all his sincerity upon coming to know gave his reply on May
17, 2017 stating that it is the owner, who submitted an affidavit
vide online ID No. 10037937 for demolition of existing
construction before commencement of construction of work, in
other words, he never submitted any affidavit while applying
online. Unfortunately, there was no information from the owner
to the petitioner regarding the commencement of the construction
with regard to the said property till the time he submitted his
reply to the show cause notice or even till the filing of the
petition.     He clearly stated that he has never undertaken the
services of supervision of construction on the said property.
Despite reminders being given to the higher officials of the
respondents on June 28, 2017 and July 11, 2017, respectively, for
consideration of the reply submitted by the petitioner to the
alleged show cause notice, unfortunately without taking into
consideration the same, the impugned letter dated July 13, 2017
has been issued communicating thereof the decision to debar the
petitioner as “Engineer / Structural Engineer” for a period of
W.P.(C) No. 7163/2017                                    Page 3 of 8

two years. It is also stated by him that the order dated May 18,
2017 by which a decision was taken was never communicated to
him.
4.        A status report has been filed by the respondent No.1 /
Nr. DMC wherein it is stated that the impugned letter dated July
13, 2017 was issued to the petitioner for certain omission and
commissions while applying for the building plans of property
bearing No. 4085, Gali Mandir Wali, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi under
Saral Scheme vide I.D. No. 10037937.            It is the case of
respondent No.1 that the report of the Assistant Engineer (Plan)
Nr. DMC dated May 15, 2017 was received by the respondent
No.3 i.e Deputy Commissioner regarding submission of false
affidavit to the effect that the Building will be constructed after
demolishing the existing one but instead of demolishing the old
building, it was found the construction is not being raised as per
the BBL-2016 at site.        The petitioner being the registered
Architect and having obtained the sanctioned building plans
under Saral Scheme, it was his duty to supervise the construction
and ensure that the building is constructed as per BBL-2016 and
MPD-2021. The report dated May 15, 2017 was considered by
the Deputy Commissioner and vide order dated May 18, 2017,
the petitioner was debarred for a period of two years for
submission of proposal of sanctioned building plans as Architect
as well as Structural Engineer. The said recommendation was
sent to respondent No.2 SDMC for circulation of order of
debarment of the petitioner because the said task on behalf of all
the three Corporations was being dealt by SDMC.
W.P.(C) No. 7163/2017                                      Page 4 of 8

5.        A short affidavit has been filed by the SDMC also
through the Executive Engineer, Building Department, wherein it
is stated that SDMC is the Nodal agency for issuing circulars
pertaining to empanelment and de-panelment of approved
architects on behalf all the three Municipal Corporations of
Delhi. In the present case, SDMC has issued debarment circular
on the basis of order dated May 18, 2017 issued by the Deputy
Commissioner, Sadar Paharganj Zone.            It is averred that the
petitioner filed an application for sanction of building plans in
respect of property No. 4085, Gali Mandir Wali, Pahari Dhiraj,
Delhi. Suffice it would be to state that, the SDMC filed an
affidavit on similar lines as has been filed by Nr.DMC.
6.            Mr. Bhola, learned counsel for the petitioner had
submitted that the impugned action of the respondents against the
petitioner is, totally illegal as, according to him, the petitioner has
only applied under the Saral Scheme for sanction of building
plans. He had never submitted any undertaking / affidavit that
the existing structure shall be demolished before effecting the
construction as per the sanctioned building plans. He stated that
the petitioner had no clue about the owners undertaking the
construction activity, as they had not informed the petitioner
about the same. In other words, it is his submission, if any
construction was undertaken, that was by the owners without his
knowledge and surely, consequence thereof cannot be fastened on
him. He also stated that the petitioner had submitted reply to the
show cause notice on May 17, 2017 wherein he has clearly stated
that the owner started the construction without his knowledge.
W.P.(C) No. 7163/2017                                          Page 5 of 8

He has also stated that he has already withdrawn his supervision
pertaining to the said property. In other words, having withdrawn
himself from the supervision work, he cannot be held liable for
any violation of affidavit / undertaking and the regulations.
7.        On the other hand, Mr. Rajan Sabharwal, learned counsel
for the respondents has reiterated the stand taken by the
respondents in their respective status report / affidavit. He has
also produced the file wherein the impugned decision has been
taken.
8.        Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, there is
no dispute that the petitioner had applied for the approval of the
plans under the Saral Scheme with ID No. 10037937. During
submission of the plans, an undertaking and an affidavit were
submitted by the owner of the property in question i.e 4085, Gali
Mandir Wali, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi stating that the building shall
be constructed as per the building bylaws under the supervision
of structural engineer and he shall intimate about the construction
completion to the Municipal Corporation. It was also stated by
the owner in the affidavit that he shall demolish the old structure
before commencement of the construction work.
9.        The plea of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that,
pursuant to the sanction of the building plans, the owner had
informed the petitioner that as and when the construction is
started, he shall be intimated. Unfortunately, no intimation was
forthcoming and in fact, the owner started the construction in
violation of the undertaking / affidavit without demolishing the
old construction. This aspect was not in the knowledge of the
W.P.(C) No. 7163/2017                                      Page 6 of 8

petitioner and cannot be a ground to debar the petitioner, from
providing the services as “Engineer and Structural Engineer”.
10.       I am unable to agree with the said submission of the
learned counsel for the petitioner for the simple reason that the
petitioner was licensed as an “Engineer / Structural Engineer”.
There is no dispute that as a structural engineer, the petitioner
was to supervise the construction of the property in question. He
got the building plans sanctioned for the construction. If the
petitioner was informed by the owner that he shall inform him at
the time of construction of the property and was not informed, the
petitioner cannot absolve himself of the consequences thereof of
the building being constructed in violation of the sanctioned
building plans and contrary to the affidavit / undertaking given by
the owner. This I say so, the responsibility surely, was on the
petitioner to keep an eye on the property in question and to
ensure that there is no illegality committed by any person, even
the owner. If there was violation, he was required to inform the
authorities about the violation by the owner. He has not done
that. The reliance placed by the petitioner on the withdrawal
letter dated May 17, 2017, which reads as under, shall also not
help the case of the petitioner for the reason stated above. In fact,
the letter proves that he was to supervise the construction also.
      “That I Dharmender Aggarwal (E-1943) was
      appointed for the sanction of Building Plan and
      supervision of construction of the property bearing no.
      4085, Gali Mandir Wali, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi-110006.
      After sanction of building plan President of Digamber
      Jain Panchayat (Regd.) owner / Authorized Signatory
      of the above property, said that he will start the work
      after some time. But today I came to know that he
W.P.(C) No. 7163/2017                                       Page 7 of 8

      started the construction without my knowledge
      therefore, I stand withdrawn my supervision pertaining
      to property no. 4085, Gali Mandir Wali, Pahari
      Dhiraj, Delhi-110006.        After this I will not be
      responsible with any matter related to property no.
      4085, Gali Mandir Wali, Pahari Dhiraj, Delhi-110006.
        Thanking you in anticipation”
11.       So it follows, no “Structural Engineer” can put the blame
on the owner to escape the liability / consequences. A structural
engineer, who is licensed with the Corporation, has certain
obligation to ensure that the construction is being done as per the
sanctioned building plans and affidavit / undertaking, which the
petitioner, in the case in hand has failed to adhere to.
12.       In view of my above discussion, I am not convinced with
the stand taken by the petitioner in the petition and also during
the oral arguments. The petition is devoid of any merit and the
same is dismissed. No costs.
                                                 V. KAMESWAR RAO, J
JULY 01, 2019/jg
W.P.(C) No. 7163/2017                                       Page 8 of 8


