*        IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
                                            Date of decision: April 28, 2016
+        CS(OS) 2829/2015, IAs 19552/2015, 25210/2015
         MRS. SHARADA NAYAK                           ..... Plaintiff
                            Through:     Mr. Jayant K. Mehta, Adv. with
                                         Ms. Madhavi Khara and
                                         Mr. Saurabh Dev Karan Singh,
                                         Advs.
                            versus
         MR. V K SHUNGLU & ORS                                 ..... Defendants
                            Through:     Mr. Puneet Mittal, Adv. with
                                         Mr. Vasudha Bajaj, Adv. for D-1.
                                         Mr. Bhuvan Gugnoni, Adv. for D-
                                         2.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE V.KAMESWAR RAO
V.KAMESWAR RAO, J.(Oral)
IA 25210/2015
1.       By this order, I shall decide IA 25210/2015 filed by the plaintiff
under Order VI Rule 17 CPC. The amendment sought is only to para 16
of the suit, whereby valuation of the suit is sought to be enhanced from
Rs.20,10,000/- to Rs.2,01,10,000/- and paying additional court fee of
Rs.1,76,320/-.
2.       An issue has arisen as a preliminary objection by the defendants
that this Court has no jurisdiction to deal with the application on merits
since by virtue of the Commercial Courts Act and the orders issued by
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                   Page 1 of 18

Hon’ble the Chief Justice in pursuance of the Delhi High Courts
(Amendment) Act, 2015, the suit already stood transferred to the court of
the District Judge and this Court has, therefore, become functus officio
to deal with the present application.        The submission is that, this
application for amendment could only be considered by the concerned
District Court, to whom the case is transferred.
3.       Mr. Jayant Mehta would contend that the suit filed is for
declaration and even though the application filed is post the notification
dated November 24, 2015, issued by Hon’ble the Chief Justice, the date
of filing would not make any difference for this Court to allow the
application enhancing the valuation of the suit on payment of the
difference of the court fee. He would state, that the procedures are
handmade of justice and modification in following the procedure would
lead to miscarriage of justice, particularly when this Court has power and
jurisdiction under Section 24 of the Civil Procedure Code to withdraw
from the subordinate Court, any case or proceeding and to try and
dispose of the same. He would rely upon the judgment passed by this
Court in CS(OS) 3213/2011 Metal Box India Ltd & Anr. vs. T.K.
Sehgal & Sons (HUF) and ors, wherein this Court had considered the
similar issue. He would also rely upon the judgment of this Court in
CS(OS) 176/2015 decided on April 1, 2016 Kamal Sharma and ors vs.
CS()S) 2829/2015                                              Page 2 of 18

Blue Coast Infrastructure Development Pvt. Ltd and ors.
4.       On the other hand, Mr. Puneet Mittal, learned counsel for the
defendants would rely upon the judgment of this court in Anil Goel vs.
Sardari Lal 75 (1998) Delhi Law Times 641, Sadhna Sharma and ors
vs. Premlata Gautam and ors CS(OS) 2103/1998 in support of his
contention. He would also rely upon the notification issued by this Court
on November 24, 2015 to say that, in view of the said notification, the
matter stood transferred, this Court has become functus officio to
consider the application.
5.       Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I would like to
state here that this Court had on earlier occasions relying upon the
judgment passed by this Court in Mahesh Gupta vs. Ranjit Singh and
ors AIR 2010 Delhi 4, wherein this Court had inter-alia held that it is
trite that the court which does not have jurisdiction to try the matter
would have no jurisdiction to pass any orders which affect the rights of
the parties. The orders which are passed by a court which has no
jurisdiction to determine the matter, are without jurisdiction and,
therefore, of no effect and purport. The Court therefore, which does not
have pecuniary jurisdiction, cannot pass any orders allowing an
application seeking amendment of a plaint to bring the suit plaint within
the pecuniary jurisdiction of a Court, had transferred suits to the
CS()S) 2829/2015                                             Page 3 of 18

concerned District Court(s). The judgment of the Supreme Court in
Lakha Ram Sharma vs. Balar Marketing Pvt. Ltd (2008) 17 SCC 671
and Mount Mary Enterprises vs. M/s Jivratna Medi Treat Pvt. Ltd
(2015) 4 SCC 182 were not considered in those orders. I note that in
Kamal Sharma and ors (supra), on which the reliance has been placed
by Mr. Jayant Mehta, the Court had considered the judgment of Mahesh
Gupta (supra) and distinguished the same on the ground that the suit,
which was filed in this Court was valued at Rs.1,600/- for the purpose of
jurisdiction. Even though, the court fee paid was Rs.20,10,000/-. In the
appeal before the Division Bench, the plaintiff sought to amend the
plaint by enhancing the valuation of the relief of permanent injunction,
which was originally affixed by him at Rs.200/-, to Rs.20,08,600/-. This
Court in Kamal Sharma and ors has held that it was in that context, the
Division Bench in para 7 of Mahesh Gupta has observed what has been
held by it, which has already been reflected above.
6.       The judgment of Anil Goel (supra) was also distinguished in
Kamal Sharma’s case (supra), wherein in paras 40 to 43, it has been
held as under:-
         “40. In Anil Goel (supra), the suit was valued for the
         purpose of Court Fees and jurisdiction for the relief of
         permanent injunction at Rs.200/-, on which the Court
CS()S) 2829/2015                                              Page 4 of 18

         Fees of Rs.20/- was affixed. The second relief of
         damages was valued for the purpose of Court Fees and
         jurisdiction at Rs.75,000/-. The said valuation fall below
         the pecuniary jurisdiction of the High Court, which was
         above Rs.5 Lakhs. It was in this background that the
         learned Single Judge, by placing reliance on the
         decision in Lok Kalyan Samiti Vs. Jagdish Prakash
         Saini & Others, 1995 (33) DRJ 290, observed as
         follows:
         “5. I am in agreement with the opinion expressed by
         Hon'ble the Single Judge in Lok Kalyan Samiti Vs.
         Jagidish Prakash Saini & Ors. (supra) that if a Court
         does not have jurisdiction to try the suit, no amendment
         can be allowed to bring the suit within the jurisdiction of
         the Court. The Court having no jurisdiction in the
         matter cannot pass orders so as to assume jurisdiction
         and the plaint in such a case has to be returned for
         presentation in proper Court. In this view of the matter,
         the application is without any merits and the same is,
         accordingly, dismissed.”
         41. Mr. Gupta has also placed reliance on the judgment
         in Lok Kalyan Samiti (supra). In this case, the suit had
         initially been filed in this Court on a valuation of
         Rs.1,05,000/- at a time when the pecuniary jurisdiction
         of this Court was above Rs.1 Lakh. Subsequently, the
         pecuniary jurisdiction was raised to above Rs.5 Lakhs,
         and consequently, the plaintiff applied to amend the
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                 Page 5 of 18

         valuation. Pertinently, in this case, the learned Single
         Judge did not proceed to transfer the suit along with the
         application for amendment to the District Court, Delhi.
         The learned Single Judge, in fact, continued to exercise
         jurisdiction and dealt      with the application for
         amendment on its merits. Thus, this decision rather than
         advancing the submission of Mr. Gupta–that this Court
         has no jurisdiction to deal with the present application
         and that it has become functus officio, in fact, is an
         instance where this Court deal with the application for
         amendment. The fact that the application for amendment
         moved in Lok Kalyan Samiti (supra) was rejected on
         merits does not take away from the fact that this Court
         dealt with the said application on merits, even though
         the pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court had been raised
         from over Rs.1 Lakh to over Rs.5 Lakhs.
         42. I may observe that the decision in Lok Kalyan Samiti
         (supra), on merits, appears to be contrary to the latter
         view taken by the Supreme Court in Lakha Ram Sharma
         (supra) and Mount Mary Enterprises (supra). In Lakha
         Ram Sharma (supra), the Supreme Court observed:
         “4. It is settled law that while considering whether the
         amendment is to be granted or not, the court does not go
         into the merits of the matter and decide whether or not
         the claim made therein is bona fide or not. That is a
         question which can only be decided at the trial of the
         suit. It is also settled law that merely because an
CS()S) 2829/2015                                               Page 6 of 18

         amendment may take the suit out of the jurisdiction of
         that court is no ground for refusing that amendment.
         We, therefore, do not find any justifiable reason on
         which the High Court has refused this amendment.
         Accordingly, the impugned order is set aside and that of
         the trial court is restored. We, however, clarify that as
         the appellant has now raised the claim from Rs 1 lakh to
         Rs 10 lakhs, the trial court will determine, whether or
         not court fees are correctly paid.”
         43. Similarly, in Mount Mary Enterprises (supra), the
         Supreme Court observed:
         “7. In our opinion, as per the provisions of Order 6 Rule
         17 of the Civil Procedure Code, the amendment
         application should be normally granted unless by virtue
         of the amendment nature of the suit is changed or some
         prejudice is caused to the defendant. In the instant case,
         the nature of the suit was not to be changed by virtue of
         granting the amendment application because the suit
         was for specific performance and initially the property
         had been valued at Rs 13,50,000 but as the market value
         of the property was actually Rs 1,20,00,000, the
         appellant-plaintiff had submitted an application for
         amendment so as to give the correct value of the suit
         property in the plaint.
         8. x x x x x x x x x
         9. The main reason assigned by the trial court for
         rejection of the amendment application was that upon
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                Page 7 of 18

         enhancement of the valuation of the suit property, the
         suit was to be transferred to the High Court on its
         original side. In our view, that is not a reason for which
         the amendment application should have been rejected.”
7.       This Court in Kamal Sharma (supra), has also dealt with the case
of Ms. Sadhna Sharma and ors (supra). The judgment of Sadhna
Sharma (supra) was distinguished by this Court in Kamal Sharma
(supra) on the ground that the application therein was moved after the
raise in pecuniary jurisdiction of the Court vide notification dated July
16, 2003 and the amendment sought in that case was not merely confined
to amendment of valuation of the relief for the purpose of court fee and
jurisdiction. It was a substantive amendment, as the plaintiff sought to
introduce a substantive relief of possession, besides making other
prayers in the proposed plaint. This Court held in para 47 that when the
amendment is sought to be made in a suit at the pre-trial stage and that
too is a formal amendment only to re-value the reliefs for purposes of
Court Fee and jurisdiction. In such a situation, where grant of
amendment of the plaint is imminent, there would be no purpose of
relegating the plaintiff to first appear before the District Court and after
the formal amendment is allowed, to seek return of the plaint to present
it before this Court. Much water has flown under the bridge since the
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                Page 8 of 18

decision in Ms. Sadhna Sharma & Others (supra) was rendered, with
the passing of the judgments by the Supreme Court in Lakha Ram
Sharma (supra) and Mount Mary Enterprises (supra) and rejected the
plea of the defendants in that case based on Sadhna Sharma.
8.       This Court in Kamal Sharma (supra) had referred to the judgment
in Metal Box India Ltd & Anr. (supra), wherein in para 48, the Court
has held as under:-
         “48. In Metal Box India Ltd. & Anr. Vs. T.K. Sehgal &
         Sons (HUF) & Ors., C.S.(O.S.) No.2313/2011, while
         dealing     with   a   similar   application     being   I.A.
         No.960/2016, this Court observed as follows:
         “8. The submission of learned counsel for the plaintiffs
         is that it was the prerogative of the plaintiffs to value the
         relief of injunction when the suit was initially filed.
         Since the relief of declaration had been valued at Rs.25
         Lakhs, which was also as per the prerogative of the
         plaintiffs, at the time of filing of the suit, the relief of
         injunction was valued at Rs.1,000/- only, which was
         beyond the minimum valuation of Rs.130/-. The
         submission of learned counsel for the plaintiffs is that
         the suit originally, could have been filed before this
         Court, or before the District Courts, since both Courts
         have concurrent jurisdiction. Since the plaintiffs were
         desirous of filing the suit before this Court, the valuation
         of the two reliefs in the plaint originally filed had been
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                   Page 9 of 18

         made in the following manner:
         “33. The value of the suit for the purpose of court fees
         and jurisdiction for the relief of declaration is fixed at
         Rupees Twenty Five Lakhs on which the prescribed
         court fee has been paid. The value of the suit for the
         relief of permanent injunction is fixed at Rupees One
         Thousand only on which also separate court fee as
         prescribed under the law has been paid”.
         9. However, on account of rise of pecuniary jurisdiction,
         the suit would stand transferred. It is submitted that the
         plaintiffs are entitled to revalue the reliefs and pay the
         additional Court Fee, so that the suit is dealt with by
         this Court.
         10. In support of her submissions, learned counsel for
         the plaintiffs has sought to place reliance on the
         decision of this Court in Sanofi Aventis Vs. Intas
         Pharmaceuticals       Limited     &    Others,     CS(OS)
         No.2590/2008 decided on 05.01.2016. Reference has
         also been made to Mount Mary Enterprises Vs. M/s
         Jivratna     Medi    Treat   Pvt.   Ltd.,   Civil  Appeal
         No.1232/2015 decided on 30.01.2015.
         11. On the other hand, the submission of learned
         counsel for the defendants is that the plaintiffs having
         given the valuation of the reliefs at the time of filing of
         the suit, they cannot seek to revalue any of the reliefs at
         this stage, merely because the suit stands transferred on
         account of rise in the pecuniary jurisdiction of the
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                Page 10 of 18

         Court. It is further argued that, in the rejoinder filed by
         the plaintiffs to the I.A. No.23855/2015, the plaintiffs
         had asserted that the value as originally affixed was
         correct. The plaintiffs are now seeking to take a
         contradictory stand by proposing to re-assess the value
         of the relief of injunction.
         12. The further submission of learned counsel for the
         defendants is that since the suit stands transferred, the
         application for amendment should be dealt with by the
         concerned Additional District Judge to whom the matter
         may be assigned, and not by this Court. He has also
         placed reliance on the decision in Ishwar Chand Gupta
         Vs. Yudhister Gupta & Ors., 214 (2014) DLT 489, in
         support of his submission that it is the concerned Court,
         to which the matter is transferred, which has to decide
         this issue.
         13. Having heard learned counsel, I am of the view that
         there is no merit in the objection raised by the
         defendants to the present application. The only
         amendment sought by the plaintiffs is to the valuation of
         the relief of injunction. It is the prerogative of the
         plaintiffs to value the relief of injunction in their own
         way, considering the pecuniary limits of jurisdiction of
         Courts fixed by law. The plaintiffs could have originally
         filed the present suit before the District Court, by
         assessing a lesser valuation of the relief of declaration/
         injunction than the minimum pecuniary jurisdiction of
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                 Page 11 of 18

         this Court. However, the plaintiffs desired that their
         cause be entertained and tried by this Court, and
         consequently, assigned the valuation of Rs.25 Lakhs to
         the first relief of declaration. The second relief of
         injunction was valued at Rs.1,000/-, considering the fact
         that the valuation of the first relief itself brought the suit
         within the pecuniary jurisdiction of this Court. It cannot
         be said that once having valued the reliefs of
         declaration and injunction in the plaint originally filed,
         it is not open to the plaintiffs to seek to re-value either of
         the said reliefs at a subsequent stage so that the case
         may continue to be tried by this Court after the raise of
         its pecuniary jurisdiction. The plaintiffs have the option
         to continue with the suit in the High Court even when
         the pecuniary jurisdiction of the High Court has been
         raised. Of course, the plaintiffs would be obliged to
         amend the pleading qua valuation and, pay additional
         Court Fee in most cases.
         14. The submission of learned counsel for the
         defendants that the suit should be transferred and the
         application should be heard by the transferred Court, to
         which the matter has been assigned, has no merit. In
         Sanofi Aventis (supra), this Court after taking into
         consideration the earlier decisions observed as follows:
         “18. The aforesaid decision is a reiteration of the settled
         legal position that when a Court has the inherent
         jurisdiction to pass certain orders even though it may
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                   Page 12 of 18

         not have the pecuniary or territorial jurisdiction to try
         the suit, that would not be a ground to disallow an
         amendment to the plaint, the logic being that one cannot
         stick to the form of law to the point that the substance
         gets obliterated. That would amount to missing the wood
         for the trees. The object must be to abjure a pedantic
         approach and interpret procedural rules with the idea of
         promoting     the   cause   of   justice  and   shunning
         unnecessary     and    avoidable   delay   in   the  suit
         proceedings”.
         15. Since the amendment sought by the plaintiffs is only
         with regard to the re-valuation of the relief of
         injunction, no useful purpose would be served in
         transferring the suit, and, thereafter, waiting for it to
         being sent back to this Court upon the application for
         amendment being allowed permitting the plaintiffs to re-
         value the relief of injunction to over Rs.2 Crores. The
         same would lead to wastage of time, delay in trial of the
         suit, and adding to the administrative work of the two
         Courts concerned.
         16. Reliance placed by the defendants on Ishwar Chand
         Gupta (supra) is of no avail. In the said case, the Trial
         Court passed an order holding the suit not to be
         properly valued even before issuance of summons. The
         suit had been filed to seek recovery of Rs.5 Lakhs, apart
         from seeking injunctive relief, which was valued at
         Rs.130/- and on which Court Fees of Rs.13/- had been
CS()S) 2829/2015                                              Page 13 of 18

         paid. This Court while dealing with a petition under
         Article 227 of the Constitution of India upheld the
         valuation of the suit by observing that it was the
         prerogative of the plaintiff in the suit for injunction to
         value the relief at an amount he deems fit, with the
         minimum valuation of Rs.130/-. It was also observed
         that at the stage of issuing summons in the suit, it cannot
         be held that the suit was not properly valued for the
         purpose of Court Fees and jurisdiction. However, if
         such an issue is raised by the defendants, the same shall
         be dealt with finally by the concerned Court dealing
         with the suit.
         17. The aforesaid decision does not advance the
         submission of learned counsel for the defendants. In
         fact, it only re-affirms the well-settled position that it is
         the prerogative of the plaintiffs to value the relief of
         injunction. The averment of the plaintiff that the suit had
         been valued correctly is not contradictory to the
         proposed amendment. That valuation was correct when
         the suit was filed. Merely because amendment of
         valuation is sought now, it does not mean that the
         original    valuation    was   incorrect.   There    is   no
         contradiction as claimed by the defendant.
         18. For all the aforesaid reasons, the application is
         allowed to the limited extent that the relief of injunction
         is permitted to be re-valued at Rs.Two Crores One
         Thousand, on which the additional Court Fees shall be
CS()S) 2829/2015                                                 Page 14 of 18

         paid by the plaintiffs. The amended plaint, in terms of
         this order, be filed within two weeks. The Court Fees
         shall be filed along with the amended
         plaint. ” (Emphasis supplied)
9.       The only plea need to be considered, whether the date of
application, being post, the notification issued on November 24, 2015,
this application need to be decided by the concerned District Court as the
matter stood transferred to the concerned Court. In this regard, I note,
that this Court in para 50 of Kamal Sharma’s case has observed as
under:-
         “50. The defendants cannot be heard to say that this
         Court cannot deal with the present application, even
         when the formal order for transfer of the suit in terms of
         the order passed by the Hon'ble the Chief Justice has
         still not been passed by this Court. Insistence on
         following the procedure requiring transfer of the case to
         the concerned District Court; assignment of the case to
         an Additional District Judge; issuance of notice to such
         of the parties who do not appear before the Court to
         whom the case is assigned, in case they do not appear;
         fixing the date for hearing of the amendment application
         by the transferred Court; hearing of the application
         which, if allowed, would result in the suit not falling
         within the jurisdiction of the District Court, and
         consequential return of plaint to be presented once
CS()S) 2829/2015                                               Page 15 of 18

         again before this Court would immensely prejudice the
         plaintiffs, who have been pursuing the present suit since
         January 2015. In the meantime, dozens of orders have
         been passed, eventually leading to delayed filing of
         written statements with applications to seek condonation
         of delay and an application under Section 8 of the
         Arbitration & Conciliation Act, 1996. If the procedure,
         as insisted upon by the defendants were to be adopted, it
         would mean that, eventually, in case the amendment
         application is allowed by the transferred Court, the
         plaintiff would have to re-serve all the defendants in the
         suit, and again await their filing of their written
         statements and other applications. Such a result must be
         avoided, since it can be avoided in law. The hands of
         this Court are not tied. The shackles of such procedural
         bounds can and should be broken with a view to,
         eventually, attain speedier disposal of the case, as no
         prejudice is caused to the defendants even if this Court
         considers the amendment application rather than
         transferring the suit along with the amendment
         application. Adoption of the procedure insisted upon by
         the defendants would, ironically, delay the disposal of
         the commercial cause, when the enactment of the
         Commercial Courts Act and the amendment to the Delhi
         High Court Act was intended to lead to speedier
         disposal of such commercial causes.”
10.      The aforesaid observation would hold good in this case as well.
CS()S) 2829/2015                                               Page 16 of 18

The plaintiff has been pursuing this case since September, 2015. The
case is at pre-trial stage.      Written statement has been filed by the
defendant Nos.1 and 2. Noting the distinguishing features, I am of the
view that the judgment of Mahesh Gupta (supra) and Sadhna Sharma
(supra) are not applicable to the facts of this case, inasmuch on the date
of filing of the suit, this Court had the jurisdiction to entertain the suit.
Moreover, keeping in view the ratio of the judgments of the Supreme
Court in Lakha Ram (supra) and Mount Mary (supra), this Court is
within its right to consider the application for amendment and the
application having been moved quite early in the proceedings, the
replication is yet to be filed, the amendment sought by the plaintiff, does
not in any manner prejudice the defendants, need to be allowed. The
amended plaint filed by the plaintiff is taken on record. The plaintiff is
directed to pay the additional court fee, required to be paid in view of the
amendment allowed within two weeks from today, if not already paid.
Since the amendment is only with respect to the valuation clause and
does not touch upon the merit, I do not consider it necessary to call for
an additional written statement on this aspect. Objections taken by the
defendants in the original written statement shall hold the field.
CS()S) 2829/2015                                              Page 17 of 18

CS(OS) 2829/2015 & IA 19552/2015
11.      Replication be filed in four weeks. List before Joint Registrar on
30th May, 2016 for further proceedings.
         List the application 19552/2015 for hearing on August 8, 2016.
                                                  (V.KAMESWAR RAO)
                                                          JUDGE
APRIL 28, 2016
ak
CS()S) 2829/2015                                              Page 18 of 18


