*               HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                          FAO 104/1987 & CM No.21183/2015
                                            Pronounced on: 9th May, 2016
       RAJENDER KUMAR SAINI                                 ..... Appellant
                           Through:     Mr. Rajeev Gupta, proxy for
                                        Mr. Parveen        Kumar         Singh,
                                        Advocate
                           versus
       KRISHAN KUMAR SAINI & ORS.                   ..... Respondents
                           Through:     Mr. S.K. Kalia, Advocate for
                                        respondent No.1
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE V.K. SHALI
V.K. SHALI, J.
1.     This is an appeal filed by the appellant against the judgment dated
       27.02.1987 by virtue of which the probate petition of the appellant
       was dismissed.
2.     Briefly stated that facts of the case are that Subedar Major Som
       Nath Saini owned a house bearing No.A-70, South Extension, Part-
       II, New Delhi, measuring 250 sq. yds., and some deposits in Banks
       and Post office. His wife is alleged to have died in October, 1975.
       He is alleged to have been bedridden for several years and
       ultimately he also died on 15.09.1984 at his residence in South
       Extension. Before his death, he is purported to have executed a
FAO 104/1987                                                   Page 1 of 7

       Will dated 26.08.1982 bequeathing the ground floor and the built
       up portion of the barsati floor to his son Rajinder Kumar Saini and
       first floor of his house and the un-built portion on the second floor
       to respondent No.2 Surender Kumar Saini. As regards the deposit
       in Banks and Post Office, including the shares details of which are
       given in the schedule attached to the petition were bequeathed in
       equal shares to the appellant Rajinder Kumar Saini and respondent
       No.2 Surender Kumar Saini. His third son Krishan Kumar Saini
       was excluded from the bequest and so far his married daughter
       Krishna Kumari, is concerned, the reason given in the Will
       disinheriting these two persons are as under:-
               “…..My eldest son, Krishan Kumar Saini did not pay the
               least attention to my ailing wife i.e. his mother, who died
               in October, 1975 and was bed-ridden for several years.
               Shri Krishan Kumar Saini is also inattentive to me in my
               old age.
                      My daughter, namely, Krishna Kumari, has been
               married, who was given sufficient dowry.”
3.     The Will executed by the deceased/testator is stated to have
       witnessed by two attesting witnesses, PW-1 D.R. Madan and PW-2
       Balkrishan Sharma. Apart from this, the appellant had entered into
       the witness box.
4.     So far as respondent is concerned, he has examined himself as RW-
       1. Various documents have been proved, namely Will Ex.P-1,
       photographs Ex.PW-1/RA1 and PW-1/RB2. Apart from these the
       other documents which have been proved re PW-3/X1 to PW-
FAO 104/1987                                                    Page 2 of 7

       3/X6, PW-3/Y to PW-3/Y-5, which are the documents pertaining to
       bearing the signatures of the deceased/testator.
5.     The learned trial Court after hearing the arguments dismissed the
       probate petition. One of the important grounds for dismissal of the
       probate petition was the suspicious circumstances which were not
       fully explained by the appellant/petitioner. These suspicious
       circumstances were that so far as the identification of the
       deceased/testator is concerned, D.R. Madan, who is a lawyer and
       an attesting witness apart from being a scribe of the Will, had
       stated that the deceased/testator was friend of his elder brother
       whom he used to visit off and on.        He has also stated in the
       examination-in-chief that he knew deceased/testator for the last
       more than 10 to 15 years. But when he was cross-examined and he
       was asked to identify the deceased/testator, he could not do so.
6.     The learned trial Court considered this vital piece of evidence as a
       crucial factor for arriving at the conclusion that the testimony of
       D.R. Madan was not reliable. Similarly, so far as the other witness
       PW-2 Balkrishan Sharma is concerned, he had also stated that he
       knew the deceased/testator for 4 to 6 years prior to execution of the
       Will and has met him for 5-10 times during that period and he had
       signed the Will at the instance of PW-1 D.R. Madan and he has
       seen the deceased/testator putting signatures on the Will. Like
       PW-1 D.R. Madan, he was also asked to identify the
       deceased/testator from a family photograph which was shown to
       him which are Ex.PW-1/RA-1 and PW1/RB-2 which had appeared
       in some magazine. So far as Balkrishan Sharma is concerned he
FAO 104/1987                                                  Page 3 of 7

       identified a wrong person as the deceased/testator. In the light of
       this discrepancy in the cross-examination the testimony of these
       persons were not believed and it was considered to be suspicious
       that it is possible that the attesting witnesses did not know the
       deceased/testator and they had put the signatures at different times.
7.     Accordingly, the probate petition was dismissed.
8.     I have heard the learned counsel for the appellant as well as the
       learned counsel for the respondents. I have also gone through the
       impugned judgment as well as the grounds of appeal.
9.     I find that the learned trial Court has rightly not relied upon the
       testimony of the attesting witnesses because their testimony does
       not inspire confidence of the Court and does not seem to be
       credible. The reason of this is that not only they are contradicting
       each other but also the fact that it is highly improbable that a
       person who is in touch and known to the deceased/testator for the
       last 10 to 15 years and has been constantly meeting and seeing him
       will not be in a position to identify him, if a photograph is shown.
       This precisely has happened so far as the testimony of PW-1 D.R.
       Madan is concerned. D.R. Madan has categorically stated in his
       examination-in-chief that the deceased/testator was friend of his
       elder brother whom he had been visiting and he had seen him, met
       him and interacted with him for the last 10 to 15 years. If that be
       so, it is highly improbable that he would not have been in a
       position to identify the deceased/testator from a photograph which
       was very clear and apparent. Because of this the only reasonable
       inference which can be drawn is that the witness has never seen the
FAO 104/1987                                                  Page 4 of 7

       deceased/testator and there is no question of his signing
       simultaneously along with the deceased/testator on the Will. He
       has simply stated that he has drafted the Will at the instance of the
       deceased/testator and later on read over and explained to him and
       then only he had put his signatures. Therefore, this testimony of
       PW-1 D.R. Madan is totally unreliable and it will not be safe to
       rely on his testimony.
10.    In order to establish the Will it is not necessary that both the
       attesting witnesses need to be examined. The testimony of one of
       the attesting witnesses is good enough, provided he is inspires
       confidence and he is able to prove the Will.
11.    In the instant case not only the testimony of PW-1 D.R. Madan,
       who is one of the attesting witness has been examined but the
       appellant has examined the other attesting witness also by the name
       of PW-2 Balkrishan Sharma. PW-2 Balkrishan Sharma had stated
       that he had also seen the deceased/testator signing in his presence.
       He was acquainted with him. So far as Balkrishan Sharma is
       concerned, when he was also shown the photographs of the
       deceased/testator in the cross-examination and he identified a
       wrong person. The very fact that either of these witnesses are not
       able to identify or identified a wrong person clearly shows that not
       only they were not known to the deceased/testator moreover, they
       do not seem to have put the signatures in the presence of each other
       or the deceased/testator has never given any assurance to any one
       of them that the other attesting witness has signed in his presence.
FAO 104/1987                                                  Page 5 of 7

       All these facts lead only to one inference that it will not be safe to
       rely on their testimony and grant the probate.
12.    Further, this fact of suspicious circumstance gets further
       compounded by the fact that both PW-1 D.R. Madan and PW-2
       Balkrishan Sharma contradicted each other around the time when
       they went to the Court for the purpose of registration of the Will.
       One of them says that they went in the morning while as other
       witness says that they went in the afternoon. There cannot be so
       much of gap in the testimony of the two attesting witnesses
       regarding time of registration of Will. The attesting witnesses
       could have said that both of them had gone in the morning or in the
       evening. There may be some variations in the time or they had
       gone in the afternoon. When both the witnesses had gone for the
       registration of the Will at the same time, there can be variation to
       the exact time which is stated by them in their statements. When
       one witness says in the morning or other says in the afternoon, it
       makes a lot of difference which clearly shows that these witnesses
       are in fact procured witnesses.
13.    Further, in the Will itself the father, namely, Subedar Major Som
       Nath Saini, the deceased/testator has given a reasons for excluding
       is third son Krishan Kumar Saini on the ground that he has not
       looked after his mother at the time of her old age and similarly he
       has not looked after the deceased/testator as well. It is very rare
       that despite the fact that a parent may not be looked after by one of
       the child out of three-four children, still he would not go to the
       extent to divest that person from the inheritance for the simple
FAO 104/1987                                                   Page 6 of 7

       reason that when a person is on the death bed he always has a
       tendency to forget or forgive. Therefore, this fact of excluding one
       of the sons also creates some doubt. Since the deceased/testator
       was living in the suit premises itself where the appellant himself is
       stated to be living and he may have manipulated this Will in his
       favour and in the favour of one of his brother to the exclusion of
       the third. Same is the case with the daughter. Father is more
       attached to the daughters and despite the fact that she has got
       married in 1963 still when the deceased testator is about to meet
       his creator, he would not like to deprive his daughter of a token
       amount being bequeathed as there is no apparent reason for the
       same. All these facts if seen cumulatively, I feel that the Will
       which is set up by the appellant is not proved in law and rightly so
       held to be not proved by the learned trial Court.
14.    So far as this appeal is concerned, I find myself in total agreement
       with the conclusion and the reasoning given by the learned trial
       Court and accordingly, the present appeal is without any merit and
       the same is dismissed.
15.    Pending application also stands disposed of.
                                                           V.K. SHALI, J.
MAY 09, 2016
vk
FAO 104/1987                                                  Page 7 of 7


