*             THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                  Writ Petition (Civil) No.16664/2006
                                       Date of Decision : 17.4.2009
M/S GATI LIMITED                                      ……Petitioner
                                     Through : Mr.Jitendra Kumar
                                     Jha, Advocate.
                                Versus
DY. LABOUR COMMISSIONER & ORS.                    …… Respondents
                                     Through : Mr.Rakesh Mehta,
                                     Advocate.
CORAM :
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE V.K. SHALI
1.     Whether Reporters of local papers may be
       allowed to see the judgment?                   YES
2.     To be referred to the Reporter or not ?        NO
3.     Whether the judgment should be reported
       in the Digest ?                                NO
V.K. SHALI, J. (Oral)
1.     The petitioner in this writ petition has challenged the ex
parte order dated 20.5.2005 passed by the Deputy Labour
Commissioner, an authority constituted under Minimum Wages
Act in case titled Sh.Jagdish Paswan Vs. M/s Gati bearing
No.MW/SD/81/04/7358-59 dated 20.5.2005. By the aforesaid
order, the claim of the claimant /respondent Sh.Jagdish Paswan
for payment of minimum wages for the period from 1st April,
1995 to 30th November, 2004 was allowed and the petitioner was
directed to make the payment of Rs.10,860/- to the respondent
/workman being the difference of the wages between the wages
paid to the respondent/workman and the minimum wages,
which was admissible to him at the relevant period of time. The
WP(C) No.16664/2006                                        Page 1 of 5

detailed analysis and the forms as to how the aforesaid
differential amount has been arrived at is given in the impugned
order. The aforesaid order has been challenged by the petitioner
primarily on the ground that the petitioner was not properly
served and therefore, it did not get an opportunity to contest the
claim of the respondent/workman on merits.             An argument
subsidiary to this was that the name of the petitioner/Company
which is M/s GATI Ltd. was shown to be as M/s Gati simplicitor.
It was alleged that the report of refusal is purported to have been
obtained by the respondent was not a genuine report and also
that the respondent/workman was an employee of the petitioner.
2.     I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and
perused the record. There is no dispute about the fact that if a
party is not served or if it is served but is prevented by ’sufficient
cause’ to appear in Court, the ex parte proceedings against a
party deserves to be set aside.      In the present case, the main
contention of the petitioner/Company is that it has not been
served.         This  submission      has   been    made     by     the
petitioner/Company on the ground that it is a Limited Company
known as M/s GATI Ltd. while as the notices which have been
issued either through the process server or even by the courier
have shown the name of the petitioner/Company as M/s Gati. It
was also urged that the report of refusal dated 23 rd February,
2005 was a procured report and therefore, could not form a basis
of setting the petitioner ex parte.
WP(C) No.16664/2006                                         Page 2 of 5

3.     I have considered the submission of the learned counsel for
the petitioner and gone through the record of the Deputy Labour
Commissioner who was acting as an authority under the
Minimum Wages Act.        I have also gone through the impugned
order.    The impugned order clearly shows that not once but
thrice notices have been sent on address C-40, Okhla Indl. Area,
Phase-II, New Delhi-20 in the name of M/s GATI and the courier
has also not been received back.          These summons through
courier were sent on 7.12.2004, 5.1.2005, 12.1.2005 and also on
9th March, 2005. It is admittedly not the case where the courier
has been received back unserved. Merely because the name of
the petitioner /Company is M/s GATI Ltd. and couriers have
been sent or the notices have been sent in the name of M/s GATI
does not mean that it has not been served. The denial of service
by the petitioner in the writ petition of the notices does not
inspire any confidence for the simple reason that there is not an
iota of averment made by the petitioner in the writ petition that
at the relevant time, it was not having its office at C-40, Okhla
Indl. Area, Phase-II, New Delhi-20.         On the contrary, the
addresses which have been furnished by the petitioner in the
memo of parties are of Mahatma Gandhi Road, Sickandarabad,
Andhra Pradesh and having its Zonal office at 14/19/2, Old
Delhi Gurgaon Road, Samalka, New Delhi.         This clearly shows
that the conduct of the petitioner/Company is not truthful even
in revealing that at the relevant time, it was having its address or
business operations at C-40, Okhla Indl. Area, Phase-II, New
WP(C) No.16664/2006                                        Page 3 of 5

Delhi-20. The entire purpose seems to be to avoid the service or
deny the service of summons.       This is further fortified from the
fact that the Dy. Labour Commissioner had also directed the
summons to be sent through process server and the same were
given dasti to the respondent /workman. On the summons being
served by the process server also there was a report of refusal
given by the process server.     The report of the refusal by the
process server has been said to be a procured report but in the
light of the facts as have been stated hereinabove, there is no
reason as to why the Court should not believe that the report,
which has been furnished by the process server is not a correct
one given in the ordinary discharge of his duties by the process
server. The process server has obviously no animus or malafides
qua the petitioner to furnish a false report moreover he is a
public servant and there is presumption that a public servant
will discharge his duties in the normal course of business and
the assumption of genuineness of the report furnished by him
would attach to the same unless something tangible to the
contrary is shown which the petitioner has failed to do.
Therefore, this plea of the petitioner that it was not served must
necessarily fail.
4.     The Court would have considered even in all fairness to give
an opportunity to the petitioner to contest the matter also if the
stake in the matter would have been high.          A perusal of the
record shows that the total amount of differential between the
minimum wages and the actual wages which have been paid to
WP(C) No.16664/2006                                          Page 4 of 5

the respondent/workman and which have been awarded by the
impugned order comes to only Rs.10,568/- which has been
granted.     Even for such paltry amount, the contest has been
made although the learned counsel for the respondent had given
a suggestion to settle the amount after negotiations.             This
observation is being passed by the Court on account of the fact
that even during the pendency of the matter, the learned counsel
for the respondent had suggested that he is not averse to the
idea of settlement of the matter. The petitioner did not respond
positively.
5.     For the reasons mentioned above, I am of the considered
opinion that this is a case where the petitioner had been actually
served and if the petitioner has chosen not to appear despite the
service, there is no sufficient ground for setting aside the ex parte
order against the petitioner which has been passed by the Dy.
Labour Commissioner in the capacity of authority constituted
under Minimum Wages Act on 20th May, 2009.
6.     Accordingly, the writ petition of the petitioner is without
any merit and the same is dismissed.
       The file be consigned to the record room.
                                                      V.K. SHALI, J.
APRIL 17, 2009
RN
WP(C) No.16664/2006                                         Page 5 of 5


