*                  HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+       F.A.O. No.375 of 2007 & C.M. Nos.14346/2006, 11550,
  16729/2007, 4598/2008, 4915/2009, 9924-9925/2011, 19493, 20294,
                     21007, 21013/2012, 205-206/2013
                                         Decided on : 28th May, 2013
PRITI PRATAP SINGH                                   …… Appellant
                      Through:    Ms. Tasneem Ahmadi & Mr. T.R.
                                  Thakur, Advocates.
                        Versus
THE SARISKA PALACE & ORS.                            …… Respondents
                      Through: Mr. Brijesh Kalappa & Ms. Divya Nair,
                                  Advocates in C.M. No.206/2013.
                                  Mr. Rajendra Rawat, Advocate for
                                  M/s. Shiva Corporation India Ltd.
CORAM:
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE V.K. SHALI
V.K. SHALI, J.
1.      This is an appeal filed by the appellant against the order dated
6.9.2006 passed by the learned Additional District Judge, Delhi rejecting
the suit for permanent and mandatory injunction filed by the appellant.
2.      Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the appellant/plaintiff
originally filed a suit bearing No.238/2006 for permanent and mandatory
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                               Page 1 of 26

injunction against the respondent/defendant, The Sariska Palace, having
its office in Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi.            In the said suit, the
appellant had essentially prayed for grant of permanent injunction against
the respondents from dealing with the Fort and the Palace in any manner
situated at Kuchaman City, Tehsil Nawan, District Nagaur, Rajasthan.
Ancillary reliefs regarding permanent injunction from carrying out any
repair, construction, alteration or demolition or creating any third party
interest in the suit property were also prayed for. The basis for filing this
suit    for    permanent    and   mandatory      injunction   was    that     the
appellant/plaintiff stated that she had filed a suit in Delhi High Court
titled Priti Pratap Singh vs. Rani Prem Kumari & Others bearing
No.2414 of 1994 challenging the Will purported to have been made in
respect of the properties owned by him including the property of the
present suit to a trust. Further, relief of partition and injunction in respect
of the properties left behind by her father including the Kuchaman Fort
and Palace was prayed for.
3.      Notices    were   issued   to    the  respondent/defendant.          The
respondent/defendant filed an application under Order VII Rule 10 & 11
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                  Page 2 of 26

CPC bearing I.A. No.11751 of 1998 in Suit No.2837/1998 before the trial
court stating that the respondent/defendant, Sariska Palace, was a division
of Shebawheels Private Ltd. and the said defendant, Sariska Palace, was
only managing the marketing of the Hotel Kuchaman Fort Palace for the
purpose of tourism for and on behalf of one M/s. Rathore Hotels and
Tours Pvt. Ltd. which has been given the power to run, maintain,
advertise the Hotel Kuchaman Fort Palace. In view of the aforesaid
application having been filed by respondent/defendant, Sariska Palace, a
fresh application under Order I Rule 10 CPC bearing I.A. No.520 of 1999
came to be filed by the appellant for impleadment of M/s. Sheba Wheels
Pvt. Ltd. and M/s. Rathore Tours and Travels Pvt. Ltd. as defendants to
the suit.     Vide order dated 9.7.2003, the High Court permitted the
amendment to the suit and the impleadment of these two parties as
defendants       (now   the  respondents)    to   the  suit.     All      the
respondents/defendants were proceeded ex parte.
4.      The ex parte evidence was adduced by the appellant. During the
pendency of the suit, the status quo order had also been passed in respect
of the suit property but on account of enhancement of pecuniary
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                              Page 3 of 26

jurisdiction of the District Court, the suit was transferred to the court of
District and Sessions Court and it came to be marked to the Additional
District and Sessions Judge, Tis Hazari Courts for the purpose of
adjudication which culminated into the impugned order dated 6.9.2006
directing the return of the plaint for want of territorial jurisdiction as the
learned judge was of the view that there was an application filed under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC by the respondent to which reply had also been
filed by the respondent/defendant No.1 but the said application was still
pending.
5.      The learned Additional District Judge formed the view since the
Fort and the Palace was situated in District Nagaur, State of Rajasthan,
which was outside the territorial jurisdiction of this court, therefore, no
effective relief could be granted by this court. The plaint was ordered to
be returned for lack of territorial jurisdiction under Order VII Rule 10
CPC. Reference in this regard was made to Section 16 of the CPC and
the judgment cited by the learned counsel for the appellant in this regard
passed in The Fertilizer Corporation of India Ltd. & Others vs. Ranjit
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                 Page 4 of 26

Kumar Mishra; AIR 1980 Orissa 152 was held to be not applicable to the
facts of the present case.
6.      Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid rejection of the plaint, the
appellant had filed the present appeal wayback on 18.10.2006 and this
court had passed an order of status quo during the continuance of the
hearing of the appeal which has continued till date. In between, repeated
interim applications have been filed by the appellant making allegations
with regard to the alleged additions and alterations as well as structural
changes and the damage being caused to the Kuchaman Fort and Palace
by the defendants and this court resultantly passing orders for further
restraint as well as calling for the report of the Collector of Nagaur, who
is stated to have furnished a report supporting the submissions made by
the learned counsel for the appellant that alterations, additions and
structural changes were made from time to time in the Kuchaman Fort
and Palace which had allegedly resulted in damaging the paintings and
other heritage articles in the Fort.     It may also be pertinent here to
mention that there are some applications under Order 39 Rule 2A CPC
which were filed by the appellant for initiating of contempt proceedings
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                Page 5 of 26

for willful and contemptuous disobedience of the order of restraint having
been passed by this court by the respondents which are pending
adjudication of this court. It was also alleged that in addition to this,
there is an application filed by one M/s. Shiva Corporation Pvt. Ltd. for
being impleaded as party. All these applications which are more than 7-8
in number are pending adjudication and when the matter was taken up for
hearing, this court had requested the learned counsel for the appellant to
address the arguments on the main appeal itself rather than seeking
adjudication of the contempt applications and other ancillary matters.
The fundamental question to be considered was whether the order of the
trial court rejecting the plaint on account of lack of territorial jurisdiction
was relegated to the background and on the contrary, interim orders were
invited repeatedly from the court and the same were followed by
contempt applications and thus, complicating the whole issue involved in
the appeal. More than six years had gone by since appeal is pending and
more than 15 years have gone by since the filing of the suit and the court
is not able to decide as to whether the Delhi Court has the territorial
jurisdiction or not.
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                  Page 6 of 26

7.      It was contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the
present suit was a suit for injunction simplicitor and was essentially for a
tort qua the property for which there was no applicability of Section 16 of
the CPC. Reliance in this regard was placed on AIR 1928 Calcutta 887
and 1901 (xxvi) ILR 140.
8.      It was contended that Section 16 of the CPC which deals with
regard to the suits of immovable property, subject to certain exceptions,
which would not be applicable to the facts of the present case. Even if it
did then, the proviso to Section 16 CPC makes it abundantly clear that the
suit can be instituted where the defendants works for gain and in the
present case, the defendant Nos.2 & 3 having been impleaded by a
specific order of the court and the appellant having filed the records of
the defendants/respondents regarding Notice for the Board Meetings,
Minutes of their Meetings, Auditors Reports, Directors Reports, Invoices,
Brochure, etc. to show that the respondents were working for gain in
Delhi and all the activities giving rise to the cause of action for the
present but were being carried in Delhi hence, the Delhi court had the
jurisdiction. In this regard, the learned counsel placed reliance on H.
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                              Page 7 of 26

Ahmed and Co. vs. Kohinoor Glass Factory Ltd., Hyderabad; AIR 1961
A.P. (FB) 476 and Shyama Sundari Dasi „Devi‟ vs. Ramapati
Chattopadhya & Another; AIR 1973 Calcutta 319.
9.      It was further contended that so far as the respondent Nos.2 and 3
are concerned, they themselves had admitted that they are carrying out
activities in Delhi and, therefore, at best even if it is treated as an
admission, the two courts both in Delhi and at District Nagaur, Rajasthan
will have the jurisdiction and in case there are two courts having a
concurrent jurisdiction, the plaintiff, namely, the appellant had an option
to file the suit in either of the two courts and accordingly, the appellant
having chosen to file the suit in Delhi could not be said that the Delhi
court did not have the jurisdiction. Reliance in this regard was also
placed on Sri Rajendra Mills Ltd. vs. H.V.M. Hazi Hasan Dada &
Another; AIR 1970 Calcutta 342 and The Fertilizer Corporation of India
Ltd. & Others vs. Ranjit Kumar Mishra; AIR 1980 Orissa 152.
10.     A subsidiary arguments advanced to this was that the appellant
could not be compelled to file the suit in District Nagaur, Rajasthan as is
sought to be urged by the respondents. Reliance in this regard was placed
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                               Page 8 of 26

on M/s. L&T Niro Ltd. vs. M/s. S.R.P. Industries Ltd.; 93 (2001) DLT 158
and Kanshi Ram vs. Dule Rai & Co.; AIR 1933 Lahore 11. On the basis
of these submissions, it was contended that the Delhi court has the
jurisdiction.
11.     This submission made by the learned counsel for the appellant was
contested by the counsel appearing for intervenor/applicant for Shiva
Corporation Pvt. Ltd. and by the counsel for respondent No.1. At the
outset it is stated that the submissions made by the proposed respondents
are not being taken into consideration while deciding the present appeal.
The reasons for this is that the intervenor/applicant has still not been
impleaded as a party and, therefore, till the time they are not impleaded as
a party, they have no locus to make any submissions much less the
cognizance and the same cannot be taken by this court.
12.     The court still has to consider as to whether the suit for injunction,
which was filed by the appellant before the Delhi court, could be
entertained in respect of a property which was situated in District Nagaur,
Rajasthan. There is no dispute about the fact that the appellant has filed
the present suit for permanent and mandatory injunction. The suit for
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                 Page 9 of 26

permanent and mandatory injunction presupposes the existence of a right
on the basis of which or on the foundation of which a party is claiming a
restraint order both permanent in nature and a mandatory in nature qua
the respondent/defendant. Unless and until this pre-existing right is not
shown to the court prima facie to be in existence, it will not be proper for
the court to entertain the suit. The pre-existence of such a right would
clearly mean that it is a right to immovable property and, therefore, such
a suit essentially will be covered by Section 16 (d) CPC.
13.     The contention which has been advanced by the learned counsel for
the appellant is that it has a pre-existing right in the property, that is,
Kuchaman Fort and Palace and that pre-existing right is sought to be
based on the suit for partition which has been filed by the appellant
bearing No.2414 of 1994 which has been entertained by Delhi Court and
in respect of which the injunction order has also been issued.
14.     In my view, the very fact that the appellant has filed a suit for
declaration challenging the Will of her father which included the suit
property and has claimed partition in respect of the said properties of
which includes Kuchaman Fort and Palace would not in itself mean that
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                               Page 10 of 26

the appellant has a pre-existing right in such property. This right is yet to
be adjudicated finally or in other words till the time a positive finding is
returned by the court holding that the appellant has a right in the
properties in question, the title of the appellant in respect of those
properties is inchoate. So far as the contention of the learned counsel that
a restraint order has been issued in the said partition suit against the
respondent from creating any third party interest is concerned, that is of
no consequence as it is only an interim order and cannot be said to be
adjudication of the right of the appellant. Further in case, such an interim
order was passed by the court in suit for partition and the appellant was
apprehending danger to the suit property, the proper course of remedy
was to file an application for the suit rather than file an independent suit,
as has been done by the appellant. Therefore, this suit out of which the
present appeal arises has to be considered independently. In other words,
whether a plaint discloses a cause of action is essentially a question of
fact but whether it does or does not, must be found out from the reading
of the plaint itself. The test is whether the averments made in the plaint,
if taken to be correct in their entirety, a decree would be passed. Seeing
from this perspective, the very foundational relief has not been claimed,
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                Page 11 of 26

that is, either establishing a pre-existing right to the suit property or
seeking a declaration to that property and seeking consequential relief
only, that is, injunctional relief to get around the bar of territorial
jurisdiction, which cannot be done. Reliance in this regard is placed on
Hardesh Ores Pvt. Ltd. vs. Hade & Company; 2007 (5) SCC 614. It may
also be pertinent here to refer to Section 16 CPC. The said section reads
as under :-
              “16.  Suits to be instituted where subject-matter
                    situate, subject to the pecuniary or other
                    limitations prescribed: suits,
              (a)   for the recovery of immovable property with
                    or without rent or profits,
              (b)   for the partition of immovable property,
              (c)    for foreclosure, sale or redemption in the
                    case of a mortgage of or charge       upon
                    immovable property,
              (d)    for the determination of any other right to
                    or interest in immovable property,
              (e)   for compensation for wrong to immovable
                    property,
              (f)   for the recovery of movable property
                    actually under distraint or attachment, shall
                    be instituted in the Court within the local
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                              Page 12 of 26

                   limits of whose jurisdiction the property is
                   situate:
                   Provided that a suit to obtain relief
                   respecting, or compensation for wrong to,
                   immovable property held by or on behalf of
                   the defendant, may where the relief sought
                   can be entirely obtained through his
                   personal obedience be instituted either in
                   the Court within the local limits of whose
                   jurisdiction the property is situate, or in the
                   Court within the local limits of whose
                   jurisdiction the defendant actually and
                   voluntarily resides, or carries on business,
                   or personally works for gain.
                   Explanation.- In this section "property"
                   means property situate in [India].
              20.  Other suits to be instituted where defendants
                   reside or cause of action arises, Subject to
                   the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be
                   instituted in Court within the local limits of
                   whose jurisdiction-
              (a)  the defendant, or each of the defendants
                   where there are more than one, at the time
                   of the commencement of the suit, actually
                   and voluntarily resides, or carries on
                   business, or personally works for gain; or
              (b)  any of the defendants, where there are more
                   than one, at the time of the commencement
                   of the suit actually and voluntarily resides,
                   or carries on business, or personally works
                   for gain, provided that in such case either
                   the leave of the Court is given, or the
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                               Page 13 of 26

                       defendants who do not reside, or carry on
                       business, or personally work for gain, as
                       aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or
              (c)       the cause of action, wholly or in part,
              arises.”
        22. In Harshad Chimanlal Modi Vs. DLF Universal Ltd.
        (2005) 7 SCC 791, it has been observed by the Apex Court as
        under:
              “16.     Section 16 thus recognizes a well established
                       principle that actions against rest or
                       property should be brought in the forum
                       where such rest is situate. A court within
                       whose territorial jurisdiction the property is
                       not situated has no power to deal with and
                       decide the rights or interests in such
                       property. In other words, a court has no
                       jurisdiction over a dispute in which it cannot
                       give an effective judgment. Proviso to
                       Section 16, no doubt, states that though the
                       court cannot, in case of immovable property
                       situate beyond jurisdiction, grant a relief in
                       rem still it can entertain a suit where relief
                       sought can be obtained through the personal
                       obedience of the defendant. The proviso is
                       based on well known maxim "equity acts in
                       personam", recognized by Chancery Courts
                       in England. Equity Courts had jurisdiction
                       to entertain certain suits respecting
                       immovable properties situated abroad
                       through personal obedience of the
                       defendant. The principle on which the maxim
                       was based was that courts could grant relief
                       in suits respecting immovable property
                       situate abroad by enforcing their judgments
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                  Page 14 of 26

                    by process in personam, i.e. by arrest of
                    defendant or by attachment of his property.
              17.   …………
              18.   The proviso is thus an exception to the main
                    part of the section which in our considered
                    opinion, cannot be interpreted or construed
                    to enlarge the scope of the principal
                    provision. It would apply only if the suit falls
                    within one of the categories specified in the
                    main part of the section and the relief sought
                    could entirely be obtained by personal
                    obedience of the defendant.
              19.   In the instant case, the proviso has no
                    application. The relief sought by the plaintiff
                    is     for specific performance of agreement
                    respecting immovable property by directing
                    the defendant No. 1 to execute sale-deed in
                    favor of the plaintiff and to deliver
                    possession to him. The trial court was,
                    Therefore, right in holding that the suit was
                    covered by Clause (d) of Section 16 of the
                    Code and the proviso had no application.
                20. ……
                21. Plain reading of Section 20 of the Code
                    leaves no room of doubt that it is a residuary
                    provision and covers those cases not falling
                    within the limitations of Sections 15 to 19.
                    The opening words of the section "Subject to
                    the limitations aforesaid" are significant and
                    make it abundantly clear that the section
                    takes within its sweep all personal actions. A
                    suit falling under Section 20 thus may be
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                 Page 15 of 26

                     instituted in a court within whose
                     jurisdiction the defendant resides, or carries
                     on business, or personally works for gain or
                     cause of action wholly or partly arises.”
        23. A perusal of the aforesaid judgment makes it
        abundantly clear that a Court within whose jurisdiction the
        property is not situated cannot decide the rights of the parties
        in respect of land or any other immoveable property and give
        effective judgment ruling on the same. The only exception to
        this is provided in the provision that is if the relief which is
        sought is of such a nature that it can be obtained simply by
        the personal obedience then that Court may entertain such a
        suit as an exception to Section 16(d) CPC.
        24. In Vipul Infrastructure Developers Ltd. & Anr. vs Rohit
        Kochhar; 2008 (102) DRJ 178 (DB), a suit for specific
        performance relating to a property situated in Gurgaon was
        filed in Delhi on the ground that the agreement was executed
        at Delhi and the defendants also carried on business at Delhi.
        The learned Single judge held the suit to be maintainable on
        the ground that only a declaration of right and title in the
        property was sought and not the delivery of possession. The
        Division Bench overruled this judgment holding that Delhi
        Court had no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit. The
        relevant paras of the judgment are reproduced as under:
              “19.   Accordingly, we are of the considered
                     opinion that the submissions of the learned
                     Counsel for the Respondent and the findings
                     recorded by the learned Single Judge that
                     the present case is covered by the proviso of
                     Section 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure
                     are misplaced. In the facts and
                     circumstances of the case as delineated, the
                     relief in the present suit cannot be entirely
                     obtained through the personal obedience of
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                Page 16 of 26

                   the Defendants. The proviso to Section 16 of
                   the Code of Civil Procedure would be
                   applicable to a case where the relief sought
                   for by the Plaintiff was entirely obtainable
                   through the personal obedience of the
                   Defendant, i.e., the Defendant has not at all
                   to go out of the jurisdiction of the Court for
                   the aforesaid purpose. The present case is
                   not a case of the aforesaid nature. In the
                   present case for execution of the sale deed
                   the Defendants will have to go out of the
                   jurisdiction of this Court and get the same
                   executed and registered in Gurgaon.
              20.  In the present case also it is an admitted
                   position that possession of the said property
                   was with the seller and, therefore, in terms
                   of the provisions of Section 55(1) of the
                   Transfer of Property Act, 1882, the relief of
                   possession is inherent in the relief of specific
                   performance of the contract. In our
                   considered opinion the ratio of the decision
                   of the Supreme Court in Babu Lal (supra)
                   and the principles laid down in the case of
                   Harshad Chiman Lal Modi(supra) are
                   applicable to the facts of the present case. In
                   Harshad Chiman Lal Modi (supra) it was
                   found that in addition to passing decree, the
                   court was also required to deliver
                   possession of the property. It was held that
                   such a relief can be granted only by sending
                   the concerned person responsible for
                   delivery of possession to Gurgaon and the
                   court at Delhi does not have the jurisdiction
                   to get the aforesaid decree enforced for the
                   property     situate     outside     territorial
                   jurisdiction of Delhi High Court. The Court
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                Page 17 of 26

                     while referring to the provisions of Section
                     16 of the Code of Civil Procedure held that
                     the location of institution of a suit would be
                     guided by the location of the property in
                     respect of which and for determination of
                     any right or interest whereof the suit is
                     instituted. The proviso to Section 16 Code of
                     Civil Procedure is also not applicable to the
                     case, as the relief sought for cannot be
                     entirely granted or obtained through the
                     personal obedience of the Respondent.
        25. Similar view was taken by this Court in Splendor
        Landbase Limited vs M/s. Mirage Infra Ltd. & Anr. 2010
        (116) DRJ 702 (DB). In this case, a suit for declaration and
        permanent injunction relating to a property situated at
        Chandigarh was filed at Delhi on the ground that the
        agreement was executed at New Delhi and payments were
        also made at New Delhi. The Division Bench of this Court
        following the judgments of the Supreme Court in Harshad
        Chiman Lal Modi (supra) and of Division Bench of this Court
        in Vipul Infrastructure Developers Ltd. (supra) held that this
        Court has no jurisdiction to entertain and try the suit. The
        relevant paragraph is as under:
              “25.   Having considered the decisions referred by
                     the parties and on a plain reading of the
                     plaint as a whole, it is clear as we have
                     indicated above that the present suit is one
                     which comes within the purview of Section
                     16 (d) of the Code of Civil Procedure and
                     the proviso of Section 16 of Code of Civil
                     Procedure is not applicable under the
                     circumstances as the proviso of Section 16 of
                     Code of Civil Procedure is an exception to
                     the main part of the Section which cannot be
                     construed to enlarge the scope of the main
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                Page 18 of 26

                    provision. If the suit comes within Section
                    16(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure, it has
                    been held by the Apex Court in Harshad
                    Chiman Lal Modi's case (supra) that Section
                    20 of the Code would have No. application
                    in view of the opening words of Section 20
                    "subject to limitations aforesaid". The Apex
                    Court has held that the proviso to Section 16
                    would apply only if the relief sought could
                    entirely be obtained by personal obedience
                    of the Defendant. The proviso we feel will
                    only apply if the suit falls within one of the
                    categories specified in the main part of the
                    Section. In the present case, although
                    specifically the relief for possession of the
                    property has not been claimed by the
                    Appellant in the prayer for the purpose of
                    development, however, it is settled law that
                    by clever drafting a party cannot be
                    permitted to come within different meaning
                    of relief claimed. Hence, No. benefit can be
                    derived by the Appellant either from the
                    proviso of Section 16 or Section 20 of the
                    Code of Civil Procedure.”
15.     In view of the aforesaid judgments passed in Harshad Chimanlal
Modi‟s case (supra) and Splendor Landbase Limited‟s case (supra), it is
very clear that although the appellant had filed a suit for permanent and
mandatory injunction but since the appellant does not have any pre-
existing right in the suit property, therefore, she essentially wants the
adjudication of the pre-existing right by a court within whose jurisdiction
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                               Page 19 of 26

the property is not situated, that court cannot grant such a relief.
Therefore, the appellant ought to have filed the aforesaid suit in District
Nagaur, Rajasthan on the basis of Section 16 (d) CPC. This reasoning
gets further fortified because the appellant herself had filed repeated
applications alleging that the respondents have done additions, alterations
and structural changes in the property in question and invited the report of
the Collector which report had further, according to the counsel for the
appellant, confirmed that such additions, alterations and structural
changes have been done clearly shows this court by virtue of the
adjudication of the present suit could not have directed the clock to be put
back and those additions, alterations or damages or structural changes
which were carried out in the suit property to be undone by a court in
Delhi.
16.     At this stage, I must also refer to the judgments cited by the learned
counsel for the appellant. These are The Fertilizer Corporation of India
Ltd. & Others vs. Ranjit Kumar Mishra; AIR 1980 Orissa 152, Gokul Das
& Another vs. Chagan Lal & Another; AIR 1928 Calcutta 887, H. Ahmed
and Co. vs. Kohinoor Glass Factory Ltd., Hyderabad; AIR 1961 A.P.
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                  Page 20 of 26

(FB) 476, Sri Rajendra Mills Ltd. vs. H.V.M. Hazi Hasan Dada &
Another; AIR 1970 Calcutta 342, M/s. L&T Niro Ltd. vs. M/s. S.R.P.
Industries Ltd.; 93 (2001) DLT 158 and Kanshi Ram vs. Dule Rai & Co.;
AIR 1933 Lahore 11.
17.     I have gone through all these judgments. Barring the judgment in
Shyama Sundari Dasi „Devi‟ vs. Ramapati Chattopadhya & Another; AIR
1973 Calcutta 319, all other judgments are essentially distinguishable on
the facts of each case. In most of these cases, the question of jurisdiction
is being seen in the light of the averments made by the respective sides
with regard to the place of business of the respondent or the accrual of the
cause of action. While as in each case, the question which is to be
considered is as to whether a plaint and meaningful reading of the plaint
shows that Delhi Court has the territorial jurisdiction or not? In this
regard, it has already been observed by this court hereinabove that for
maintaining a suit of permanent injunction, there must be a pre-existing
right in the property. In the instant case, there is no pre-existing right
shown by the appellant in the suit property which happens to be
Kuchaman Fort situated in District Nagaur, Rajasthan. The appellant has
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                               Page 21 of 26

based her claim on the interim order which has been purportedly passed
in regard to the status quo of the said property by a Delhi Court in a suit
for partition which, I, prima facie feel is not maintainable because the suit
property is not situated in Delhi. The appellant is also not seeking a
declaration with regard to the property in question. It is in this regard, the
judgment of Shyama Sundari‟s case (supra) is slightly relevant where the
Calcutta High Court has observed that a suit for declaration and
injunction does not involve any determination of any interest or right in
the land. In the said case, the plaintiff had filed a suit for declaration to
the effect that the two documents purported to have been signed by the
plaintiff were void and invalid and accordingly, an injunction order was
sought against the respondent that he should not interfere with the
possession of the plaintiff. It was in this context that the Single Judge of
the Calcutta High Court observed that the suit was to be filed under
Section 20 of the CPC at the place where the cause of action has accrued
or where the defendant resides or works for gain. This judgment, in my
opinion, does not lay down the correct exposition of law. It is in stark
contrast to the judgment of our own High Court in case titled Priyanka
Vivek Batra vs. Neeru Malik & Ors.; 154 (2008) DLT 354 wherein the
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                 Page 22 of 26

court has examined entire case law and came to the conclusion that a suit
for declaration encompasses to determination of a right or interest in
immovable property and it has to be filed at a place of local jurisdiction
where the property is situated. The judgment of the Calcutta High Court
has only persuasive value which reasoning I find not to be as sound as the
reasoning given by our own High Court and I tend to agree with HMJ
Rajiv Sahai Endlaw that the suit for declaration ought to be filed at a
place where the property is situated. But incidentally, it may be pertinent
here to mention that the appellant has not claimed any declaration even
and has straight away chosen to file a suit for permanent injunction.
Therefore, this question of declaration also is of academic interest and
does not help the appellant in any manner.
18.     Another noticeable aspect which I must observe in the instant case
as well as in other cases is that there is a recent trend in the courts to cite
as many judgments as is possible so that the judge is inundated with the
case law and is left to search as to what authority is applicable rather than
guide him properly. It has been laid down by the Apex Court not in one
judgment but in number of judgments that while applying the ratio
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                 Page 23 of 26

decidendi of a judgment applicable to the facts of a case, the court must
see the factual background in which the law has been laid down and
correlate the same with the facts of the case where the law is sought to be
made applicable. Reliance in this regard can be placed on Haryana
Financial Corporation & Anr. vs. Jagdamba Oil Mills & Anr.; AIR 2002
SC 834 and Sushil Suri vs. CBI; AIR 2011 SC 1713 and number of other
judgments. In the instant case while as without reference to the factual
matrix of the case, judgments have been sought to be relied upon by the
appellant so as to confuse the court as to the maintainability of the suit
itself on account of lack of territorial jurisdiction. I, therefore, feel that
the judgments which have been cited by the learned counsel for the
appellant are in no way helpful to the appellant in any manner
whatsoever.
19.     I feel that the judgments passed by the court below allowing the
application of the respondent under Order VII Rule 11 CPC and rejecting
the plaint holding that the Delhi court did not have the territorial
jurisdiction, does not suffer from any illegality or infirmity and
accordingly, the appeal of the appellant is without any merit and the same
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                                Page 24 of 26

is dismissed.      Since the appeal of the appellant has been dismissed
accordingly the order of status quo which has been passed by this court
on 19.10.2006 and in respect of the suit property and continued till date,
stands vacated.
20.     The only question now remains is with regard to two aspects; one
is an application under Order I Rule 10 bearing No.19493/2012 filed by
Shiva Corporation Pvt. Ltd. for being impleaded as a party. The said
application does not survive as the appeal itself has been dismissed.
Leaving this court only with C.M. Nos.4598/2008, 9924/2011 &
21007/2012 which are filed by the appellant under Order 39 Rule 2A read
with Section 151 CPC that is pertaining to initiation of contempt
proceedings against the respondent for willfully disobeying the interim
orders passed by this court from time to time. There is no dispute about
the fact that in case there were interim orders passed by this court and
they were disobeyed by the respondents, the same have to be dealt with in
accordance with law.       Accordingly, so far as these applications for
contempt are concerned, the Registry is directed to segregate them and
place in a separate folder along with photocopies of the order of which
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                            Page 25 of 26

the violation is alleged so that the same could be decided independently.
List these contempt applications on 15th July, 2013.
                                                         V.K. SHALI, J.
MAY 28, 2013
‘AA’
F.A.O. No.375/2007                                             Page 26 of 26


