                 HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
              JAIL CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.48 OF 2006
       From the judgment and order dated 05.05.2006 passed by
       Sri K.C.Pattnaik, Additional District & Sessions Judge, Gajapati,
       Paralakhemundi in Sessions Case No. 9/2005/Sessions Case
       No.158/05(GDC).
                                    -----------
       Penta Sabar                        …                    Appellant
                                    -   Versus –
       State of Orissa                   …                    Respondent
                    For Appellant         …     Mrs. Tapaswani Sinha,
                                                Advocate.
                    For   Respondent      …    Sk.Zafarulla,
                                               Addl.Standing Counsel.
                                  --------------
       PRESENT:
            THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE VINOD PRASAD
                                       AND
               THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE S.K.SAHOO
       Date of hearing: 07.01.2015          Date of judgment: 12.01.2015
Vinod Prasad, J. The sole appellant-Penta Sabar was prosecuted for
       committing uxoricide by murdering his second wife Gurubari
       Sabar, sister of the informant Sharma Sabar, on 24.12.2004 at 5
       p.m., inside the bed room of his house situated           in village

                                 2
Janiguda, under police circle Paralakhemundi, district Gajapati,
by the Additional District and Sessions Judge, in Sessions Case
No. 9/2005/Sessions Case No. 158/05(GDC) and was adjudged
guilty of that crime under Section 302, IPC and resultantly was
convicted of that crime and sentenced to imprisonment for life
and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/- and in default to serve another six
months RI vide impugned judgment and order dated 05.05.2006.
Challenge in this appeal by the convicted accused appellant is to
the aforesaid verdict.
2.           The back ground incident, as is evident from the FIR
Ext.1, materials collected during the investigation and the
deposition of the witnesses during the trial, reveals that the
deceased Guribari Sabar was the second wife of the appellant, a
cultivator, resident of village Janiguda, P.S. Parlakhemundi,
District Gajapati. Incidentally the appellant was also the second
husband of the deceased whose first husband was one Kurei
Sabar. Both, from Kurei Sabar as well as from the appellant,
deceased was blessed with a son each both named as Jisaya.
First Jisaya Sabar from the earlier husband Kurei Sabar and the
deceased resided in the informant’s village Kotapeta under
Serango Police Station, District Gajapati, where as the other son
Jisaya from the appellant and the deceased resided in village
Janiguda. After twenty years of their marriage, when their son
was aged about six years, on the ill fated day, i.e., 24.12.2004, at
5 p.m. there was a quarrel between the appellant and the
deceased in the witnessing of Santiamma Sabar, daughter-in-law
of the appellant/deceased and it is alleged that the appellant with
the help of his Lungi strangulated his wife Gurubari Sabar to
death. Information regarding demise of the deceased was
conveyed to her brother Sharma Sabar/PW.2 at his poultry by
his agnatic elder brother Lakia Sabar/PW.4. Both the brothers

                               3
then arrived at the scene of the incident saw the cadaver of the
deceased covered with a blanket and a Lungi was tied around her
neck. Both the brothers then laid the search for the appellant,
who was located by them at village Kathalakaitha at the house of
his elder brother    but seeing them appellant fled away. The
incident was narrated to the Sarpanch S.Balaraju/PW.7 of village
Podami by the brother of the deceased Sharma Sabar and on his
advice, Sharma Sabar/PW.2 got the FIR Ext.1 scribed through
Jayadev Apata/PW.8 and then tramping to a distance of 11 Kms.,
informant/PW.2 got his FIR registered on 25.12.2004 at 1.30
p.m. at Parlakhemundi P.S. as Case No. 219 of 2004 under
Section 302, IPC.
        The Inspector-in-Charge of Parlakhemundi P.S. registered
the crime and instructed the investigation to S.I. Siba Prasad
Biswal/PW.9,    who    immediately  initiated  the  investigation,
examined the informant, came to the spot, conducted inquest on
the cadaver of the deceased, prepared inquest report Ext.5 and
then dispatched the dead body for autopsy purposes. The
appellant was arrested on the same day and since he complained
of assault and injury, he was also sent for medical examination.
Wearing apparels of the deceased were seized by preparing
seizure memo whereas her ornaments were given under the
zimanama to Jisaya Sabar. Other witnesses were interrogated by
the I.O. and their statements were recorded including that of the
scribe PW.8. Autopsy report was received and wrapping up the
investigation, appellant was charge sheeted for murdering his
wife under Section 302, IPC. Injury report respecting the accused
is Ext.6.
3.           Autopsy   on the cadaver of the       deceased   was
conducted on 26.12.2004 by Dr. Prasant Kumar Padhi/PW.3,

                                4
who detected the following three injuries on the corpse of the
deceased:-
       (1)   Bruise 3”x2” on the right side of the scalp above eye
             lid.
       (2)   Bruise 3”x2” on posterior aspect of occipital region.
       (3)   Abrasion 2”x3” on left knee.
       Further    examination  of   the   cadaver    revealed    extra
vessation of blood into subcutaneous tissue of neck and adjacent
muscles. Carotid arteries internal coat were ruptured. The
cornua of the higher bone and superior cornua of the thyroid
cartilage were fractured. Larynx and trachea were congested and
contain frothy mucous. Lungs were marked congested with
presence of haemorrhagic patches. All internal visceras like lever,
kidney, spleen, brain were darkly congested. Stomach was empty.
Chambers of heart empty. Injuries on the cadaver were opined to
be ante mortem in nature and the cause of death was due to
asphyxia consequent to strangulation, which was homicidal in
nature. P.M. examination report of the deceased is Ext.3, and 36
to 48 hours had lapsed since she was murdered. On a query
made by the I.O., doctor/PW.3 has further opined on 21.01.
2005, through his opinion Ext.4, that the ligature mark on the
cadaver of the deceased was possible by the Lungi/M.O.-I, which
was recovered from her corpse by the police.
4.           Accused was summoned and in due course after
observing necessary formalities his case was committed to the
Court    of Session,   where   it   was   registered    as   Sessions
No.158/05(GDC) and subsequently re-numbered as Sessions No.
9/2005 on its transfer to the file of the learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Parlakhemundi. Appellant was charged with
offence under Section 302, IPC on 4.08.2005 by the learned trial
judge/Additional Sessions Judge, Parlakhemundi and since he

                                  5
denied the same and claimed to be tried, he was prosecuted for
that crime to establish his guilt.
5.            Reliance was placed by the prosecution to prove the
appellant’s guilt on nine witnesses. Magata Sabar/PW.1, Sharma
Sabar/PW.2, Lakia Sabar/PW.4, Santiamma Sabar/PW.5, Buda
Sabar/PW.6 are the fact witnesses whereas Dr. Prasant Kumar
Padhi/PW.3, S.Balaraju/PW.7, Jayadev Apata/PW.8 who scribed
the report and I.O.-Siba Prasad Biswal/PW.9 are the formal
witnesses. No defence witness was examined by the accused nor
was any documentary evidence led. FIR of the incident is Ext.1,
seizure list in respect of Lungi of the appellant and command
certificate is Ext.2, Autopsy report is Ext.3, opinion by the doctor
respecting Lungi as a weapon to strangulate the deceased is
Ext.4, inquest report of the deceased is Ext.5, injury requisition
of  the   appellant    is Ext.6  and    custody/zimanama     of  the
ornaments of the deceased is Ext.7 and the spot map of the
incident place is Ext.8.
6.            Learned trial judge after summating and weighing
through the oral and documentary evidences returned a verdict
of appellant being guilty of the crime of murder and therefore
convicted him under Section 302, IPC and sentenced him to life
imprisonment with fine of Rs.5000/-(Rupees five thousand) and
in default to serve six months additional R.I. through the
impugned judgment and order giving rise to the instant appeal at
the behest of the convicted accused-appellant.
7.            In this back ground, we have heard Mrs. Tapaswani
Sinha for the appellant and Sk.Zafarullha, learned Additional
Standing Counsel for the State and have scanned the entire trial
court record and the evidences.
8.            Unleashing the criticism of the impugned judgment,
learned counsel for the appellant raises many contentions

                                  6
including    that   none   of  the   facts  have    been  established
conclusively and nobody is an eye witness to the incident. The
appellant has been falsely implicated and that there are
discrepancies galore on the testimony of the witnesses and
consequently     the   impugned     conviction   and   sentence   are
indefencible. Learned Additional Standing Counsel refuting the
contentions argues to the contrary and urges that but for the
appellant, nobody else could have committed murder of the wife
and the chain        of events brought on record conclusively
establishes his guilt beyond any shadow of doubt. Near and dear
relatives of the appellant have appeared as witnesses against him
who had no reason to concoct a story against the head of the
family as the real perpetrator of the crime and therefore, the
appeal is devoid of merit and deserves to be dismissed.
9.            After giving our thoughtful considerations over the
rival contentions and after scrutinizing the evidence, we are of
the opinion that so far as conviction of the appellant is
concerned, the same seems to be infallible, as but for him nobody
else could have committed the crime. The reasons for our
conclusion are that the incident had occurred in the wintery
evening on 24.12.2004 at 5 p.m. and normally at that time, in
villages, the people are inside their houses/hutments. The
presence of the appellant and the deceased inside their house
therefore   is   very   natural.  Further   we    find  that  Magata
Sanar/PW.1 in no uncertain terms has stated that he had
witnessed this appellant strangulating the deceased by wrapping
the Lungi around her neck and pulling it from both the ends. At
that time Santiamma Sabar/PW.5, daughter-in-law of the
appellant and deceased was also present and was dissuading the
accused from assaulting her mother-in-law, which forbidding did
not yield any result. It is further statement of PW.1 that after the

                                 7
deceased died, accused sprinted away into the Jungle. House of
PW.1 is at a distance of 20-24 feet away from the house of the
deceased and the appellant and therefore his presence at the
place of the incident is not something which is unnatural. Giving
topographical descriptions, PW.1 had deposed that the house of
the appellant consisted of one kitchen and a bed rooms and since
the front door was locked, he had peeped through the ventilated
portion of the bari side door and was able to witness the deceased
lying on the floor while the appellant was strangulating her facing
towards PW.1. It has been further stated that the accused had
seen PW.1 peeping through the door. This incident was conveyed
to Lakia Sabar/PW.4 by PW.1, who was brother of the deceased.
During cross-examination the details have got elicited by the
defence itself and therefore there remains no manner of doubt
that the deceased was done to death inside the bed room by the
appellant.
10.          The testimony of PW.1 has been corroborated in all
material aspects by the informant Sharma Sabar/PW.2, who was
conveyed about the murder of his sister by his brother Lakia
Sabar/PW.4. Arriving at the scene of the incident, informant
himself had seen the dead body of his sister covered with a
blanket and the Lungi was tied around her neck.          They had
searched for the appellant and then at the advice of the Sarpanch
S.Balaraju/PW.7, the informant/PW.2 had dictated the FIR to
scribe Jayadev Apata/PW.8 and then had lodged it at the police
station. Informant is also a witness of the seizure of the Lungi
vide seizure memo Ext.2. He was at Parlakhemundi on the date
of the incident and from his cross-examination we do not find
anything worthwhile damaging the prosecution story in its main
substratum. His cross-examination further reveals that the

                                 8
appellant was at the house of his elder brother and seeing the
informant he had escaped from the house.
11.          Coming to another fact witness-Lakia Sabar/PW.4,
he has also corroborated his predecessor fact witness and has
deposed that after coming to know about the demise of the
deceased from Magata Sabar, he had gone to the house of the
appellant and had seen his dead sister, thereafter this witness
had informed the incident to his brother Sharma Sabar, the
informant/PW.2, who had lodged the FIR regarding the incident.
Virtually the defence had abdicated its responsibility in seriously
challenging the testimony of this witness Lakia Sabar and
therefore, there remains little doubt that the deceased lost her life
inside her house in the bed room after being strangulated with
the help of a Lungi belonging to the appellant. Santiamma
Sabar/PW.5, who is the daughter-in-law of the appellant as well
as of the deceased, in no uncertain terms had narrated that she
had witnessed the accused dragging the deceased wrapping his
Lungi around her neck. On the date of the incident she was a girl
of sixteen years of age and her statement during the trial was
recorded one year after the incident and at that time she was
seventeen years of age. From her cross-examination only an
omission has been pointed out that she had not stated before the
police that the appellant had quarreled with the deceased at
1p.m. and had threatened her. To us, such an omission is of no
value as P.W.5 had no reason to lie against her own father-in-law
to ruin her marital life. No suggestion has been given to her that
she had any animus against the appellant and therefore, her
straight forward evidence inspire confidence and we treat her to
be a truthful and creditworthy witness, whose narration about
the actual strangulation cannot be brushed aside. Another
important feature is that Buda Sabar/PW.6, who is the brother of

                                 9
the appellant, also appeared as a witness against him and
testified that the deceased had murder his wife. Buda Sabar, like
PW.5, also had no reason to implicate the appellant as the sole
perpetrator of the crime and nothing has been elicited from him,
which may create a doubt in the prosecution story or he is being
a witness against the appellant. Thus, we have no hesitation in
concluding that so far as guilt of the appellant is concerned, the
same has been cemented convincingly without any other premise
or hypothesis and therefore, conviction part of the appellant is
untenable and we hereby concur with the opinion of the learned
trial judge that the guilt of the appellant has been established
beyond all shadow of reasonable doubt.
12.          This leads us to the question as to whether the
appellant can be made responsible for committing the murder of
his wife or in the facts and circumstances his crime will be one of
culpable homicide not amounting to murder punishable under
Section 304, Part(1) of the IPC. In this respect we find that the
evidence of daughter-in-law/PW.5 is that the incident between
the appellant and the deceased was preceded by a quarrel.
Narration in the case diary and the statement of PW.5 informs us
that the quarrel took place over giving of meal. Prosecution has
not been fair enough to the court and in fact it has failed to bring
the real statement before the court that the incident started
because of giving of meal. Further, the testimony of PW.5 in the
court also indicates that there was some altercation between the
deceased and the appellant in course of which the appellant had
assaulted the deceased. In view of the aforesaid, we are in great
doubt that in fact the appellant intended to cause death of the
deceased or had an intention to cause such bodily injury as in all
probability could have resulted in her death. Case of the
appellant, in our opinion does not fall in any of the categories

                                 10
enumerated in Section 300, IPC, so as to clothe the guilt of
murder around the appellant’s neck. Bruises on the right side of
the scalp above the eye lid, on posterior aspect of occipital region
and abrasion on the left knee, the three physical injuries noted
by the doctor are also not indicative of the fact that the culprit
(appellant) had the requisite intention to commit murder of the
deceased. In our view the incident had started all of a sudden at
the spur of the moment because of some altercation between
them. There is no evidence on record that prior to this incident,
there was a quarrel of such magnitude between the appellant and
the deceased, which could have prompted the appellant to
commit her murder after twenty years of their marriage and after
having a son aged about six years. What is perceptible is that all
of a sudden in a fight between wife and the husband, out of sheer
outrage, the appellant-husband acted hastily in wrapping up his
Lungi around her neck and pressing it , which resulted in
deceased’s demise. Here we would like to add that the means of
strangulating the deceased was also an unconventional Lungi, it
is neither string nor any other blunt object and therefore it seems
that when the incident started, appellant had no intention to
commit murder of the deceased. Our analysis as above refrains
us from convicting the appellant for a charge of murder and
persuade us to conclude that the appellant can be held to be
guilty only for an offence of culpable homicide not amounting to
murder punishable under section 304, Part-1, IPC and we hereby
hold as such.
13.          Coming to the sentence part of it, the appellant was
arrested on 25.12.2004 and therefore has already undergone 10
years of RI. In our opinion the substantive sentence undergone
by the appellant is sufficient to meet the ends of justice.

                                        11
       14.           Concluding the decision, we hereby allow the appeal
       in part. Conviction of the appellant for charge under Section 302,
       IPC and sentence of life imprisonment with fine of Rs.5000/-, are
       scored out and instead, appellant is convicted under Section 304,
       Part-I, IPC and for that crime he is sentenced to the period of
       imprisonment already under gone by him. The appellant was
       allowed bail by this Court on 31.10.2011 and therefore, he need
       not surrender. His personal bail bonds are discharged and he is
       set at liberty.
       15.           The appeal is allowed in part as above.
       16.           Let copy of the judgment be certified to the learned
       trial judge for its information.
                                                     …………………………
                                                       Vinod Prasad, J.
S.K.Sahoo, J         I agree.
                                                    ………………………….
                                                         S.K.Sahoo, J.
       Orissa High Court, Cuttack
       The 12th January, 2015/AKD

12

