$~56.
*       IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI
+                       Date of Decision: 31.01.2013
%       W.P.(C) 2615/2011 and C.M. No.5588/2011
        MODERN FOOD INDUSTRIES (I) LTD
                                                                 ..... Petitioner
                          Through:    Mr. Sandeep Prabhakar, Mr.Amit
                                      Kumar & Ms. Prerna Mehta,
                                      Advocates.
                          versus
        LALJEE YADAV AND ORS
                                                            ..... Respondents
                          Through:    Mr. Sanjoy Ghose, Advocate for
                                      respondents No.1 & 2.
                                      Mr. Mithilesh Kumar Mishra &
                                      Mr.H.S. Sachdeva, Advocates for
                                      respondent No.3.
        CORAM:
         HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VIPIN SANGHI
VIPIN SANGHI, J. (ORAL)
1.      The petitioner management has preferred the present writ petition to
assail the award dated 10.09.2010 passed by the Labour Court-XII,
Karkardooma Courts, Delhi in I.D. No.1499/04/99, whereby the Labour
Court has answered the reference made to it by the Appropriate Government
in favour of the respondent workmen and against the petitioner management.
The following reference was made by the Appropriate Government on
03.11.2000 to the Labour Court:
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                       Page 1 of 16

        “Whether the services of S/Sh. Krishna Kumar Laljee Yadav &
        Sanjay Kr. Pandey have been terminated illegally and/or
        unjustifiably by the management, and if so, to what relief are
        they entitled and what directions are necessary in this
        respect?”
2.      The claim of the respondent workmen was that they were employed
by the petitioner as Salesmen since 10.03.1997 on monthly salary of
Rs.1,500/- plus conveyance allowance of Rs.500/- each. They claimed that
the petitioner was engaged in the manufacture of bread, fruitcake, etc. They
claimed that their services were terminated on 20.11.1997 (Krishan Kumar),
01.03.1998 (Laljee Yadav) and 01.06.1998 (Sanjay Kumar Pandey) without
notice and without communicating any reason. They alleged breach of
Sections 25-F, 25-G, 25-H and 25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947
(the Act). Despite their demand notice, the dispute could not be resolved
before the Labour Commissioner or in conciliation proceedings and,
therefore, they sought the aforesaid reference to the Labour Court.
3.      The petitioner management raised a preliminary objection to the
effect that the respondents were not covered under the definition of
„workman‟ and, therefore, they had no right to invoke the provisions of the
Act. The petitioner challenged the maintainability of the reference before
the Labour Court.        It was further alleged by the petitioner that the
respondent workmen had also applied for appointment as Distributors and
these applications were also accepted and they were appointed as
Distributors on terms & conditions which also show that they were not
„workman‟ of the petitioner management. The petitioner claimed that the
respondents had been appointed for a period of three months as „Salesman‟
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                   Page 2 of 16

against temporary posts for sales promotion purpose on salary-cum-
incentive basis.
4.      On 21.04.2004, the issues were framed and the first issue was –
whether their existed the relationship of employer and employee between
the parties. The second issue was in terms of reference. Evidence was led
by the parties on affidavits and the witnesses were cross-examined. The
Labour Court held that the respondents were „workman‟. It was also held
that the workmen had not accepted the Distributorship Agreement by
complying with the terms thereof. On that basis, the Labour Court invoked
the other provisions of the Act and granted lump-sum compensation of
Rs.40,000/- each in lieu of the respondents‟ claim for reinstatement, back
wages, compensation, etc. along with interest @ 9% per annum. However,
no relief was granted in respect of Krishan Kumar on the ground that he had
failed to establish that he had worked for 240 days in the year preceding his
termination.
5.      The submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the case of
the respondent workmen in their statement of claim was that they were
appointed by the management against the “permanent post of salesman”. It
was not their case that though they were designated as „Salesman‟, they
were performing any other manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational,
clerical or supervisory work which could bring them within the definition of
the expression „workman‟ as defined in Section 2(s) of the Act.
6.      The submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that at the
relevant time „Salesman‟ was not covered by the definition of „workman‟ as
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                      Page 3 of 16

defined under the Act. He submits that in their written statement/reply, the
very first preliminary objection taken by the petitioner was that the
applicants are not covered under the definition of „workman‟ and that they
have no right to apply to the Labour Court under the Act and, as such, the
referenced is not maintainable.
7.      The petitioner had also pleaded in paragraph 2 of the preliminary
objections that the applicants/workmen had been appointed for a period of
three months for sales promotion of the products of the management.
8.      Learned counsel submits that the respondents not having pleaded in
their statement of claim that though their appointment was as „Salesman‟ for
development of the business of sale of bread, the same was a camouflage,
and they had been appointed primarily to carry out manual, or unskilled, or
skilled, or technical, or operational, or clerical or supervisory work. He
submits that this being the position, the respondents were precluded from
claiming that they are covered by the definition of the expression „workman‟
and the Labour Court was also precluded from proceeding to examine
whether the respondents were „workman‟ or not. He submits that, in any
event, the petitioner had led evidence to show that payment of varying
amounts, month after month, had been made to the respondents for the
services rendered by them, depended upon the sales made by them.
9.      In support of his submission, learned counsel for the petitioner has
placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in H.R. Adyanthaya
Vs. Sandoz (India) Ltd., AIR 1994 SC 2608, a Constitution Bench judgment
of the Supreme Court. The Constitution Bench was constituted in view of
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                    Page 4 of 16

the conflict of opinion arising from the earlier decisions of the Supreme
Court in May and Baker (India) Ltd. Vs. Their Workmen, (1961) @ Lab
LJ94: AIR 1967 SC 678 and two other decisions on the one hand, and S.K.
Verma Vs. Mahesh Chandra, (1983) 3 SCR 799 : AIR 1984 SC 1462, on
the other hand. Whereas the three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in
May and Baker (supra) had held that a medical representative of a
Pharmaceutical company was not „workman‟, in S.K. Verma (supra) the
Supreme Court had taken a diametrically opposite view but without
reference to the earlier decisions in May and Baker (supra), Western Indian
Match Co. Ltd. Vs. Their Workmen, AIR 1964 SC 472, and Burmah Shell
Oil Storage & Distribution Co. Of India Vs. Burmah Shell Management
Staff Association, (1971) 2 SCR 758. The Supreme Court after considering
the earlier decisions observed that the position as it obtained when the Court
was considering H.R. Adyanthaya (supra) was that for a person to be a
„workman‟ under the Act, he/she must be employed to do the work of any of
the categories, namely manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational,
clerical or supervisory. It was not enough that he is not covered by either of
the four exceptions to the definition. The Supreme Court reiterated the said
interpretation of the law in H.R. Adyanthaya (supra). It was held that a
„Salesman‟ engaged in the promotion of sales of the employer cannot be
said to fall in any of the aforesaid categories to qualify as a „workman‟.
10.     Learned counsel for the petitioner has also referred to the decision of
the Supreme Court in Shankar Chakravarti Vs. Britannia Biscuit Co. Ltd.
& Anr., 1979 AIR 1652, wherein the Supreme Court had observed that the
rules of fairplay demand that where a party seeks to establish a contention
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                     Page 5 of 16

which, if proved, would be sufficient to deny relief to the opposite side, such
a contention has to be specifically pleaded and then proved. There is no
question of proving something which is not pleaded. He submits that it was
for the respondent workmen to plead that though they were engaged as
„salesman‟ for sales promotion, they were actually not Salesmen, and were
rendering service as „workman‟ within the definition of the said expression
contained in the Act. Since there was no such pleading made by them, there
was no question of their being permitted to lead evidence to the contrary, or
the Labour Court considering the said submission of the respondents. He
further submits that the petitioner‟s evidence brought on record before the
Labour Court establishes the fact that they were, indeed, engaged in the
activity of sales promotion. The incidental rendering of manual labour, i.e.,
of lifting the bread crates etc. would not deviate from the primary
responsibility discharged by the respondents as „salesman‟.
11.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that it is only after issuance
of the notification dated 31.01.2011 published on 01.02.2011 under the
Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976, that sales
promotion employees employed in, inter alia, biscuits and confectionaries
industry, have been classified as „workman‟ under the Act.             The Sales
Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 earlier did not
cover such employees engaged in the industry being run by the petitioner.
12.     Mr. Ghosh, learned counsel for the respondent had defended the
impugned award insofar as it holds that the respondents were „workman‟
within the meaning of the Act. He, firstly, submits that the petitioner did not
even seek the framing of a specific issue on the said aspect. If the petitioner
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                       Page 6 of 16

was so serious about the preliminary objections raised by it, the petitioner
ought to have sought an issue on its plea – i.e. whether, or not, the
respondents were „salesmen‟ or „workmen‟. He further submits that the
evidence brought on record by the respondents clearly shows that their
nomenclature as Salesman was inconsequential since they were, in fact,
performing manual labour. They were engaged in delivering the products of
the employer at various locations. They were not acting independently.
They did not even have their independent conveyance.            They did not
exercise any independent control or supervision over the other workmen of
the employer.
13.     Mr. Ghosh submits that a „Salesman‟ is not the same as a „Sales
Promotion Executive‟. The nature of duties of the two are distinct. A
„Salesman‟ only carries on the sales activities for the employer, whereas a
„Sales Promotion Executive‟ solicits prospective clients and customers. He
further submits that the issue whether, or not, the relationship of employer
and employee existed between the parties is separate & distinct from the
issue whether the respondents were workmen.             He submits that the
appropriate government made the reference after application of mind to the
issue whether the respondents were workmen, or not. The fact that the
reference was made itself shows that the respondents were treated as
„workmen‟. If it was the contention of the petitioner that the respondents
were not „workmen‟, it was for the petitioner to have specifically sought an
issue. Not having done so, it is not open to the petitioner to now claim that
the respondents were not „workman‟ within the meaning of Section 2(s) of
the Act, or that this aspect could not have been gone into by the Labour
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                   Page 7 of 16

Court.
14.     He also relies on the evidence led by the respondents before the
Labour Court to submit that the respondents are workmen. He submits that
the finding of fact returned by the Labour Court in this regard should not be
interfered with in writ jurisdiction, particularly, when the said finding cannot
be said to be perverse or contrary to the evidence brought on record.
Discussion
15.     The reference made by the Appropriate Government is only to the
effect whether the service of the respondent workman was illegally and/or
unjustifiably terminated by the management and, if so, to what relief they
are entitled and what directions are necessary in that respect. That is the
basic dispute between the parties. When the Labour Court examines the
reference, the same is done on the basis of the pleadings of the parties. In
their pleadings, it was for the parties to raise their submissions of fact & law.
The respondent workmen had of their own stated in their statement of claim
that they are working with the management on permanent post of
„Salesman‟. They had also placed reliance on their letters of appointment as
Salesman. The said letters of appointment, inter alia, stated as follows:
        “Sub:-APPOINTMENT OF SALESMAN ON TEMPORARY
        BASIS FOR DEVELOPMENT OF SALE OF BREAD
        Sir,
        With reference to the interview held on 21&22.02.97 for the
        appointment of Salesman on purely temporary basis for the
        development of sale of bread. We are pleased to appoint you
        as Salesman purely on temporary basis at Delhi unit on the
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                       Page 8 of 16

        following terms and conditions:
        a) You will be paid a consolidated amount of Rs.1,500/-
            (Rupees one thousand five hundred only) per month for
            Rs.500/- as conveyance allowance during the period.
        b) Necessary deductions on account of E.S.I. at the rate of
            1.75% and Provident Fund at the rate of 10% as prevalent
            from the above amount will be made by the Company.
        c) 10 days leave on pro-rate basis in year will be admissible to
            you.
        Your area of operation i.e. route and base sale target will also
        be fixed as per our requirement. The route can be changed at
        any time without any prior notice by the Management.
        This appointment of Salesman is purely on temporary basis for
        the period of three months w.e.f. date of joining. This can be
        terminated by either part after giving a notice of seven days
        only. During this period no other payment/perquisites except
        the above shall be payable to you.
        In case of any dispute/misunderstanding, the decision of the Sr.
        General Manageer of the Delhi Bread Unit-I of Modern Food
        Industries (I) Limited, shall be final and binding.
        This appointment will not confer any right of him for regular
        appointment under the Company.” (emphasis supplied)
16.     From the aforesaid, it would be seen that the letters of appointment
were for appointment of „Salesman‟ “for development of sale of bread”.
The appointment letters did not merely say that the appointment was being
made for “sale of bread”.          This important aspect in these letters of
appointment has repeatedly been emphasized in the subject as well as in the
opening paragraphs of the letters. Though, the remuneration payable was not
correlated to the sales turnover achieved by the efforts of the workmen, and
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                    Page 9 of 16

the respondents were entitled to be paid a fixed remuneration of Rs.1,500/-
per month and Rs. 500/- as conveyance allowance that, in my view, would
not make a difference to the nature of duties required to be performed by the
respondents. The fixation of the “base sale target” shows that „salesmen‟
were expected to scout for and solicit customers so as to achieve the targets
set by the management. If the case of the respondents was that, though they
were designated as „Salesman‟ for development of sale of bread they were,
in fact, performing manual labour as delivery men, it was for them to say so
in their statement of claim. However, that was not the case set up by the
respondents.
17.     The petitioner, on the other hand, at the earliest opportunity made
their stand clear by stating that the respondents were not „workmen‟ covered
by the definition of „workman‟ under the Act; they have no right to apply to
the Labour Court under the Act, and; the reference is not maintainable. The
petitioner also stated that the respondents were employed as „Salesman‟ for
a period of three months for sales promotion of the products of the
management. Pertinently, in the rejoinder filed by the respondent workmen,
they did not dispute the aforesaid stand of the petitioner. The rejoinder is
short and cryptic, and relevant part of the rejoinder filed by the respondent
workmen reads as follows:
        “Para 1 to 5 of the reply are wrong and denied hence not
        acceptable to the workmen. If the management feels that the
        Govt. of NCT of Delhi while making the reference misused its
        powers then the management can file writ in the High Court.
        Govt. of NCT of Delhi is not a party before the Labour Court.
        Other facts are related to the present dispute in which the
        Hon’ble Court has to seek if the lock out by the Management is
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                   Page 10 of 16

        legal and justified. Thus the management is taking false ground
        to justify its illegal acts and the workmen need not comment on
        those false grounds, in as much as illegal acts are not
        justifiable.
        REPLY PARAWISE
        Paras 1 to 11 of the reply are wrong and hence not acceptable
        to the workmen. Date of appointment, designation and salary
        as given in the claim are correct. So far as other contents are
        concerned the contents of reply to preliminary objection and
        that of the statement of claim are referred to. Workmen are
        unemployed since the date of their termination of services and
        are ready to resume their duties. In reply to the rest of the
        contents the reply to the preliminary objections is referred to.
        Other facts are matter of record, evidence and arguments and
        hence need no reply.”
18.     It is on the basis of the aforesaid pleadings that the issues were framed
by the Labour Court. The first issue being: whether the relationship of
employee and employer existed between the parties. Though the submission
of learned counsel for the respondents is that the said issue is not the same as
the issue: whether the respondents were „workmen‟ or not, I am of the view
that the issue: whether the respondents were „workmen‟ or not, is a narrower
issue and is covered by the larger issue: whether the relationship of
employer and employee existed between the parties. Since the respondents
had not sought any issue to claim that, though they were designated as
„Salesmen‟ for promotion of sale of bread, they were „workmen‟ under the
Act, it was not necessary for the petitioner to have sought a specific issue in
that respect. The case of the petitioner was pitched even higher, since,
according to the petitioner, the respondents were not even the employees of
the petitioner, let alone „workman‟.           According to the petitioner, the
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                       Page 11 of 16

appointment of the respondents was as „Salesman‟ for a term of three
months whereafter they had entered into agreements to act as Distributors
under specified terms & conditions.          According to the petitioner, the
respondents upon being appointed as Distributors ceased to function even as
„Salesman‟ for promotion of sale of bread. The Labour Court has, however,
not accepted the petitioner‟s submission that the respondents were
functioning as Distributors under the Distributorship Agreement.           The
reasoning for the same is that the said agreements were never put into
operation as the respondents had not made payment of the amounts due to be
paid under those agreements.
19.     Even if this finding of the Labour Court (that the respondents did not
become distributors) were to be accepted, and one were to proceed on the
basis that the respondents did not become Distributors of the petitioner, the
smaller issue, viz. whether the respondents were „workmen‟, or not, was still
required to be adjudicated. The Labour Court has, in fact, proceeded to
adjudicate the said issue. Therefore, it cannot be said that the petitioner
failed to raise the issue about the respondents not being „workmen‟ and,
therefore, they are precluded from urging that the respondents were not
„workmen‟.        In fact, the position is to the contrary, as noticed above.
Though the petitioner had raised the issue with regard to the respondents not
being „workmen‟ in their preliminary objections, the respondents have not
dealt with the same in their rejoinder. They had not pleaded that they were
„workmen‟ and not „salesman‟ engaged for promotion of sale of bread, or
that their designation as „Salesman‟ for promotion of sale of bread was
incorrect or misleading.
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                   Page 12 of 16

20.     The submission of Mr. Ghosh that there is a distinction between a
„Salesman‟ and a „Sales Promotion Executive‟, and that a „Salesman‟ merely
carries on sales, whereas the Sales Promotion Executive solicits clients and
customers, though appears to be correct, in my view, has not much relevance
in the facts of this case. The respondents not having made any pleading or
set up a case contrary to their own appointment letters, could not have been
heard to say that they were not „salesman‟ engaged for development of sale
of bread. The evidence led by the respondents to the effect that they used to
perform the task of loading and unloading and also maintaining accounts
with regard to supply of crates to the hospital and to prepare the sale &
purchase documents and provide the same to the concerned officers, can
only be understood as activities performed by the respondents incidental to
the main function of development of sale of bread by them. Moreover, the
respondents could not have led evidence beyond their own pleadings. They
could not have been heard to say that they are not „Salesman‟ engaged in the
business of sale of bread, but engaged only for the purpose of selling and
supplying the bread to various purchasers/consumers as delivery men.
Pertinently, their appointment was not as “Deliveryman” but as “Salesman”
for development of sale of bread with targets fixed by the management. A
mere delivery man would not be concerned about the targets/turnover. He
would simply deliver the goods as per the instructions of the management or
the customer. This also clearly shows that the respondents were not mere
deliverymen but „salesmen‟. What the respondents sought to establish in
their evidence before the Labour Court was that they were Deliveryman – a
case never set up by them in their pleadings.
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                  Page 13 of 16

21.     Mr. Ghosh has placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in
Management of Messers Roneo Vickers India Limited Vs. Lt. Governor of
Delhi & Others, 53 (1994) DLT 785, in support of his submission that since
the Labour Court has held, on the basis of the evidence led before it, that the
respondents fall within the definition of the term „workman‟, this Court
would not re-appreciate the evidence and arrive at a different conclusion in a
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. In my view, this case
does not advance the cause of the respondents for two reasons. Firstly, the
approach of the Labour Court itself is flawed. The real issue is with regard
to examination of a case never set up by the respondents in their pleadings
and in their evidence. It is well-settled that a party cannot set up a different
case in his evidence from the one set up in his pleadings. If that is done, it is
for the concerned Court not to permit that to succeed. However, in the
present case the approach of the Labour Court is erroneous, since the Labour
Court permitted the respondents to lead evidence and to show that they were
performing manual functions, though, that was not the pleading made by
them in their statement of claim, and even in their rejoinder, they did not
specifically deal with or deny the defence of the petitioner management.
The decision of the Supreme Court in Shankar Chakravarti (supra) is
attracted in the facts of this case. Secondly, where the finding of fact is not
founded upon the relevant evidence or is contrary to the evidence, or arrived
at by taking into consideration irrelevant materials, this Court is not
powerless to interfere with such a finding in writ proceedings. For the same
reason, reliance placed on Berger Paints India Limited Vs. Chandrakant N
Raut, 2000 LawSuit (BOM) 909, appears to be misplaced.
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                     Page 14 of 16

22.     The submission of Mr. Ghosh that the reference made by the
appropriate government did not raise the issue whether the respondents were
„workmen‟ or „salesmen‟, and thus the said issue stood concluded in favour
of the respondents needs only to be stated to be rejected. The reference was
sought by the workmen. If they desired to raise an issue/dispute regarding
their status – as being workmen and not being salesmen, it was for them to
seek the reference accordingly.       In any event, when the appropriate
government makes the reference, it does not make any adjudication of any
issue. It is not an adjudicatory exercise that the appropriate government
undertakes while making the reference.
23.     The decision of the Supreme Court in M.R. Adyanthaya (supra), in
my view, squarely applies to the facts of the present case. In that case, the
question for consideration before the Supreme Court was whether medical
sale representatives were covered under the definition of workmen under the
Act. The Supreme Court referred to and relied upon its earlier decision in
May & Baker (supra) and Burma Shell (supra), wherein it was observed
that the main work of medical sale representatives was that of canvasing
sales and that any clerical or manual or technical or supervisory work that
they had to do viz. carrying out correspondences; making recommendations
for selection of agents & dealers; extension or curtailment of credit facilities
to agents/dealers/customers etc.- was incidental & ancillary to the said main
work. In view of the said observations, the Supreme Court rejected the
contention that medical representatives are engaged in the “skilled” and
“technical” work. The court observed that medical sales representatives do
not perform duties of skilled and technical nature and, therefore, they are not
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                    Page 15 of 16

„workmen‟. The connotation of the word “skilled”, in the context in which it
is used, will not include the work of a sales promotion employee such as the
medical representative. That word has to be construed ejusdem generis and
thus construed, would mean skilled work whether manual or non-manual,
which is of a genre of the other types of work mentioned in the definition.
The work of promotion of sales of the product or services of the
establishment is distinct from, and independent of the types of work covered
under the said definition. The respondents, in the present case, too, as
aforementioned, have been appointed as salesman for the development of
sales of bread. Their main work was to promote the sale of bread and
achieve the base target set by the management. Any manual work viz. lifting
the bread and delivering the same was merely ancillary and incidental to the
main work of sale of bread. The said incidental work would not, as taken
note of the Supreme Court, bring the respondents within the ambit of the
other types of work forming a part of the definition of „workman‟.
24.     For the aforesaid reasons, in my view, the impugned award cannot be
sustained and is, accordingly, set aside. However, it is made clear that this
decision would not impact the case of Krishan Kumar, who was Claimant
No.1 before the Labour Court, since in his writ petition W.P.(C.)
No.7445/2011, he has settled his disputes with the management. The Rule is
made absolute. Parties are left to bear their own Costs.
                                                          VIPIN SANGHI, J
JANUARY 31, 2013
BSR
W.P.(C) 2615/2011                                                  Page 16 of 16


