                                         WA No.162 of 2017
                            BEFORE
      HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
19.6.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Mr.AK Purkayastha, and Mr.NN Upadhyay, learned
       counsel for the appellant.
       None for the respondents.
       Heard on admission.
       This intra court appeal is directed against the order
dated 27.2.2017 passed by the learned Single Judge of this
High Court, whereby he has dismissed appellant’s WP(C)
No.529/2017 directing him to approach Debt Recovery Tribunal
for the reliefs prayed.
       Respondent No.4 borrowed loan from the Punjab
National Bank and the appellant is alleged to have stood as his
guarantor. Respondent No.4 has not paid the installments and
therefore, the Bank has proceeded against him under Section
13(2) of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (in short
“SARFAESI Act”). The Bank has also issued notice to the
appellant under Section 13(2) of the Sarfaesi Act treating him
as guarantor of Respondent No.4.
       According to the appellant, he has filed a civil suit
against Respondent No.4 and the Bank pleading therein that he
is a victim of fraud played by Respondent No.4 as he never
stood as guarantor for him. The Civil Court is also reported to
                                                      Page 1 of 2

have prima facie agreed with the appellant and thus directed
the parties to maintain status quo.
        Armed with the said finding of the Civil Court, the
appellant filed WP(C) No.529/2017 for a direction that
proceedings before the Debt Recovery Tribunal against him be
stayed. The learned Single Judge by the impugned order has
finally disposed of the writ petition with liberty to the appellant
to file appropriate appeal under Section 17 of the SARFAESI Act
before the Debt Recovery Tribunal.
        Since the appellant has an alternative efficacious
statutory remedy available to him, we find no good ground to
admit this appeal. Even otherwise, as stated by the appellant,
the Civil Court has already directed the parties to maintain
status quo insofar as it relates to recovery of amount from him
is concerned.
        The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
             JUDGE                                CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                         Page 2 of 2


