                      IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT,
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                      Writ Appeal No.182 of 2016
AP P ELLANT:
        Governing Body of Burhinagar Junior College
        represented by its President Sri Madhab Chandra Rajbongshi,
        S/o Late Puwa Ram Das, R/o Mangaldai ,
        PO & P.S. Mangaldai, District Darrang, Assam.
R ESP ONDENTS :
1.      The State of Assam
        represented by the Commissioner & Secretary,
        Govt. of Assam Education (Secondary) Dispur,
        Guwahati-6 District Kamrup Assam & others
                                          BEFORE
                      HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the appellant:           Ms. N Saikia and Ms.L Borgohain,
                             learned counsel
For the respondents:         Mr.KN Choudhury, learned senior counsel,
                             assisted by Mr.M Mahanta, learned counsel.
Date of hearing & judgment: 15.6.2017
                                JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
        This intra court appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated
17.9.2015 passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court, whereby he
has dismissed appellant’s WP(C) No.5799/2014 on the ground of locus.
        Appellant is Governing Body of the Burhinagar Junior College. On
19.6.2014, it issued an advertisement in the local daily        “Assam Tribune”
inviting applications from eligible candidates for the post of Principal in the
College. A Selection Committee was then constituted, which met on 6.7.2014
and recommended respondent No.5 in the first position and respondent No.4 in
second position, respectively. But the Director of Secondary Education vide
                                                                      Page 1 of 2

order dated 9.10.2014 disapproved the selection on the ground that “local
candidates” were not preferred. Aggrieved with the said disapproval, the
Governing Body filed WP(C)5799/2014 contending that candidates were
evaluated on merit and the “local person” preference had played no role in the
selection. The learned Single Judge instead of deciding the writ petition on
merit, declined to entertain the challenge by holding that Governing Body had
no locus. It is in this background, the Governing Body has filed the present
appeal.
       It is not in dispute that Governing Body is the appointing authority of
Principal and had issued the advertisement. Therefore, in a dispute relating to
selection and appointment of the College Principal, Governing Body certainly
has locus standi to question the decision of disapproval of the Director. For
these reasons, we disagree with the view of learned Single Judge that the
Governing Body had no locus in the matter. We accordingly set aside the
impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge and remand the matter for
its decision on merit. The Registry shall now list the matter before the learned
Single Judge as per roster in the week commencing from 17.7.2017.
       The appeal is allowed but without any order as to cost.
           JUDGE                                          CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                                      Page 2 of 2


