                                                   WA No.188 of 2017
                              BEFORE
         HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
10.7.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Mr. K Das and Mr.S Ali, learned counsel for the appellant.
       Mr.S Dutta, learned senior counsel assisted by Ms.N Modi,
       learned counsel for caveator and Ms. B Das, learned counsel
       for Respondent No.1.
       Heard on admission.
       This intra-court appeal is directed against the order dated
3.7.2017 passed by the learned Single Judge of Kohima Bench of
this High Court, whereby he has dismissed appellant’s WP(C)No.
111(K) of 2017.
       The 10th Northern Angami-1 (ST) Assembly Constituency in
Nagaland has become vacant with effect from 24.5.2017. And the
Election Commission of India issued a Press Note dated 29.6.2017
stating therein that bye-election to fill casual vacancy shall be held
on 29.7.2017. Admittedly, now even notification dated 5.7.2017 has
also been issued regarding the election programme to fill up the
vacancy.
       The appellant challenged that Press Note of the Election
Commission of India on the ground that since remainder of the term
of a member in relation to a vacancy is less than one year, bye-
election to fill up the vacancy is uncalled for. In support of this
submission, the appellant referred to Section 151-A of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951. Another ground of
challenge was that no provision for Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trial
has been made to ensure free and fair election. But the learned
                                                            page 1 of 3

Single Judge disagreed with the appellant and dismissed the writ
petition.
         Section 151-A of the Representation of the People Act reads
as under:
                “151-A. Time limit for filling vacancies referred to in
                Sections 147, 149, 150 and 151.— Notwithstanding
                anything contained in Section 147, Section 149, Section 150
                and Section 151, a bye-election for filling any vacancy
                referred to in any of the said sections shall be held within a
                period of six months from the date of the occurrence of the
                vacancy:
                Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply
                if—
                        (a) the remainder of the term of a member in
                        relation to a vacancy is less than one year; or
                        (b) the Election Commission in consultation with the
                        Central Government certifies that it is difficult to
                        hold the bye-election within the said period.
         A bare reading of the above quoted Section makes it clear
that there is no bar on the Election Commission of India to fill up the
casual vacancy even if the remainder of the term of a member in
relation to a vacancy is less than one year. Proviso (a) to Section
151 is merely an exception to a statutory mandate that bye-election
for filling up casual vacancy must be held within a period of six
months from the date of occurrence of the vacancy. The proviso
does not say that no bye-election shall be held to fill up a vacancy if
the remainder of the term of a member in relation to a vacancy was
less than one year.
         The bye-election in question has been duly notified. We hope
and trust that Election Commission of India has taken all steps to
ensure free and fair election. Even otherwise, there is no material on
record to suggest that Election Commission of India is not vigilant to
ensure free and fair election. If after the bye-election the appellant
has material to establish that election was not free and fair, he can
resort to remedy provided under the Representation of the People
                                                                   page 2 of 3

Act, 1951. At this stage, when the bye-election has been notified,
we are not inclined to admit the writ appeal. It is accordingly
dismissed.
            JUDGE                              CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                        page 3 of 3


