                                                 WA No.187 of 2017
                             BEFORE
         HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
10.7.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Mr.KN Choudhury, learned senior counsel, assisted by Mr.J
       Patowary, learned counsel for the appellant.
       Mr. BD Goswami, learned Additional Advocate General,
       Arunachal Pradesh, for Respondent No.3, Mr.I Choudhury,
       Mr. D Panging and Mr. S Biswakarma, learned counsel for
       Respondent No.5.
       Heard on admission.
       This intra-court appeal is directed against the order dated
21.6.2017 passed by the learned Single Judge of Itanagar Bench of
this   High   Court,   whereby    he   has   dismissed   appellant’s
WP(C)No.220(AP) of 2017.
       The State Government of Arunachal Pradesh through its
Power Department issued an Invitation for Bid inviting Single Stage
Bids in two parts for execution of the project, viz, Electrification
works of Itanagar town, Naharlagun town & Seppa town, Pasighat
town, Aalo town, Daporijo town, Tezu town and Namsai town in
Arunachal Pradesh under Integrated Power Development Scheme
through a process of e-tendering. The estimated cost of the work is
Rs.150.90 crores. The work is required to be executed under a
centrally sponsored scheme to be funded by Rural Electrification
Corporation   Limited/Power   Finance    Corporation Limited.    The
Government of Arunachal Pradesh is only the implementing agency
of the Scheme.
       The appellant, Respondent No.5 and one M/s Capital Power
Infrastructure Private Limited were the three bidders. Since the
                                                          page 1 of 4

technical bids of all the three bidders were found to be responsive,
their financial bids were opened on 2.2.2017. On opening the
financial   bids     it was    found    that    Respondent     No.5    quoted
Rs.109,49,01,337.97P (L-1), M/s Capital Power Infrastructure
Private Limited quoted Rs.127,21,24,219.93P (L-2) and appellant
quoted Rs.149,83,000,00.08P (L-3). Thus, the bid quoted by
Respondent No.5 was the lowest and that of appellant third highest.
Therefore, the authorities of the Power Department decided to
award the work in favour of Respondent No.5 whereafter Letter of
Intent dated 24.3.2017 was also issued in its favour. It is however
to be noted that having regard to the low price quoted by
Respondent No.5 as compared to the estimated cost of the work,
the Chief Minister of Arunachal Pradesh put up a note directing that
Respondent No.5 be asked to deposit additional performance
security of 10% so as to ensure quality and time bound completion
of the contract work.
       Aggrieved with the allotment of work order in favour of
Respondent No.5, the appellant filed WP(C) No.220(AP) of 2017.
The appellant challenged the acceptance of bid of Respondent No.5
on the following grounds:
                (i)     The price quoted by Respondent No.5 being below
                        27% of the tender value, the same was liable to be
                        rejected in the light of Section 20.4.3.2 of the CPWD
                        Manual, 2014; and
                (ii)    That rate quoted by Respondent No.5 was
                        unworkable inasmuch as the contractual work
                        cannot be executed at such low price.
       The learned single Judge however disagreed with the
appellant and by the impugned order has dismissed the writ
petition. It is in this background the appellant has filed the present
appeal on the same grounds.
       After hearing the learned counsel for the appellant, we find
no merit in the writ appeal as we find ourselves in complete
                                                                    page 2 of 4

agreement with the reasons assigned by the learned Single Judge in
dismissing the writ petition. We, in fact, adopt the reasons and
reproduce the same herein under:
          “23. The contractors are hard headed businessman who, it is
          believed, are having sufficient experience and exposure in
          execution of works of similar nature of such high value and,
          therefore, it will be difficult to presume that any bidder would
          quote a low rate without understanding the implication it would
          have in the execution of the work. It is no doubt true that the
          rate quoted by the L-1 bidder i.e. the respondent No.5 was
          much lower than the estimated cost but that by itself, in the
          absence of any specific condition in the ITB, cannot lead to
          rejection of the price bid offered by the respondent No.5. If
          quoting of low price is perceived as a ground for poor quality of
          work, I find from the ITB that there are adequate measures to
          protect the interest of the State when it comes to quality
          control and, therefore, there is no basis for this court to readily
          presume that the low price quoted by the Respondent No.5
          was only aimed at delivering poor quality of work and beyond
          the time frame.
          24. Another significant aspect that has invited the attention of
          this Court is the conscious role played by the Chief Minister of
          the State who had put up a note requiring the respondent No.5
          to deposit additional 10% performance security for protecting
          the interest of the State. Although Mr. K.N. Choudhury, learned
          senior counsel for the petitioner has argued that such action of
          the Chief Minister was without the authority of law, I am
          unable to accept the said argument for two reasons, firstly,
          clause 9.3.1 of the General Conditions of Contract (GCC)
          permits the authorities to ask for additional performance
          security from the contractor and, therefore, it cannot be said
          that insistence on 10% additional performance security was de
          hors the contract. Secondly, the Chief Minister, being the
          Executive head of the State, can never be denuded of his
          authority to take any decision for protecting the interest of the
          Government or the public interest in general.
          25. As noted above, even without the 10% performance
          security, the selection of the respondent No.5 could not have
          been held to be bad under the ITB. However, expressing
          concern about the interest of the State, the Chief Minister has
          thought it prudent to insist on additional security from the
          bidder. The project is meant to bringing light to the thousands
          of households spread across the remote corners of the State.
          Being the executive head of the State, the Chief Minister was
                                                                 page 3 of 4

            certainly well within his jurisdiction and power to demand such
            additional security from the contractor and the said decision
            cannot, by any stretch of reasonable reckoning, be termed as
            unwarranted. Rather, the stand of the Chief Minister displays a
            great degree of dynamism in the thought process while
            maintaining the concern for early implementation of the project
            at an economical cost without jeopardizing the interest of the
            State.”
    It is also to be noted that bid amount quoted by the appellant is
the third highest and, therefore, bidder of second highest bid will
have better claim over the appellant. Also, as seen above, the work
is required to be executed under a centrally sponsored scheme to be
funded by the Rural Electrification Corporation Limited/Power
Finance Corporation Limited following certain standards and
guidelines and the Government of Arunachal Pradesh is merely the
implementing agency. The appellant admittedly has not made any
complaint to the Central Government against the decision making
process of the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
    The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
               JUDGE                                     CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                                  page 4 of 4


