                                                   WA No.204 of 2017
                                BEFORE
           HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
24.07.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Mr.MK Choudhury, learned senior counsel, assisted by Mr.A
       Chetry, learned counsel for the appellant.
       Mr.SS Dey, learned senior counsel, assisted by Mr.DJ Kapil,
       learned counsel for Respondent Nos.1, 2, 3 and 4 and Mr.R Dhar,
       learned counsel for Respondent No.5.
       Heard on admission.
       This intra court appeal is directed against the order dated
12.7.2016 passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court, Kohima
Bench, whereby he has dismissed appellant’s WP(C) No.133(K) of 2016.
       The appellant has been working as Director, New & Renewable
Energy Department, Kohima in the State of Nagaland since last 8½
years. Vide order dated 18.7.2016, the State Government transferred
him from the said post as Officer on Special Duty, New & Renewable
Energy Department, Kohima, Nagaland Civil Secretariat, in the same
Kohima Town. Aggrieved, the appellant filed WP(C) No.133(K) of 2016
challenging his transfer order on the ground that it had been issued in
contravention of Section 2(ii) of the Nagaland Government Servants
(Transfer and Posting) Act, 2009 (in short “Act,2009”). The learned
Single Judge however disagreed with the appellant and has dismissed
the writ petition by the impugned order. The appellant has therefore filed
the present appeal.
                                                                Page 1 of 3

        Section 2 of the Act, 2009 deals with the power to transfer
Government Servants to Ex-Cadre Post which reads as under:-
         “2. Power to transfer Government Servants to Ex-Cadre Post.
        Notwithstanding anything contained in the service rules of various
        Departments of the Government of Nagaland, or of various services
        under the Government of Nagaland, the Government of Nagaland shall
        have the power to transfer any Government servant, and to post him
        against any ex-cadre post, in any Government Department, Public
        Sector Undertaking, Corporation or Company, owned by the State
        Government, subject to the following conditions:
        (i)     that the ex-cadre past against which the Government servant is
                posted is not lower in terms of rank and pay scale, than the post
                he/she is holding in a substantive capacity;
        (ii)    that the posting is done, either with the consent of the
                Government Servant concerned or with the recommendation of
                the Civil Services Board, consisting of the following:-
                (1) Chief Secretary                             … Chairman
                (2) Secretary in charge of Home Department …Member
                (3) Commissioner, Nagaland                      … Member
                (4) Secretary in charge of P&AR               ... Member Secretary
        The above quoted Section 2 (ii) clearly provides that any
Government servant can be transferred to an ex-cadre post on the
recommendation of the Civil Services Board consisting of Chief Secretary,
Secretary in charge of Home Department, Commissioner, Nagaland and
Secretary in charge of P&AR. Admittedly, the Civil Services Board
comprising of these members recommended the transfer of appellant to
the ex-cadre post of Officer on Special Duty (mentioned above). Merely
because, apart from members mentioned in Section 2(ii), one more
member was also in the Board, the transfer order cannot be held as
invalid,     more   particularly,   when     all   the   members      unanimously
recommended for appellant’s transfer. Apparently, the provisions of
Section 2 has been substantially complied with while issuing the transfer
order.
                                                                         Page 2 of 3

       It is stated at the bar that appellant has not joined in his new
place of posting and has gone on leave. The appellant must gracefully
comply with the transfer order once it has been held to be valid by the
court.
       The appeal has no merit and is accordingly dismissed summarily.
             JUDGE                                   CHIEF JUSTICE
skd/-
                                                               Page 3 of 3


