                            THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
         (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, ARUNACHAL PRADESH AND MIZORAM)
                      Writ Appeal No.248 of 2015
Appellant:
Sri Surjya Kanta Bora
S/o Late Nara Kanta Bora
R/o House No.27, Masjid Road,
Krishna Nagar, Japorigog, Guwahati-781005,
District- Kamrup (Metro), Assam
(Office of the Urban Water Supply & Sewerage Board,
Ganeshguri, Guwahati-781005).
Respondents:
1. Urban Board Engineers’ Association
(A registered Association of Engineers of the Assam
Urban Water Supply and Sewerage Board)
having its head office at R.G.Baruah Road,
Ganeshguri, Guwahati-781005,
represented by its General Secretary.
2.Shri Munindra Kumar Deka
S/o Krishna Ram Deka
R/o VIP Road, Jonaki Nagar,
Guwahati-781036, District Kamrup (Metro) Assam
3.The Assam Urban Water Supply and Sewerage Board,
R.G.Baruah Road, Ganeshguri, Guwahati-781005
represented by its Managing Director.
4. The Managing Director
The Assam Urban Water Supply and Sewerage Board,
Ganeshguri, Guwahati-781005
5. The State of Assam
represented by the Secretary to the Government of Assam,
Urban Development Department, Dispur, Guwahti
                                      BEFORE
               HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                  HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the Appellant             …      Mr. R Dubey and Ms. A Kayastha,
                                     learned counsel
For the Respondents           …      Mr. S Kataki, learned counsel
                                     for Respondent Nos.1 & 2,
                                     Ms. M Bordoloi, learned counsel for
                                     Respondent Nos.3 &4
Date of hearing & Judgment …         26.07.2017
                                                                         Page 1 of 3

                           JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       This intra-court appeal is directed against the order dated 4.8.2015
passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court, whereby, he has
allowed respondents’ WP(C) No.4236/2008.
       Respondent No.1 is an Association of Engineers of the Assam Urban
Water Supply and Sewerage Board (in short “The Board”) and Respondent
No.2 is its General Secretary. The Board was established through a statutory
enactment i.e. Assam Urban Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 1985 ( in
short “The Act”).
       Respondent No.4, who is Managing Director of the Board, vide order
dated 19.12.2006, appointed the appellant as Secretary of the Board, which
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 challenged by filing WP(C) No.4236/2008 on the
ground that the Managing Director was incompetent to make such
appointment. The learned Single Judge, after hearing the parties, agreed with
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 and quashed the appellant’s appointment order
dated 19.12.2006 as Secretary. Aggrieved, the appellant has filed the present
appeal.
       The sole question which calls for our consideration is whether the
Managing Director of the Board is competent to appoint Secretary of the
Board.
       Section 8 of the Act deals with the appointment of Secretary, Chief
Engineer, Chief Accounts Officer and other Officers and Employees of the
Board. It reads as under:-
              “8.    The Board may appoint a Secretary, a Chief Engineer, an
              Accounts Officer and such other Officers and Employees as it
              considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions:
                     Provided that the appointment of the Secretary, Chief
              Engineer and Chief Accounts Officer shall be made with the previous
              approval of the Government.
                     Provided further that in case of emergency –
                     (a) The Managing Director may appoint, temporarily for a
                         period not exceeding three months such Officers or
                         Employees as may, in his opinion, be required for the
                         purpose of this Act, and the employment of whom for any
                                                                           Page 2 of 3

                        particular work had not been prohibited by any resolution
                        of the Board; and
                    (b) Every appointment made under clause (a) shall be
                        reported by the Managing Director to the Board at the next
                        meeting.”
       The above quoted Section 8 clearly says that the Board may appoint a
Secretary, a Chief Engineer, an Accounts Officer and such other Officers and
Employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its
functions, subject to condition that appointment of the Secretary, Chief
Engineer and Chief Accounts Officer shall be made with the previous approval
of the Government. No previous approval of the Government is, however,
needed for appointment of other Officers and Employees made by the Board.
Section 8 also provides that in case of emergency, the Managing Director
may appoint, temporarily for a period not exceeding three months such
Officers and Employees as may, in his opinion, be required for the purpose of
this Act and the employment of whom for any particular work had not been
prohibited by any resolution of the Board. The Section further says that every
such appointment made by the Managing Director shall be reported by him to
the Board at the next meeting. The Managing Director is, thus, apparently
not competent to make appointment to the higher positions like the
Secretary, Chief Engineer and Chief Accounts Officer even in case of
emergency and Secretary, Chief Engineer and Chief Accounts Officer can be
appointed only by the Board and that too with the previous approval of the
Government. In the case at hand, neither the appellant nor the counsel of
Managing Director has produced any decision of the Board to appoint the
appellant as Secretary. And as the Managing Director, without any authority,
vide order dated 19.12.2006, illegally appointed the appellant as Secretary of
the Board, the learned Single Judge has rightly quashed the same.
       The appeal has no merit and is accordingly dismissed.
            JUDGE                                         CHIEF JUSTICE
skd/-
                                                                        Page 3 of 3


