                                 Writ Appeal No.278 of 2016
                           BEFORE
      HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
8.6.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Mr.H Buragohain and Mr. S Hazarika, learned counsel for
       the appellants.
       Ms. S Kanugoe, learned counsel for the Respondent.
       This intra-court appeal is directed against the order
dated 4.12.2014 passed by the learned Single Judge of this
High Court, whereby he has allowed respondent’s WP(C) No.
528 of 2011.
       Babul Chandra Dev was husband of the respondent. He
died-in-harness    on  22.6.1993,   while   serving   as   Roller
Handyman under the appellants. The respondent, therefore,
applied for compassionate appointment and the appellants
agreed to her request. The respondent was, thus, appointed on
11.12.1998 on compassionate ground. Although she should
have   been    appointed  on   a  suitable   vacant   post,  her
appointment was made as a Work Charged staff. Her case was
also taken up for regularization by the appellants against
available vacancies, but when nothing happened and her salary
was also withheld with effect from August/September, 2010,
she filed WP(C) No.528/2011. In the writ petition, the
respondent prayed for a direction against the appellants to
regularize her services against available vacancies and also to
pay arrears of salary.
                                               Page 1 of 2

        The learned Single Judge, after hearing the respondent
and the appellants, by the impugned order, allowed the writ
petition with a direction to regularize the services of respondent
and also to pay arrears of salary. Aggrieved, the appellants
have filed the present appeal.
        Admittedly, the appellants have paid arrears of salary to
the respondent. As regard regularization of the services of
respondent, the learned counsel for the appellants states that if
this court will direct, the services of respondent will be
regularized within 15 days. We fail to understand why another
direction is needed in appeal for the appellants to regularize the
services of respondent, when the learned Single Judge has
already issued such a direction. In all fairness, the appellants
should have appointed the respondent on a suitable vacant
post, but instead, she was appointed as Work Charged staff.
Compassionate appointment is neither illegal nor irregular mode
of appointment. In the fact situation of the case, the services of
respondent deserve to be regularized without further delay. The
impugned order is well founded and does not call for any
interference.
        The appeal has no merit and is accordingly dismissed.
          JUDGE                                CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                  Page 2 of 2


