                        IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT,
       (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                       WRIT APPEAL NO.295 of 2014
AP P ELLANTS :
1.     Sujit Kumar Paul,
       S/o Late Rakesh Kumar Paul
       Village Modhura, P.O. and P.S. Silchar
       District Cachar Assam and 11 others.
R ESP ONDENTS :
1.     The State of Assam
       Through The Commissioner and Secretary
       to the Government of Assam, Home Department,
       Dispur, Guwahati-781 006 and 22 others.
                                    BEFORE
               HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the appellants:          Mr.A Goyal and Mr. JP More, learned counsel
For the respondents:         Mr.RKD Choudhury, learned Additional
                             Senior Government Advocate, Assam
Date of hearing & judgment: 21.6.2017
                             JUDGMENT AND ORDER
 (Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       This writ appeal is directed against the order dated 6.8.2014
passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court whereby he has
dismissed appellants’ WP(C) No.3545/2010. Only Appellant No.1 - Sujit
Kumar Paul has pressed this appeal.
2.     Appellant No.1 applied for the post of Constable in a prescribed
standard form of application. He against the Column “Community”
mentioned that he belongs to Rudrapaul Community. This community is
notified as Other Backward Class in the State of Assam. According to
                                                                    Page 1 of 3

Appellant No.1 although he secured more marks than the selected
candidates belonging to Other Backward Class community he has illegally
been denied appointment. He, therefore, in the writ petition prayed for a
direction against the respondents to appoint him on the post of Constable.
The learned Single Judge, however, disagreed with him and dismissed his
writ petition by the impugned order.
3.      The stand of the respondents before the learned Single Judge was
that since Appellant No.1 did not file any caste certificate to establish that
he belongs to Other Backward Class community, his candidature was
considered as General Category candidate.
4.      After hearing the learned counsel for Appellant No.1 as well as the
learned Additional Senior Government Advocate for the respondents, we
are of the view that the appeal deserves to be allowed. It is not disputed
by the respondents that Appellant No.1 belongs to Rudrapaul Community
which is notified as Other Backward Class community in the State of
Assam. In the 2010 AB Constable recruitment, the cut off mark for Other
Backward Class category was 59.5 whereas Appellant No.1 secured 60.6
marks. It is thus evident that had his candidature been considered in the
category of Other Backward Class community, he would have surely been
selected for appointment. But as mentioned above, his candidature was
considered as General Category candidate merely because he did not file
any caste certificate along with the prescribed standard form of
application. However, in the prescribed standard form of application, it is
nowhere mentioned that candidates belonging to Other Backward Class
community shall also file a certified copy of the caste certificate as
required in respect to candidates who were members of Scheduled Caste
and Scheduled Tribe. Moreover, if the respondents had any doubt
regarding caste of Appellant No.1, in all fairness, they ought to have given
him an opportunity to submit his caste certificate.
                                                                   Page 2 of 3

5.     For these reasons, we are of the view that Appellant No.1 has been
denied appointment for not fault of his. In fact, the lapse/mistake is on
the part of respondents for not requiring the candidates of Other
Backward Class community to submit caste certificate along with
prescribed standard form of application and then arbitrarily treating their
candidatures as general candidates. We accordingly set aside the
impugned order dated 6.8.2014 passed by the learned Single Judge and
direct the respondents to immediately appoint Appellant No.1 as
Constable.
6.     The appeal is allowed only in respect of Appellant No.1 with cost of
Rs.3000/- which shall be payable by the respondents to him. The appeal
in respect of remaining appellants is dismissed as not pressed.
          JUDGE                                       CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                                Page 3 of 3


