                      IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT,
      (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                    WRIT APPEAL NO.359 OF 2014
APPELLANTS :
1.    The Gauhati University
      An University established under the
      Gauhati University Act, 1947,
      represented by its Registrar,
      Gauhati University, Guwahati-14
2.    The Registrar,
      Gauhati University, Guwahati-14
3.    The Selection Committee
      represented by its Member Secretary
      constituted for the purpose of interview
      and selection to the post of Assamese –
      JN Professor – Spl – Open under the Gauhati
      University, Guwahati-14
R ESP ONDENTS :
1.    The State of Assam
      Represented by the Commissioner & Secretary
      to the Government of Assam,
      Department of Education (Higher)
      Dispur, Guwahati
2.    The Director of Higher Education,
      Kahilipara, Guwahati-19.
3.    Dr. Malinee Goswami
      W/o Sri Birendra Mohan Goswami
      Resident of House No.49, Navagiri Road,
      Chandmari, PO Silpukhuri, Guwahati-3.
4.    Dr. Dipti Phukan Patgiri,
      W/o Dilip Patgiri, through the Registrar,
      Gauhati University, Guwahati-14.
                                                             Page 1 of 5

                                     BEFORE
              HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
       For the appellants: Mr.MK Choudhury, learned senior counsel,
                             assisted by Mr.N Deka and Mr.M Gogoi, learned
                             counsel for the appellants.
       For the respondents:Mr. K Gogoi, learned counsel for Respondent
                             Nos.1 and 2, Mr. M Nath and Mr. A
                             Bhattacharjee, learned counsel for Respondent
                             No.3 and Mr. SN Krishnatraya, learned counsel
                             for Respondent No.4.
Date of hearing & judgment: 20.6.2017
                             JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       This intra court appeal is directed against the order dated 12.6.2014
passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court, whereby he has
allowed WP(C) No.941/2013 of Respondent No.3 – Dr. Malinee Goswami.
2.     On 22.2.2012, Registrar of Gauhati University (appellants) issued an
advertisement for filling up the post of Jawaharlal Nehru Professor (in short
“J.N.Professor”) in the Department of Assamese. The specialization
mentioned in the advertisement for the post was “Open”. Both Respondent
No.3 and Dr. Dipti Phukan Patgiri (Respondent No.4) claiming themselves to
be eligible for the post responded to the advertisement. Admittedly, except
for Respondent Nos.3 and 4, there was no other candidate and both of them
appeared for the interview before the Selection Committee on 14.2.2013.
Respondent     No.3    then    filed  WP(C)   No.941/2013    challenging     the
recommendation      of   Selection   Committee   on    the ground    that    the
recommendation of illegally constituted Selection Committee cannot be
acted upon. Although the appellants strongly averred that the Selection
Committee was properly constituted, the learned Single Judge agreed with
                                                                   Page 2 of 5

Respondent No.3 and by the impugned order allowed the writ petition. The
learned Single Judge has also directed the appellants to proceed afresh in
accordance with law for selecting the J.N. Professor in the Department of
Assamese. The learned Single Judge has even held that the Vice Chancellor
could have nominated the re-appointed Professor of the Department in the
Selection Committee because being its member cannot be construed to have
held any administrative office. Aggrieved, the appellants have filed the
present appeal.
3.     The sole question which calls for our consideration is whether the
Selection Committee was legally constituted and if not whether its
recommendation can still be acted upon ?
4.     Section 15A (1) (a) & (b) of the Gauhati University Act, 1947 (in short
“Act”) deals with the constitution of Selection Committee for making
recommendation to the Executive Committee for appointment of Professor,
Readers etc. The relevant extract of Section 15A(1)(b) of the Act reads as
under:-
              “ 15A (1) SELECTION COMMITTEE:
              (a)    ……..
               (b)   In making recommendations for the appointment of
                     Professors of the University, the Selection Committee shall
                     co-opt the Head of the Department concerned, if he is a
                     Professor, one Professor of the Department to be nominated
                     by the Vice-Chancellor and two persons not in the services of
                     the University to be nominated by the Executive Council out
                     of a panel of not less than five names of persons
                     recommended by the Academic Council who have special
                     knowledge of the subject for which the Professor is to be
                     selected.”
5.     A bare reading of the above quoted Section 15A(1)(b) makes it clear
that in making recommendations for the appointment of Professors of the
University, the Selection Committee shall co-opt the Head of the Department
concerned, if he is a Professor, one Professor of the Department to be
nominated by the Vice-Chancellor and two persons not in the services of the
                                                                     Page 3 of 5

University to be nominated by the Executive Council out of a panel of not
less than five names of persons recommended by the Academic Council,
who have special knowledge of the subject for which the Professor is to be
selected.
6.      Admittedly, in the case at hand, the Selection Committee was not
constituted in terms of Section 15A(1)(b) of the Act, as the Vice Chancellor
himself nominated two persons as members instead of calling for the
nomination of such two persons by the Executive Council. Section 15A(1)(b)
of the Act clearly states that Vice Chancellor is to nominate one Professor of
the Department whereas Executive Council is to nominate two persons who
have special knowledge of the subject. The role of participation of such
experts is crucial in the selection process because it is expected from the
Selection Committee to make endeavour to select the best suitable
candidate. Section 15A(1)(b) does not permit the Executive Council to
delegate its power on the Vice Chancellor to nominate two persons who
have special knowledge of the subject. Therefore, the nomination of such
two persons can be made only by Executive Council and not by the Vice
Chancellor. It is well settled principle of law that a statutory power must be
exercised only by the authority or the person on whom it is conferred unless
the statute by express words or necessary implication permits delegation.
From the language used in Section 15A(1)(b) also, it is apparent that
requirement of nomination of two persons by the Executive Council from the
panel of experts is mandatory, which the learned Single Judge has rightly
held by giving cogent reasons in paragraph 31 of the order. There is yet
another settled principle of law which says that when power is given to do a
certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be done in that way and not at
all. In other words, if the manner of doing a particular act is prescribed
under any statute the act must be done in that manner and not at all.
Therefore, in the constitution of Selection Committee even this principle of
law was violated by the appellants.
                                                                    Page 4 of 5

7.      We are, however, unable to agree with the learned Single Judge that
the Vice Chancellor could have nominated the reappointed Professor of the
Department in the Selection Committee. According to the learned Single
Judge being a member of the Selection Committee does not amount to
holding of administrative post. As per Rule 8(c) of the Gauhati University
Teachers’ Re-employment Rules, a re-employed teacher cannot hold
administrative post in the University. The Supreme Court in National
Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences vs. Dr.K. Kalyana Raman,
1992 Supp (2) SCC 481 has clearly held that function of the Selection
Committee is neither judicial nor adjucatory and is purely administrative.
Therefore, having regard to the decision of the Supreme Court, the Vice
Chancellor cannot nominate a re-appointed Professor as member of the
Selection Committee.
8.      Be that as it may, we are of the considered view that since the
Selection Committee was not constituted as mandated in Section 15A(1)(b)
of the Act, its recommendation cannot be permitted to be acted upon.
Subject to our finding in paragraph 7, we find no merit in the appeal. It is
accordingly dismissed.
          JUDGE                                      CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                                Page 5 of 5


