                     IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT,
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     Writ Appeal No.365 of 2016
AP P ELLANTS :
1.     Central Bank of India,
       Represented by its Chairman and Managing Director,
       Chandermukhi, Nariman Point, Mumbai-400 021 & six others.
R ESP ONDENTS :
1.     Shri Ramani Kakati,
       Central Bank of India,
       Ulubari Branch, Guwahati Region,
       District Kamrup (Metro)
       PIN-781 007 Assam & others.
                     Writ Appeal No.374 of 2016
AP P ELLANTS :
1.     Central Bank of India,
       Represented by its Chairman and Managing Director,
       Chandermukhi, Nariman Point, Mumbai-400 021 & four others.
R ESP ONDENTS :
1.     Shri Anil Chandra Das
       Son of Late Golak Chandra Das
       Resident of Bihdia Post Office Karia
       Police Station Nalbari & others
                                        BEFORE
                     HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the appellants:         Mr.B Kalita, Mr. A Khanikar
                            and Mr. S Biswas, learned counsel
For the respondents:        Mr.Aveek Dey, Mr. M Nath and
                            Mr.A Bhattacharjee, learned counsel.
Date of hearing & judgment: 15.6.2017
                                                                  Page 1 of 5

                               JUDGMENT AND ORDER
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       These intra court appeals are directed against the common order dated
14.3.2016 passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court, whereby he
has allowed respondents’ WP(C) Nos.3781 and 3914 of 2014.
2.     The respondents are engaged as Safai Karmachari/Sub-staff in various
branches under the three Regional Offices of appellant - Central Bank of India.
These offices are Guwahati Regional Office, Upper Assam Regional Office and
Barpeta Road Regional Office.
3.     On 9.8.2012, the appellant – Bank entered into a Memorandum of
Settlement with the All India Central Bank of India Employees Federation (in
short “Federation”) wherein it was agreed that as a onetime measure all
temporary/casual workers engaged in various branches of the Bank shall be
allowed to participate in the recruitment process to be initiated in the
immediate future, but not in the subsequent process for selection to the post of
“Safai Karmachari cum Sub-staff” and “Sub-staff” on fulltime basis along with
fresh candidates subject to fulfillment of certain conditions.
4.     The recital of the Memorandum of Settlement states that considering the
rapid expansion of the branch network of the Bank coupled with progressive
reduction of strength of subordinate staff year after year due to large scale
retirements etc. the need for recruitment of subordinate staff was felt. As a
prelude to recruitment of subordinate staff, as a pro-employee initiative
management converted all the permanent part time Safai Karmacharis in
subordinate cadre into full time wages with the designation “Safai Karmachari-
cum-Sub-Staff” w.e.f. 1st April, 2011. The Bank decided to recruit the
subordinate staff with the designation, “Safai Karmachari-cum-Sub-Staff” and
“Sub-staff” by following the due process. Considering the fact that some of the
branches had engaged temporary/casual workers in subordinate cadre within
the Bank's guidelines, the matter of giving an opportunity to such
temporary/casual workers to participate in the recruitment process along with
                                                                      Page 2 of 5

the fresh candidates for selection of “Safai Karmachari-cum-Sub-staff” and
“Sub-staff” with a humane approach and also to provide an opportunity to such
temporary/casual workers whose cases are sub-judice, to settle their disputes
through out of Court mechanism was under discussion between the parties.
After a series of discussion, it was agreed by and between the Bank and the
Federation that as a onetime measure such temporary/casual workers so
engaged by the various branches of the Bank would be allowed to participate
in the recruitment process to be initiated in the immediate future but not in the
subsequent processes for selection to the post of subordinate staff with the
designation “Safai Karmachari-cum-Sub-staff” and “Sub-staff” on full time basis
along with fresh candidates subject to fulfillment of the following conditions :-
              (i) Such temporary/casual workers should have been engaged in
              subordinate cadre including as Safai Karmachari and should have put in
              a minimum of 45 days service during a continuous period of 12 months.
              (ii) Age of the candidate should have been between 18 to 26 years
              when initially engaged as temporary/casual worker, relaxable in respect
              of eligible categories as per rules.
              (iii) Age of the candidate as on the date of the said settlement should
              not have been more than 45 years irrespective of category.
              (iv) In case of candidates who had filed cases before Courts or
              Tribunals seeking permanent absorption in the Bank service and such
              cases being pending, the candidates were required to unconditionally
              withdraw such cases prior to applying for participating in the
              recruitment process.
              (v) Where there are awards or judgments of any Tribunal or Court
              directing the Bank to consider any candidate for such absorption, such
              candidate would be considered and allowed to appear in the interview
              process initiated pursuant to the settlement irrespective of the age and
              other eligibility criteria provided under the settlement subject to the
              only condition that the age of the candidate at the time of interview
              should not be above 60 years.
              (vi) Recruitment would be done through personal interview of the
              eligible candidates by committees to be constituted by the
              management.
                                                                            Page 3 of 5

5.      Pursuant to the Memorandum of Settlement, the Bank issued
advertisements dated 9.11.2012 and 11.11.2012 inviting applications from
eligible candidates for the post of “Safai Karmachari cum Sub-staff” and “Sub-
staff” in the abovementioned three regional offices. The respondents claiming
themselves to be eligible responded to the advertisements by submitting their
applications region-wise. Thereafter, interview was held in the three regions on
different dates in the months of January and February,2013. The respondents
participated in the interview and thereafter waited anxiously for declaration of
result. But to their dismay, the Bank issued public notices dated 05-07-2014,
06-07-2014 and 08-07-2014 cancelling the recruitment process on the ground
that actual Sub-staff strength in certain Branches as well as in certain Zonal
Offices was more than the sanctioned strength in respect of those branches
and Zonal Offices and therefore, there was no need to recruit any person
against the posts advertised. According to the Bank, since the manpower is in
excess of the sanctioned strength, a decision was taken to cancel the exercise
of recruitment in the three regional offices and this decision was also later
approved by the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 21.6.2014.
6.      Aggrieved, the respondents rushed to this Court by filing WP(C) Nos.
3781 and 3914 of 2014, which the learned Single Judge has allowed by the
impugned order. The learned Single Judge having regard to the Memorandum
of Settlement has held that the Bank had no justification to cancel the
recruitment process on the ground that there was surplus subordinate staff and
directed the Bank to complete the recruitment process initiated pursuant to
Memorandum of Settlement without any further delay. It is in this background,
the Bank has filed these appeals.
7.      After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find no merit in the
appeals. As seen above, it is clearly stated in the Memorandum of Settlement
that as prelude to recruitment of subordinate staff, the management as a pro-
employee initiative had converted all          the permanent part-time Safai
Karmacharis in subordinate cadre into full time wages with the designation
“Safai Karmachari-cum-Sub-staff” and “Sub-staff” w.e.f. 01-04-2011 and it was
                                                                       Page 4 of 5

after such conversion, the Bank decided to recruit the subordinate staff with
the designation “Safai Karmachari-cum-Sub-staff” and “Sub-staff” and to give
an opportunity to the temporary/casual workers working in the Branches in
subordinate cadre to participate in such recruitment process with relaxed
norms as a onetime measure. It is for this reason, the learned Single Judge has
held that cancellation of the recruitment process on the ground that there was
surplus subordinate staff as against the sanctioned strength cadre was neither
justified nor tenable. We also find no good reason to disagree with the learned
Single Judge. Besides this, it is a well settled principle of law that even in cases
where there is no legal right, example, for an appointment to oppose even
after selection if the government drops the idea, relief can be granted if the
decision taken is wholly unreasonable and arbitrary. It is also to be noted that
under the Memorandum of Settlement the Bank has lured the workmen who
had instituted cases before Courts and Tribunals for their absorption in the
service to withdraw their cases unconditionally to entitle them to appear in the
recruitment process as a onetime measure. With such conditions, the
Memorandum of Settlement was binding on both the parties i.e. Bank and
Workmen. The Bank, therefore, could not have unilaterally decided to cancel
the recruitment process, which was initiated pursuant to the Memorandum of
Settlement. Moreover, the learned Single Judge has rightly held that having
regard to the Scheme of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, settlement arrived
at between employer and employee is always placed at a higher pedestal than
even an award passed after adjudication.
8.      The appeals have no merit and are accordingly dismissed.
           JUDGE                                              CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                                          Page 5 of 5


