                        IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT,
       (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                         WRIT APPEAL NO.374 of 2015
AP P ELLANTS :
1.     Gumrah Co-operative Society Limited
       Village Khelma Part-VI, PO Gumra Bazar
       District Cachar, Assam,
       Represented by its Chairman,
       Kalachan Baishnab & another.
R ESP ONDENTS :
1.     The State of Assam
       Represented by the Commissioner & Secretary
       to the Government of Assam, Cooperation Department,
       Dispur, Guwahati-6 and 7 others.
                                        BEFORE
               HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                  HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
For the appellants:             Mr.DP Chaliha, learned senior counsel,
                                assisted by Mr. UP Chaliha, learned
                                counsel
For the respondents:            Dr. B Ahmed and Mr.AK Azad,
                                learned counsel
Date of hearing & judgment: 21.6.2017
                                JUDGMENT AND ORDER
 (Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       This intra court appeal is directed against the order dated
19.6.2015 passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court
whereby he has dismissed appellants’ WP(C) No.3394/2015.
2.     The Registrar of Cooperative Societies, Assam, vide order
dated 20.5.2015 cancelled the election of appellants’ Society. By
the same order, the Registrar also cancelled the approval of
election with a direction that fresh election be held in accordance
                                                               Page 1 of 3

with the provisions of Section 26(3) of the Assam Co-operative
Societies Act, 2007. Aggrieved, the appellants filed WP(C)
No.3394/2015 which the learned Single Judge has dismissed by the
impugned order on the ground that the election stood vitiated due
to non-compliance of the provisions of Section 26(3) of the Act.
Section 26(3) of the Act reads as under:-
              “26. Rights and liabilities of members of registered
              societies and exercise of rights thereof:-
              (1) ……
              (2) ……
              (3) The Chief Executive of every cooperative society within
                  twenty days of closure of the previous cooperative
                  year, shall prepare a list of members with the right of
                  vote, and a list of members without the right of vote,
                  valid for the current financial year. The list shall be
                  affixed on the notice board of the Head office of the
                  cooperative society for information of all members and
                  any member not satisfied with specific instances of
                  inclusion or non-inclusion of members in the lists, may
                  appeal to the Board within ten days from the date of
                  the affixing of the lists on the notice board, for re-
                  examination of the records, and the Board shall within
                  forty days of closure of the previous cooperative year,
                  review the lists, finalise it, and have it affixed on the
                  notice board of the Head office or the cooperative
                  society:
                           Provided that a member who is an employee or
                  member of Employees Union of such society shall not
                  be entitled to vote-
                      (i)     at election of a member of the Board of
                              such society;
                      (ii)    in any general meeting convened for
                              framing the bye-laws of such society or any
                              amendments thereto.”
3.     The above quoted Section 26(3) of the Act mandates that
the Chief Executive of every cooperative society within twenty days
of closure of the previous cooperative year, shall prepare a list of
members with the right of vote, and a list of members without the
right of vote, valid for the current financial year. The list is also
required to be affixed on the notice board of the Cooperative
                                                            Page 2 of 3

society for information of all members and any member not
satisfied with specific instances of inclusion or non-inclusion of
members in the lists, may appeal to the Board within ten days for
re-examination of the records and the Board shall within forty days
of closure of the previous cooperative year, review the lists, finalize
it, and have it affixed on the notice board.
4.      In the present case, admittedly, the election was held
without preparation of the voters’ list as mandated in Section 26(3)
of the Act. In the result, many members having no right to vote,
voted in the election. It is in this fact situation, the Registrar
cancelled the election and its approval with a direction that the
same be held afresh after following the provisions of Section 26(3)
of the Act. We also find ourselves in complete agreement with the
view taken by the Registrar as well as the learned Single Judge. No
ground for interference is made out. The appeal is dismissed.
          JUDGE                                CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                       Page 3 of 3


