                                                      WA No.81 of 2017
                                 BEFORE
            HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
              HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
27.07.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
       Mr.J I Borbhuiya and Mr. L Mohan, learned counsel for the
       appellant.
       Mr. RKD Choudhury, learned Additional Senior Government
       Advocate for Respondent Nos.1, 2 and 3 and Mr. AM Borbhuiya,
       learned counsel for Respondent No.4.
       This intra court appeal is directed against the order dated
23.2.2017 passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court,
whereby, he has dismissed appellant’s WP(C) No.678/2016.
       Respondent No.3 - Child Development Project Officer published an
advertisement inviting applications from the candidates who were
interested to provide voluntary service as Anganwadi Worker/Helper in
the different centres under the concerned Child Development Project
Officer. Clause 2 of the advertisement clearly provided that the candidate
must be a permanent resident of revenue village where the centre is
located. In response to the advertisement, the appellant submitted her
application and thereafter she was also interviewed. In the select list
prepared and published by the Respondent No.3 even her name
appeared at Sl. No.13 showing her as selected candidate for the post of
Anganwadi Worker in the Solmari Bhaira Napara Anganwadi Centre. But,
when it came to the stage of issuance of appointment order, her name
did not find place and instead the appointment of Respondent No.4 was
made. Aggrieved, she filed WP(C) No.678/2016.
       Before the learned Single Judge appointment of Respondent No.4
was defended on the ground that she had made a written complaint to
                                                                 Page 1 of 3

the Deputy Commissioner, Nalbari alleging that appellant was not a
resident of the locality where the Centre , in question, is located and
therefore, she was not entitled to be appointed. And pursuant to the said
complaint, the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Nalbari made an
enquiry. Accordingly, report was called from the Circle Officer, Paschim
Nalbari as well as the Child Development Project Officer, Paschim Nalbari
and in both the reports it was indicated that appellant was a resident of
another locality and it was respondent No.4 who was a local resident of
that area. Then on the basis of these reports, the Additional Deputy
Commissioner       vide    communication    dated    5.12.2015     instructed
Respondent No.2 - Director, Social Welfare, Assam to appoint a local
candidate in order to avoid further litigation in the matter. Respondent
No.2, in turn, acting on the advice, vide order dated 8.1.2016 directed
Respondent No.3 to cancel the selection of appellant and include the
name of Respondent No.4 as the selected candidate. Consequently,
Respondent No.3 issued an appointment order dated 13.1.2016 in favour
of Respondent No.4.
        The learned Single Judge, after hearing the learned counsel for
the parties, upheld the decision of Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 to appoint
Respondent No.4 and by the impugned order dismissed the appellant’s
writ petition. It is in this background, the appellant has filed the present
appeal.
        We have heard the respective counsel for the parties and are of
the view that the appeal deserves to be allowed. As mentioned above,
the condition stipulated in the advertisement was that the candidate
must be a resident of revenue village where the Centre in question is
located. Meaning thereby if the candidate is a resident of the revenue
village where the Centre is located she is entitled for appointment. It was
certainly not necessary that the candidate should be a resident of the
locality where the Centre is located in the village. Neither the report of
Circle Officer nor the report of Child Development Project Officer says
that appellant is not a resident of revenue village Solmari where the
Centre is located. In fact, the report dated 8.9.2015 of Kanangoo
confirms that the appellant is very much a resident of village Solmari
                                                                    Page 2 of 3

where the Centre, in question, is located. Apparently, Respondent Nos.2
and 3 wrongly interpreted the condition of advertisement that candidate
should be a resident of locality where the Centre is situated in the
village. We, therefore, set aside the impugned order and allow the
appeal with a direction that appellant be allowed to function as
Anganwadi Worker in Solmari Bhaira Napara Anganwadi Centre.
           JUDGE                                     CHIEF JUSTICE
skd/-
                                                              Page 3 of 3


