                                                       WA No.93 of 2015
                                 BEFORE
            HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
3.8.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
        Mr.PD Nair and Mr.H Rahman, learned counsel for the appellants.
        Ms.P    Chakraborty,   learned    standing     counsel,    Education
        Department for Respondent Nos.1, 2 and 3, Mr. DK Roy, learned
        counsel for Respondent No.4, Mr. DR Gogoi and Ms.SE Ahmed,
        learned counsel for Respondent No.8.
        This intra court appeal is directed against the order dated
25.7.2014 passed by the learned Single Judge of this High Court
whereby he has allowed WP(C) No.4974/2013 of Respondent No.8. The
appellants are also aggrieved with the order dated 25.11.2014 whereby
their Review Petition No.130/2014 has been dismissed.
        An advertisement was issued for filling up two Grade-IV posts in
Hajo SBSKR Higher Secondary School. The required educational
qualification of a candidate mentioned in the advertisement was upto
Class-X. The appellants claiming themselves to have studied upto Class X
in Hajo FM High School during the year 2000, applied for the posts
advertised. Likewise, Respondent No.8, who claims to have passed High
School Leaving Certificate Examination from SBSKR Higher Secondary
School had also applied. The School Selection Committee in its meeting
held on 27.11.2012 selected the appellants at Serial Nos.1 and 2 for
appointment. Pursuant thereto, the competent authority, vide separate
order dated 28.6.2013 appointed the appellants as Grade-IV staff in the
school. Aggrieved, Respondent No.8 filed WP(C) No.4974/2013 alleging
that since the appellants did not study upto Class X, they were not
eligible for appointment. He also alleged that certificates furnished by the
appellants regarding having studied in Class X in Hajo FM High School
                                                                   Page 1 of 3

were fake. The record reveals that in spite of service of notice on the
appellants no representation was made on their behalf at the time of
final hearing of the writ petition. Also, in the writ petition the Board of
Secondary Education, Assam filed an affidavit stating therein that after
verification from the Registration Record of Hajo FM High School the
names of appellants were not found registered. Learned counsel for the
Board of Secondary Education, Assam during the course of hearing
further stated that as per Regulation of Board of Secondary Education,
Assam any student studying in a High School affiliated to the Board of
Secondary Education, Assam has to get his/her name registered with the
Board of Secondary Education, Assam.
        The learned Single Judge taking note of the fact that names of
appellants were not registered with the Board of Secondary Education,
Assam prima facie believed that they did not study upto Class X and
hence, were not eligible for appointment. The learned Single Judge,
therefore by the impugned order quashed the appointment of appellants
with a direction to initiate fresh recruitment process. The appellants then
rushed to file Review Petition No.130/2014 but it too was dismissed vide
order dated 25.11.2014. It is in this background, the appellants have
filed the present appeal.
        The question which calls for our consideration is whether the
appellants did really study upto Class X in Hajo FM High School. As
mentioned above, the appellants had filed certificates of the School
showing that they had studied upto Class X. But the learned Single Judge
merely because their names were not registered with the Board of
Secondary Education, Assam prima facie believed that they did not study
upto Class X. This being question of fact, we directed the Director of
Secondary Education, Assam to conduct an enquiry and submit a report
after hearing the parties whether the appellants in fact studied upto
Class X. And pursuant to our direction, the Director of Secondary
Education has submitted his report dated 19.7.2017 confirming that
appellants did study upto Class X during the year 2000 in Hajo FM High
School for which school certificates had also been issued by the
                                                                  Page 2 of 3

Headmaster. The report of the Director of Secondary Education reads as
under:-
        “ As per direction of the Hon’ble High Court order dated 12.5.2017
        in WA 93/2015 filed by Digambar Das and others vs. State of
        Assam & others, the undersigned enquired into the matter
        whether Digambar Das & Sanatan Medhi had studied upto the
        Class X during the year 2000 in Hajo FM High School or not.
        Hence, the Director of Secondary Education, Assam directed the
        Inspector of Schools, KDC Amingaon ( Sri Madhab Chandra Deka)
        Headmaster of Hajo FM High School (Fazal Ahmed Khan) and both
        the petitioners (Digambar Das and Sanatan Medhi) to attend
        hearing fixed on 19.07.2017. Accordingly, all of themselves were
        present in the office chamber of the Director of Secondary
        Education, Assam on the same day and heard all of them.
               The Headmaster of the aforesaid Hajo FM High School
        admitted and certified that both the petitioners namely Digambar
        Das and Sanatan Medhi studied in Hajo FM High School upto Class
        X during the year 2000 and the school certificate has also been
        issued by him i.e. Headmaster Fazal Ahmed Khan.
               After perusal of records submitted by the Inspector of
        Schools, Amingaon as well as Headmaster concerned, it reveals
        that both the petitioners namely Digambar Das & Sanatan Medhi
        studied in the Hajo FM High School upto Class X during the year
        2000.”
        Having regard to the above mentioned report as well as
certificates submitted by the appellants, we have no hesitation in holding
that they had studied upto Class X and their appointment in Grade-IV
posts is valid. We accordingly set aside the impugned order dated
25.7.2014 as well as the order dated 25.11.2014 passed in Review
Petition No.130/2014.
        The writ appeal is allowed with cost of Rs.2000/- which shall be
payable by Respondent No.8 to the appellants (Rs.1000/- each) within
one month from today.
             JUDGE                                     CHIEF JUSTICE
skd/-
                                                                  Page 3 of 3


