                                                     W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                    In
                                                     WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010       I
             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
 (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
        Case No:       W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                      IN
                       WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010
 Shri Tensin Gombu Khrime & others                   …… Appellants
                             -Versus-
 The State of Arunachal Pradesh & others             ...... Respondents
                            BEFORE ::
    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ARUP KUMAR GOSWAMI
    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
        For the Appellants            :      Mr. N. Ratan
        For the Respondent (4, 5, 9 & 12) : Mr. T. Pertin
                                                  &
        For the Respondent (1, 2 & 3) :      Mr. D. Soki
        Date of Hearing               :      10. 02. 2017
        Date of delivery of
        Judgment and Order            :      13.06.2017.
                JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
(PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA, J)
        Heard Mr. N. Ratan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
    petitioners/appellants. Also heard Mr. T. Pertin, learned Senior
    Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 4, 5, 9 & 12 and
    also Mr. D. Soki, learned State counsel appearing on behalf of the
    respondent Nos. 1,2 & 3.
                                                                 Page 1 of 17

                                                       W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                       In
                                                       WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010        I
1. The present writ appeal is filed by the writ petitioners in W.P.(C) No.
   24 (AP)/2010, whose claim for seniority over the private respondents
   No. 4 to 13 was dismissed vide judgment and order dated
   08.03.2013.
2. The petitioners/appellants as per their petition are holding the post of
   Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer under the Directorate of Accounts &
   Treasuries, Government of Arunachal Pradesh. Initially they were
   substantively appointed as Inspecting Auditor/Sub-Treasury Officer
   through a selection process. They were promoted to the post of
   Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer on ad hoc basis in regular vacancies
   during the period between 20.04.1990 and 28.09.1994. During the
   year 1992 to 1996, some of the private respondents were appointed
   to the post of Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer through Limited
   Departmental Competitive Examination (LDCE) and some others
   through direct recruitment. The petitioners/appellants completed their
   regular service of 3 (three) years in the feeder cadre. However, due
   to in-action of the State respondents, the Departmental Promotion
   Committee (DPC) was not constituted to consider the cases of the
   petitioners/appellants for regular promotion during those years. In the
   year 1996 only, the DPC was convened and the DPC recommended
   regularization of the ad hoc promotion of the petitioners/appellants
   with    effect from    20.05.1996     i.e   the    date    of    DPC.    The
   petitioners/appellants were accordingly placed below the private
   respondents    in   the    provisional    seniority   list    of   Accounts
   Officer/Treasury Officer. On consideration of the representations of
                                                                    Page 2 of 17

                                                      W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                    In
                                                      WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010      I
   the petitioners/appellants, their seniority over the private respondents
   were restored. But in the final gradation list published in the year
   2009, the petitioners/appellants were placed below the private
   respondents in the seniority list.
3.  Being aggrieved, the petitioners/appellants preferred the writ petition
   praying for restoration of the seniority on the ground that the State
   respondents acted illegally in not constituting the DPC soon after they
   became      eligible for   promotion     for  the   post   of   Accounts
   Officer/Treasury Officer and as such, they were entitled to have their
   seniority counted from the date they completed the regular service of
   3 years as required under the rules in the feeder cadre. However, the
   learned Single Judge rejected the challenge to the prospective
   promotion and denial of retrospective promotion to the post of
   Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer and accordingly, this writ appeal
   against the dismissal of the writ petition has been preferred.
4. The private respondents filed their affidavit-in-opposition denying the
   claim made in the writ petition by the petitioners/appellants. It is their
   contention that in terms of the The Arunachal Pradesh (Accounts
   Officer/Treasury Officer) Recruitment Rules, 1984, superseded vide
   notification No. DA/FIN/B/24/76 (ptd) dated 14.05.1993 by the
   Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer (Group B) Recruitment Rules, 1993
   (herein after referred to as 1984/1993 Rules) LDCE was conducted by
   the Arunachal Pradesh Public Service Commission (APPSC) on various
   dates ranging from the year 1990 to 1994, the private respondents
   appeared in the said LDCE and also applied for direct recruitment and
                                                                 Page 3 of 17

                                                       W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                       In
                                                       WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010        I
   having qualified in the said examination, the private respondents were
   appointed to the post of Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer on various
   dates. It was also contended that there was a specific clause in the
   appointment letters of the petitioners/appellants that their ad hoc
   appointment would not confer them any right to claim regular
   appointment in the post of Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer. The
   1984/1993     Rules    prescribes   filing  up   the    post   of  Accounts
   Officer/Treasury Officer through 3 modes and the mode of
   regularization is not one of the prescribed modes of recruitment. The
   regularization of the ad hoc service of the petitioners/appellants are
   de-hors the 1984 Rules. The petitioners/appellants having opted for
   ad hoc promotion and having chosen not to appear in the LDCE
   cannot seek regularization from the date of their ad hoc promotion.
   Finally,   it   was    contended     that    as   the    services   of   the
   petitioners/appellants were regularized from 20.05.1996 by the DPC,
   therefore, the 1998 provisional seniority list could not be faulted.
5. The petitioners/appellants through their additional affidavit during the
   pendency of the writ petition submitted that DPC could not ignore the
   initial ad hoc service rendered by the petitioners and the minutes of
   the decision of the DPC was liable to be set aside and quashed and
   accordingly, a direction was sought for to the respondent authorities
   to     consider   their      promotion     and/or    to    regularize    the
   petitioners/appellants with effect from their date of ad hoc promotion
   or date of their eligibility.
                                                                    Page 4 of 17

                                                     W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                   In
                                                     WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010      I
6. The State respondents No. 1 to 3 in their affidavit-in-opposition
   submitted that the petitioners/appellants were promoted as Accounts
   Officer/Treasury Officer on ad hoc basis as a stop-gap arrangement
   even before completion of qualifying service period to attain eligibility
   for promotion to the cadre from the feeder cadres of Inspecting
   Auditor/Sub-Treasury Officer. It is also stated the final gradation list
   of Accounts Officer/ Treasury Officer was finally published on
   23.11.2009. Under such circumstances the question of correction of
   seniority position of the petitioners/appellants does not arise at all.
   Denying that the petitioners/appellants had to run from pillar to post
   for redressal of the grievances, the State respondents submit that the
   delay in holding the DPC as raised by the petitioners/appellants was
   due to the administrative reasons and it was the prerogative of the
   State to see as to whether any post is to be filled up or kept vacant.
7. The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition and while
   dismissing it was observed that the appointment of Accounts
   Officer/Treasury Officer is governed by the 1984 Rules and the
   subsequent rules of the year 1993 contemplates 4 modes of
   recruitment i.e. (i) Direct Recruitment, (ii) by promotion, (iii) vide
   deputation transfer, (iv) LDCE, but none of the petitioners/appellants
   were inducted by any of the prescribed modes in the 1984/1993.
   They were appointed on ad hoc basis as apparent from the promotion
   orders. On the other hand, the private respondents No. 5, 9 and 12
   were directly recruited as Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer on
   07.08.1992, 03.06.1994 and 17.01.1995, respectively and the
                                                                Page 5 of 17

                                                      W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                    In
                                                      WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010      I
   remaining private respondents were inducted in the cadre through
   LDCE on different dates starting from 28.01.1992 to 18.01.1996. It
   was also taken into consideration by the learned Single Judge that the
   DPC on 16.05.1996, after considering the cases of the ad hoc
   appointees, recommended for regular promotion wherein, it was
   specifically directed that the inter-se seniority in the cadre should be
   fixed after their appointment on regular basis. Accordingly, as per the
   DPC recommendation which was made on 20.05.1996, the services of
   the petitioners were regularized with effect from the said date vide
   order dated 26.06.1996. With regard to the responsibility of the
   respondent State for holding of DPC at early interval for consideration
   of promotion to the cadre of Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer, the
   learned Single Judge came to the finding that there is no such
   requirement for the DPC to seat every year or at any given interval as
   per the 1984 Rules. Finally it was concluded that as the appointment
   of the petitioners/appellants were not by any of the 4 modes
   prescribed by the 1984/1993 Rules, as such their appointment were
   de-hors the rules. Accordingly, the issue was decided against the
   petitioners and the writ petition was dismissed.
8. The learned counsel of the appellants submits that the initial ad hoc
   appointment      of   the   appellants   in   the    post  of   Accounts
   Officer/Treasury Officer being on promotion, the finding of the
   learned Single Judge that the initial ad hoc promotion of the
   appellants to the post of the Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer were
   de-hors the Recruitment Rules is wrong. It is submitted that as the
                                                                 Page 6 of 17

                                                      W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                     In
                                                      WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010       I
   initial appointment to the feeder cadre of the appellants being
   according to one of the prescribed modes in the Recruitment Rules as
   such the subsequent regularization in the promoted post ought to
   have been made with retrospective effect, at least, from the
   respective dates of the appellants becoming eligible for such
   promotion upon completion of the requisite length of service required
   in the feeder cadre as per the 1984/1993 Rules. Mr. Ratan, learned
   counsel for the appellants also submits that it is the failure on the part
   of the respondent State to hold the DPC for which the appellants had
   to suffer and for such failure on the part of the respondent State, the
   petitioners/appellants cannot be allowed to suffer by way of losing
   their inter-se seniority to subsequent entrants in the post of Accounts
   Officer/Treasury     officer. Thus   the    learned   counsel    for   the
   petitioners/appellants submits that the findings of the learned Single
   Judge are to be interfered.
9. Mr. N. Ratan, learned counsel for the petitioners/appellants relies the
   following decision in order to buttress his arguments:-
   (A)     L. Chandra K ishore Singh –Vs- State of M anipur and
           others reported in (1999) 8 SCC 287 para 15. In this case,
           the Hon’ble Apex Court held that the probationary or
           officiating appointment which are followed by a confirmation,
           unless contrary rules are shown the service as referred as
           officiating appointment cannot be ignored for reckoning the
           length of continuous officiating service in determining place in
           the seniority list.
                                                                  Page 7 of 17

                                             W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                            In
                                             WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010       I
(B) Direct Recruit class-II Engineering Officers Association
    –Vs-State of M aharashtra and others reported in (1990)
    2 SCC 715. In this case, the Constitutional Bench of the
    Hon’ble Apex Court held in para 47 (B) that if the initial
    appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down
    by   Rules   but   the   appointee   continues    in  the   post
    uninterruptedly till the regularization of his service in
    accordance with the Rules, the period of officiating service will
    be counted.
(C) State of W .B and Others –Vs- Aghore Nath Dey and
    others reported in (1993) 3 SCC 371. Relying upon the
    said decision Mr. Ratan submits that the Conclusion-(B) of the
    Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of Direct
    Recruit Class II –Vs- State of Maharashtra reported in (1990) 2
    SCC 715 (supra) was added to cover different kind of situation
    wherein the appointments are otherwise regular except for the
    deficiency for certain procedural requirements laid down by
    the rules.
(D) P.N. Prem achandran-Vs-State of K erala and Others –
    Vs- State of Kerala and others reported in (2004) 1 SCC
    245. In the said case owing to administrative lapse the
    Departmental Promotion Committee did not hold a sitting from
    1964 to 1980 and as such the State of Kerala took a conscious
    decision to the effect that those who have been acting in a
    higher post for a long time although on a temporary basis, but
                                                         Page 8 of 17

                                                      W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                    In
                                                      WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010      I
           were qualified at the time when they were so promoted and
           found to be eligible by the DPC at a later date should be
           promoted with retrospective effect. The said action was
           accepted by the Hon’ble Apex Court. Mr. Ratan, accordingly
           submits that the ratio of this decision fits in the facts and
           circumstances       of     the     case     of    the     present
           petitioners/appellants.
    (E)     Finally in S. Sum nyan and others –Vs- Lim i Niri and
           others reported in (2010) 6 SCC 791 , The Hon’ble Apex
           Court discussed with regard to the appointees as Assistant
           Engineers and held that the same cannot be held to be de-
           hors the rules as the appointment letters issued to the
           appointees mentioned that they would be governed by the
           service rules and also they would be regularized according to
           the rules on the recommendation of a selection board
           constituted by the Government and in the said context the
           Apex Court held that regularization of the service of a person
           whose initial appointment although not in accordance with the
           prescribed procedure but later on, regularised by a authority
           having power and jurisdiction to do so would always relate
           back to the date of their initial appointment.
10. Mr. D. Soki, the learned counsel for the respondent State submits that
    the seniority gradation list is consequential to the recommendation of
    the DPC. As apparent from the writ petition the petitioners/appellants
    had never challenged the DPC recommendation and instead had
                                                                 Page 9 of 17

                                                     W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                   In
                                                     WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010       I
   challenged the inter-se gradation list. Mr. Soki submits that as
   apparent     from    the    appointment/promotion      order    of    the
   petitioners/appellants admittedly the same was on ad hoc basis
   however, the same was subject to the clearance by the DPC. The said
   DPC     vide   its  meeting     on    16.05.1996    recommended       the
   petitioners/appellants to be fit for promotion as per the meeting held
   on the 16.05.1996. On the basis of the meeting of the DPC the APPSC
   communicated the same to the respondent State wherein, it was
   specifically  mentioned    that   the   regular   appointment    of   the
   petitioners/appellants would take effect from the date Commission’s
   proceedings are communicated. The respondent State had accepted
   the said recommendation inasmuch as the APPSC communicated the
   proceedings of the DPC meeting held on 16.05.1996 under reference
   No. PSC-D/18/91 dated 20.05.1996. The respondent State accepted
   the    said   recommendation      and    accordingly   regularized    the
   petitioners/appellants with effect from 20.05.1996. Finally, on the
   basis of the said recommendation of the DPC, final gradation list
   impugned in the writ petition was published under Memo No.
   DA/FAS/E/7/87 dated Itanagar 23.11.2009.
11. Mr. D. Soki submits that the date of regularization was fixed by the
   DPC and until and unless the said resolution which was communicated
   to the respondent State is challenged and modified, the placement of
   the petitioners/appellants in the seniority list cannot be set aside.
   Under such circumstances the writ petition itself is defective and no
   relief could be granted to the petitioners/appellants. Mr. D. Soki, relies
                                                               Page 10 of 17

                                                       W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                      In
                                                       WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010       I
    Edukanti K istam m a (DEAD) Through LR S. and others-Vs- S.
    Venkatareddy (DEAD) Through LR S. and others reported in
    (2010) 1 SCC 756 wherein, it was held that challenge to
    consequential order without challenging the basic order/statutory
    provision on the basis of which the order has been passed cannot be
    entertained and it is the legal obligation on the part of the parties to
    challenge the basic order and only if the same is found to be wrong
    consequential order may be examined. So, Mr. Soki submits that the
    present writ petition of the appellants is not at all maintainable.
12. Mr. Soki further submits that considering the facts and circumstances
    of the present appeal, referring to the Direct Recruits case (Supra),
    the proposition A is applicable inasmuch as it has been held that once
    incumbent is appointed to a post according to the rule, his seniority to
    be accounted from the date of his appointment and not according to
    date of his confirmation. The corollary of the said proposition A as
    held by the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court is that where the
    initial the appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and
    made as a stop gap arrangement the officiation in such post cannot
    be taken into account for considering the seniority. Mr. Soki further
    relies V.P. Shrivastava and others –Vs- State of M .P. and
    Others reported in (1996) 7 SCC 759 wherein, it was held that in
    the case referred thereto initial appointment of the respondents on
    promotion not having been made following the procedure laid down
    by the Recruitment Rules of 1965 and even though they were
    continuing in the post uninterruptedly but the Public Service
                                                                  Page 11 of 17

                                                      W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                   In
                                                      WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010     I
    Commission having not approved their appointments Proposition B of
    Direct Recruits case (supra) would have no application. And finally,
    the Hon’ble Apex Court applying Proposition A referred above, held
    that the direct recruits must be held senior to the respondent ad hoc
    promotees.
13. Mr. Soki in support of his argument opposing the claim of the
    petitioners/appellants further relied K . M adalaim uthu and another
    –Vs- State of T.N. and others (2006) 6 SCC 558 wherein, the
    Hon’ble Apex Court in para 24 held that a person who was appointed
    temporarily to discharge the functions in a particular post without
    recourse to the recruitment rules cannot be said to be in service till
    such time as his appointment was regularized. It further held that it is
    only from the date on which his services are regularized that such
    appointee could count his seniority in the cadre. Thus, Mr. Soki relying
    the ratio laid down in the aforesaid decisions by the Apex Court
    submits that the same is applicable in the present case and
    accordingly this Writ Appeal be dismissed.
14. Mr. T. Pertin, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
    private respondents submits that the petitioners/appellants have no
    case at all inasmuch as admittedly their appointment was not done as
    per the terms of the Recruitment Rules and referring the Direct
    Recruitment Case (supra), Mr. Pertin submits that a person appointed
    to a post according to the rules would be entitled to get his seniority
    reckoned from the date of his appointment and not from the date of
    his confirmation. Mr. Pertin submits that the private/respondents were
                                                               Page 12 of 17

                                                     W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                    In
                                                     WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010       I
    duly appointed to the post of Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer by
    following the prescribed rules in 1984. There is no dispute at all with
    regard to the said fact of the appointment of the said private
    respondents in the bar. Accordingly, the proposition A in the aforesaid
    Direct Recruits case of the Constitutional Bench of the Apex Court
    would govern the seniority of the private respondents over the
    petitioners/appellants owing to the nature of appointment to the post
    Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer. Mr. Pertin has relied upon Union
    of India –Versus- Dharam Pal and Others reported in (2009) 4
    SCC 170. In the said decision the Hon’ble Apex Court held that an
    employee appointed to a post according to rules would be entitled to
    his seniority from the date of his appointment and not from his
    confirmation. It was also held in the said decision that where the
    initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules, the
    period of officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for
    consideration of their seniority referring to para-28 of the said
    decision and submits that the ratio is applicable in the present case in
    hand.
15. Mr. Pertin submits that in a situation similar to the present case in
    hand, the Hon’ble Apex Court accepted the ratio laid down in Suraj
    Prakash Gupta –Vs- State of J& K reported in (2000) 7 SCC
    561 wherein it was held that there was no hesitancy in coming to the
    conclusion that merely because the suitability test had not been held
    at regular intervals an employee promoted on ad hoc basis can claim
    that it is a regular promotion after due process of selection. So, Mr.
                                                                Page 13 of 17

                                                     W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                   In
                                                     WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010     I
    Pertin submits that the appeal has no merit and judgment and order
    passed by the learned Single Judge needs no interference by this
    Court.
16. Mr. Pertin further submits that as submitted by Mr. Soki, the
    petitioners/appellants    had    failed   to   challenge    the   DPC
    recommendation and date of regularization fixed by the APPSC and
    under such circumstances the writ petition is not at all maintainable
    inasmuch as without setting aside the communication of the DPC, the
    consequential relief of placement of the petitioners/appellants cannot
    be gone into. On that count also the writ petition ought to have been
    dismissed.
17. Considered the submissions of the learned counsels. Also considered
    the findings of the learned Single Judge on the basis of which the writ
    petition of the petitioners/appellants was dismissed. Regarding the
    responsibility of the respondent State for constitution of the DPC at
    yearly interval to consider promotion to the cadre of Accounts
    Officer/Treasury Officer, the learned Single Judge opined that so far
    the facts and circumstances of the present case in hand are
    concerned, there is no such requirement for the DPC to sit every year
    or at given interval inasmuch as the 1984/1993 Rules does not
    prescribe holding of the DPC at yearly interval. On the basis of the
    said findings, the petitioners/appellants had raised the ground that it
    was for non-constitution of the DPC that the petitioners/appellants
    cannot be allowed to suffer.
                                                              Page 14 of 17

                                                       W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                    In
                                                       WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010     I
18. It is an admitted position that the petitioners/appellants were
    promoted on ad hoc basis and their promotion/appointment to such
    post was subject to the approval of the DPC and otherwise they
    cannot claim any right over the said post. Some Petitioners/appellants
    had not completed the required length of service period in the feeder
    post to become eligible for promotion and even then they were
    promoted on ad hoc basis de-hors the rules and some of them though
    had the length of service completed in the feeder cadre were also
    appointed on ad hoc basis. The respondent State in its affidavit has
    clearly mentioned that as the petitioners/appellants were not eligible
    for promotion so respondent State had no requirement for holding the
    DPC as the same is the prerogative on the part of the respondent
    State. Against the said stand of the respondent State, the learned
    Single Judge entered into the Recruitment Rules in order to examine
    the necessity for holding DPC at yearly interval. But the Recruitment
    Rules is totally silent in that aspect of the matter. Though such rule of
    holding the DPC at yearly intervals are not prescribed in the
    1984/1993 Rules but in order to protect the seniority, the same
    provides the mode to the petitioners/appellants in the form of
    competing the LDCE but the petitioners/appellants on their own
    volition did not appear in the said LDCE though the same were held
    regularly.
                In R .K . Trivedi and others –Vs- Union of India and
        others reported in (1998) 9 SCC 58, it was held by the Apex
        Court in a case wherein appointments were made on ad hoc basis
                                                                Page 15 of 17

                                                      W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                     In
                                                      WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010      I
         with the condition that the appointees would have no right to
         claim for even regularization, the directed essential mode under
         the statutory Rules which was required to be followed could not
         be given a go by. Applying the said ratio this Court also comes to
         the conclusion that under no circumstances the prescribed mode
         stipulated by the Recruitment Rules be given a go by and
         regularize the appellants from the date of promotion.
19. The present case in hand is that the private respondents were
    appointed to the post of Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer duly
    following the Rules prescribed by the Recruitment Rules. On the other
    hand, the petitioners/appellants were appointed on ad hoc basis with
    a condition that the said appointment would not confer any right to
    the post of Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer and the appointment is
    subject to confirmation of the DPC.
20. The ratio of the decisions relied by Mr. N. Ratan, learned counsel for
    the petitioners/appellants cannot strengthen the case of the
    petitioners/appellants. The 1984/1993 Rules itself prescribed the
    modes of entry to the post of Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer and
    the length of service in the feeder cadre also prescribed. It is also not
    disputed that the petitioners/appellants were appointed on ad hoc
    basis and that too as a stop gap arrangement and the appointment
    letters specifically mentioned that the said ad hoc appointment would
    not confer on the petitioners/appellants any right to claim the post of
    Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer. The appointment letters of the
    petitioners/appellants specifically stipulated certain conditions and
                                                                Page 16 of 17

                                                        W.A. 07 (AP)/2013
                                                                      In
                                                        WP(C) 24 (AP)/2010      I
     such conditions would govern their respective appointments to the
     post and beyond that, on the basis of the said appointment letters
     they cannot claim to be appointed duly as per the Recruitment Rules.
     Accordingly the officiation of the petitioners/appellants in the post of
     Accounts Officer/Treasury Officer cannot be taken into account for
     consideration of the seniority more so, when their appointments are
     de hors the Recruitment Rules. Accordingly, there is no error in the
     findings of the learned Single Judge while dismissing the writ petition
     of the petitioners/appellants.
21. We are of the opinion that the petitioners/appellants, without
     challenging the recommendations of the DPC with regard to the date
     of regularization of the petitioners/appellants, cannot challenge the
     respective placement of all the private respondents in the final
     gradation list. Even if it is presumed that the petitioner/appellants had
     taken a specific plea in the additional affidavit thereby challenging the
     recommendation of the DPC, then also we are of the opinion that
     there is no illegality in the recommendation of the DPC. Accordingly,
     there is no merit in the writ appeal and the same is dismissed.
                                  JUDGE                         JUDGE
B. DEY
                                                                  Page 17 of 17


