                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.1487 of 2010
                                     Joygun Begum and Three others
                                                                  ............ Petitioners
                                             - Versus –
                                      The State of Assam and others
                                                                   ........ Respondents
                                             BEFORE
                       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioners:      None appears
                       For the respondents:      Mr. M.R. Adhikary, State Counsel.
                       Date of Hearing :        12.07.2017.
                      Date of Judgment:        12.07.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
             None appears for the petitioner when the matter is called upon. Heard
      Mr. M.R. Adhikary, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate, appearing
      on behalf of the State respondent authorities in the Social Welfare
      Department.
      2.     Pursuant to an advertisement dated 05.09.2009 issued under the
      signature of the Child Development Project Officer (CDPO), Krishnai Balijana
      Twin ICDS Project, inviting applications for various posts, amongst others, of
      Anganwadi Workers/Helpers, the petitioners had duly participated in the
      same. Annexure-2 to the writ petition is a WT message dated 07.11.2009 of
      the Joint Secretary to the Government of Assam in the Social Welfare
      Department, Dispur addressed to the CDPO’s of various places including the
      Krishnai Balijana Twin ICDS Project’s CDPS, which is involved in the subject
      matter in this writ petition. The said WT message provides that the CDPO’s
WP(C) No.1487 of 2010                                                           Page 1 of 3

      are required to announce the result after observing all formalities and take
      necessary action immediately for engagement of the selected candidates and
      report compliance to the Government by a written signal.
      3.       As per the Annexure-3 notice dated 01.12.2009 under the signature of
      the CDPO, Krishnai Balijana Twin ICDS Project, a select list was notified as
      regards Anganwadi Workers and Helpers in respect of the centers under the
      said Krishnai Balijana Twin ICDS project. As per the Serial No.22 of the said
      select list for Badal Para Ward No.10, the petitioner No.4 was selected as a
      Anganwadi Helper, similarly as per Serial No.24 in respect of Natun Basti
      Ward No.11, the petitioner No.1 was selected as Anganwadi Helper and in
      respect of Bhatipara Ward No.12 in Serial No.27, the petitioner No.2 was
      selected as Anganwadi Helper. The aforesaid selections were made in respect
      of centers in the town area. In respect of the selection for th Gaon Panchayat
      areas in Serial No.22, the petitioner No.3 was selected under the Dakhin Hsila
      Beel for the post of Anganwadi Worker.
      4.       Annexure-4 is a WT message dated 14.11.2009 of the Commissioner
      and Secretary to the Government of Assam in the Social Welfare Department.
      The said WT message addressed to all the Deputy Commissioners, District
      Social Welfare Officers etc provides for a request to the concerned authorities
      for necessary assistance to the CDPO’s for smooth completion of the process
      of recruitment of Anganwadi Worker and Anganwadi Helper within their
      respective jurisdiction and to ensure compliance within 30.12.2009.
      5.       Subsequently, some similarly situated persons had preferred a writ
      petition being WP(C) No.655/2010, wherein an order dated 05.02.2010 was
      passed that the pendency of the said writ petition shall not be a bar for the
      respondent authorities to consider and make appointments in the posts of
      Anganwadi Workers and Anganwadi Helpers as per the select list dated
      01.12.2009, which is in fact also the select list involved in the present writ
      petition.
      6.       Although the matter has been pending since the year 2010, no
      affidavit in opposition has been filed by the State respondent authorities in
      the Social Welfare Department to raise any objection to the claim of the
      petitioners for a direction to make their appointments as per the said select
      list of 01.12.2009.
WP(C) No.1487 of 2010                                                         Page 2 of 3

      7.      In view of the above, this Court is of the view that the interest of
      justice would be met if a direction is issued to the concerned CDPO of Krishnai
      Balijana Twin ICDS project to give a due consideration to the case of the
      petitioners.
      8.      Accordingly, a direction is issued that the respondent No.4, being the
      CDPO of Krishnai Balijana Twin ICDS project shall give a due consideration to
      the select list dated 01.22.2009, which is annexed as Annexure-3 to the writ
      petition and upon considering the same, if the respondent No.4 finds the said
      select list to be a valid and proper select list, shall undertake the necessary
      exercise to issue appointment to the petitioners herein provided that there is
      no further legally valid impediment in making such appointments. If upon
      consideration, the respondent No.4 is of the view that the appointments are
      required to be made, the CDPO (respondent No.4) shall issue the respective
      appointment letters in the known addresses of the petitioners.
      9.      In the event, the CDPO (respondent No.4) takes a view that the
      appointments are not required to be made, specific reasons thereof shall be
      stated in a speaking order and the same shall also be duly communicated in
      the known addressed of the petitioners.
      10.     The aforesaid exercise be carried out within a period of two months
      from today.
      11.     Mr.M.R Adhikary, learned State Counsel appearing for the respondent
      Social Welfare Department shall inform the CDPO about the order passed
      today with a direction to comply with the same.
      12.     Let a copy of this order be furnished to Mr.M.R Adhiakry, learned State
      Counsel.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                            JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.1487 of 2010                                                          Page 3 of 3


