                                              WP(C) No. 1032/2010
                              BEFORE
            HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
28.07.2017
        Heard Mr. A Paul, learned counsel appearing for the writ
petitioner as well as Mr. MR Adhikary, learned Government
Advocate, Assam appearing for the respondent Nos. 1,2 and 3.
        None appears for the respondent No.4.
        It may be noticed that notice has been deemed served
upon the respondent No.4 vide order dated 11.05.2017.
        Although the learned Government Advocate was given
time to obtain necessary instructions and file affidavit-in-
opposition vide order dated 19.06.2017, no affidavit-in-opposition
has been filed on behalf of the respondents. Mr. MR Adhikary,
learned Government Advocate today submits that although a
communication was made to the authorities concerned on
19.06.2017 itself, but no instruction has been received till date.
        In view of above, the writ petition is taken up for disposal
at the admission stage with the consent of the parties.
        The case of the petitioner is that she responded to the
advertisement dated 10.09.2009 floated by the respondent No.3
i.e. CDPO, Jorhat ICDS Project, Jorhat for filling up the posts of
Anganwadi Workers and Helpers under various centers. The
petitioner accordingly applied for the post of Angwanwadi Worker
in the Miching Gaon (Ward No.9) Anganwadi Centre under Jorhat
ICDS Project. Although the petitioner fulfilled all the criteria
stipulated in the advertisement, the respondent authorities
selected and appointed the respondent No.4 (Nilima Pagag
Kardong) as Anganwadi Worker in the said centre.

         Appearing for the writ petitioner, Mr. A Paul submits that
the respondent No.4 does not meet the requirement of the
conditions stipulated in the advertisement dated 10.09.2009, in as
much as, she does not belong to the Anganwadi Centre area
concerned and, therefore, the respondent authorities could not
have appointed her as Anganwadi Worker for the Miching Gaon
Ward No.9 Anganwadi Centre. Mr. A Paul submits that the
petitioner, on the other hand, is a permanent resident of Adarsh
Gaon, Mishing Gaon Katani in the district of Jorhat and a
certificate of residency was duly issued to the petitioner by the
Gaonburah of 38 No. Grant on 16.09.2009 (Annexure-E). He,
therefore, submits that the appointment of the respondent No.4
cannot be sustained and this Court may pass appropriate
direction in that regard.
         Considering the grievance of the writ petitioner, this Court
is of the view that the grievance of the writ petitioner should be
examined by the Director of Social Welfare Department,
Government of Assam who shall thereafter pass necessary orders.
         In that view of the matter, the writ petition is disposed of
with a direction to the respondent No.2 i.e. the Director of Social
Welfare Assam to issue notice to both the writ petitioner as well
as the respondent No.4 for their appearance before him on a
fixed date and, thereafter, pass necessary orders on the basis of
his findings within a period of one month from the date fixed for
the appearance of the rival parties.
         Liberty is also granted to the petitioner as well as the
respondent No.4 to submit their respective testimonials including
the residential certificates before the Director of Social Welfare
Assam.

         The Director of Social Welfare shall undertake the said
exercise within a period of two weeks from the date of receipt of
a certified copy of this order.
         It is made clear that if the respondent No.4 is not found to
be a resident of the Anganwadi Centre area concerned, her
appointment shall be terminated by the Director of Social
Welfare, Assam and a fresh selection process shall be initiated to
fill up the post by issuing advertisement wherein the petitioner
will be given a fair opportunity to participate.
         With the above observation and direction, this writ petition
stands disposed of.
                                                              JUDGE
skd


