                               WP(C) No. 1410 of 2013
                                          BEFORE
                HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANASH RANJAN PATHAK
10.07.2017
            Heard Mr. N. I. Khan, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. N.
    Sarma, learned Standing Counsel, Elementary Education for respondent Nos. 1 to
    4, Mr. N. Goswami, learned Government Advocate for respondent No. 5 and Mr.
    S. Biswas, learned counsel for the respondent No. 6. None appeared for the
    respondent No. 7.
            It is contended by the petitioner that since 01.01.2005 she is working in
    Sishu Kalyan Venture Lower Primary School of Singaria Pt-II in the South
    Karimganj Block of Karimganj district. But her name was not forwarded to the
    Directorate of Elementary Education, Assam for provincialisation of her service
    under    the    provisions  of  “the   Assam    Venture    Educational    Institution
    (Provincialisation of Services) Act, 2011,” as amended in 2012 and that in her
    place, name of the respondent No. 7, Shahab Uddin was sent for provincialisation
    of his service, showing him as 2nd Assistant Teacher in the said school. The
    petitioner submits that though said Sishu Kalyan VLP School has its own and
    necessary DISE code, wherein her name has been reflected, but her case was not
    considered by the authority of said school.
            Being aggrieved with such action of the authority of said Sishu Kalyan VLP
    School, the petitioner has preferred this writ petition praying for consideration of
    her case for provincialisation under the said 2011 act, as amended in 2012 and
    for necessary action and further, to take legal action against the Head Master for
    of said school for not forwarding her name for provincialisation of service.
            It is stated by the petitioner that as she filed a complaint before the
    Director of Elementary Education, Assam with regard to non consideration of her
    case for provincialisation under the said 2011 act, as amended in 2012; the DEE
    Assam on 07.03.2013 wrote to the Deputy Commissioner, i.e. the Chairman of the
    District Scrutiny Committee (DSC), Karimganj to take necessary action in that
    WP(C) No. 1410 of 2013                                                  Page 1 of 4

regard. The petitioner further submitted that the District Elementary Education
Officer, Karimganj on 02.02.2013 informed the DEE, Assam to correct the name
of existing staff of said Sishu Kalyan VLP School by making specific indication that
the respondent No. 7 joined the said school only on 17.11.2012, whereas the
petitioner is serving in said school since 01.01.2005.
         In this case, the court while issued notice to the respondent, by an order
dated 18.03.2013 in the interim, stayed the provincialisation of service of the
respondent No. 7 as Assistant Teacher of said Sishu Kalyan VLP School and the
same is still in force.
         The Director of Elementary Education, Assam has filed an affidavit in the
matter stating that as per the provisions of said 2011 Act, it is the head of such
venture educational institution, who is required to submit the particulars of the
school before the concerned DEEO for necessary verification of records, such as –
land record, permission, recognition, staff pattern showing their educational
qualification, the decisions of the SMC etc. and thereafter, the DEEO of the district
concerned is required to place those materials submitted by the school concerned
before the concerned District Scrutiny Committee under the Chairman ship of the
Deputy Commissioner of the district concerned and the said DSC after scrutinizing
the particulars of the concerned school need to submit its report to the concerned
Directorate for taking further steps for provincialisation of the schools and its
eligible employees. It is further stated by the state respondents that on receipt of
such report of the DSC, the Directorate concerned requires to verify the records of
the school further and uploaded the list of eligible school alongwith its staff for
provincialisation, but observed that the said Directorate cannot included the name
of any person in the staff list of the school to be provincialised unless recommend
by the concerned DSC. The Director in the said affidavit categorically submitted
that after receiving the said communication dated 07.03.2013 from the DEEO
Karimganj, the Deputy Commissioner, Karimganj was requested to furnish a detail
report after taking necessary action, who is the authority to correct the name of
any employee in the staff list of school, eligible for provincialisation under the said
2011 Act.
WP(C) No. 1410 of 2013                                                     Page 2 of 4

        The petitioner by way of an additional affidavit submitted before the Court
that with regard to such allegation against the respondent No. 7, the matter was
enquired into by the Deputy Commissioner, Karimganj by order dated 14.03.2013
and after proper enquiry made by the Circle Officer submitted its report on
19.4.2013 and 04.06.2013 the D.C. Karimganj forwarded the said enquiry report
of Circle Officer to the DEE, Assam.
        During the pendency of this case “the Assam Venture Educational
Institutions (Provincialisation of Services) Act, 2011, as amended was declared
unconstitutional and the State Government in the Education Department w.e.f.
11.04.2017 brought into force a new Act,          namely, “the Assam Educational
(Provincialisation of Services of Teachers and Re-organization of Education
Institution) Act, 2017” for provincialisation of services of teachers of venture
educational institutions in place of said 2011 Act amended in 2012.
        Pursuant to the order passed by this court in Abdul Gafur Mondal, the
Education Department of State Government have already constituted the
Educational Tribunals for considering the case of employees for such venture
educational institutions established under the provisions of the Assam Non
Government Educational institution (Regulation and Management) Act 2006 and
the Assam Non Government Educational institution (Regulation and Management)
Rules 2007 where the District & Sessions Judge/Additional District & Sessions
Judge of each of the district of the State presides over such Educational Tribunal
of the district concerned .
        The Sishu Kalyan VLP School was established under the 2006 Act and
managed by 2007 Rules. It is seen from the enquiry report of the Circle officer,
Karimganj that due to absence of the petitioner in the school, the SMC of said
school discharged her from it and that the respondent No.7, i.e. the 3rd teacher of
the school was promoted to the petitioner’s place as 2nd Assistant Teacher of the
school and forwarded his name, who joined the said school only on 17.11.2012,
and to the Directorate of Elementary Education, Assam for provincialisation of
service of the respondent No. 7 in place of the petitioner.
WP(C) No. 1410 of 2013                                                 Page 3 of 4

        After considering the entire aspects of the matter, the petitioner is directed
to approach the concerned Educational Tribunal within 30 days from today by
submitting her grievances, if any, before the said Tribunal. In the event of such
approach of the petitioner within the time specified, the concerned Educational
Tribunal, after hearing the petitioner as well as the Headmaster of said Sishu
Kalyan VLP School, the authorities of SMC of said school, the respondent No.7
namely, Shahab Uddin, the concerned Deputy Inspector of Schools, Karimganj as
well as the DEEO Karimganj and on perusal of the records including the
proceeding books of said SMC of Sishu Kalyan VLP School, the original resolutions
book(s) of the SMC of the school, the attendance register of the school all in
original; the said Education Tribunal shall pass necessary order in accordance with
law and the provisions of said 2017 Act and shall dispose of the said matter of
the petitioner preferably within a period of 4 (four) months from such approach of
the petitioner, intimating her about the outcome of her said representation.
        With the aforesaid observation and direction the writ petition stands
disposed of. The interim order passed earlier on 18.03.2013 in this proceeding
stands merged with this order
                                                                 JUDGE
gunajit
WP(C) No. 1410 of 2013                                                   Page 4 of 4


