                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.1126 of 2010
                                     Smti Nijora Devi
                                                                   ............ Petitioner
                                             - Versus –
                                      The State of Assam and others
                                                                    ........ Respondents
                                             BEFORE
                       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioner:       Mr. J. Roy, Adv
                       For the respondents:      Mr.T.C.Chutia, State Counsel.
                       Date of Hearing :        14.07.2017.
                      Date of Judgment:        14.07.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. J. Roy, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. T.C.
      Chutia, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate appearing for the
      respondent Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5.
      2.      Office note dated 18.03.2013 indicates that AD card in respect of the
      respondent No.6 had been received back and as such, the matter is ready as
      regards service. Although a subsequent office note dated 19.03.2013 states
      that two numbers of affidavits in opposition have been filed by the respondent
      Nos. 4 and 6, but on a close perusal, it is seen that no such affidavit has been
      filed by the respondent No.6. The affidavit in opposition referred in the office
      note dated 19.03.2013 is in fact an affidavit in opposition filed by a
      respondent No.6 in WP(C) No.1199/2010, which is a different writ petition
      than from the present writ petition. As such, it is construed that no such
      affidavit has been filed by the respondent No.6 in this writ petition. Office
WP(C) No.1126 of 2010                                                            Page 1 of 4

      note also does not indicate that anybody has appeared for the respondent
      No.6. Hence, this Court deems it appropriate that the matter can be taken up
      for final consideration as the respondent No.6 had not appeared in spite of
      notice being duly served upon her.
      3.      The writ petitioner assails an order of appointment of the respondent
      No.6 Nitu Moni Borah as an Anganwadi Worker in the No.44 Salpara Mini
      Anganwadi Center situated at village Salpara. The case of the petitioner is
      that while the petitioner is a resident of the jurisdictional area of the said
      No.44 Salpara Mini Anganwadi Center, but on the other hand, the respondent
      No.6 although had been appointed is not a resident within the jurisdictional
      area of the said Anganwadi Center. It is stated that the petitioner had duly
      participated in a selection process pursuant to an advertisement dated
      05.09.2009 and the petitioner being a resident of the jurisdictional area,
      ought to have been offered the appointment as an Anganwadi Worker. It is
      the case of the petitioner that one of the essential conditions of the
      advertisement is that the appointment of an Anganwadi Worker can be made
      only amongst a resident within the jurisdictional area of a center and any
      person, who is not a resident of the jurisdictional area, is ineligible for such
      appointment.
      4.      Accordingly, the petitioner encloses a residential certificate issued by
      the Ward Member of No.2 Naltoli Maj Pubthoria Gaon Panchayat, which
      indicates that the petitioner is a resident of the jurisdictional area of the
      center. It is also stated that on the respondent No.6 being appointed, the
      public of the locality had lodged a complaint dated 23.12.2009 before the Sub
      Divisional Officer stating that a resident from outside the jurisdictional area of
      the center had been appointed as an Anganwadi Worker under the No.44
      Salpara Mini Anganwadi Center. The petitioner in order to substantiate her
      stand, assails the certificate dated 12.09.2009 issued by the Gaon Bura of
      Jengoni Katia Salpara Gaon, which indicates that the respondent No.6 Nitu
      Moni Borah is a resident of Jengoni Salpara village. 5.
      6.      It is the case of the petitioner that there is no such village in the name
      of Jengoni Salpara, whereas on the other hand, there are three separate
      villages, namely, Jengoni, Salpara and Katia. It is stated that the present
      Anganwadi Center is located in Salpara village and therefore, in order to be a
WP(C) No.1126 of 2010                                                              Page 2 of 4

      resident of the jurisdictional area of the Anganwadi Center, the concerned
      person has to be a resident of Salpara village.
      7.       In order to adjudicate the aforesaid contention of the petitioner, Mr.
      T.C. Chutia, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate was required to
      produce a written instruction from the Circle Officer, Kaliabor clearly stating
      therein as to whether there are three distinct villages namely Jengoni, Salpara
      and Katia or there exists one village in the name of Jengoni Salpara.
      Accordingly, Mr. T.C. Chutia, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate
      has produced an instruction from the Circle Officer, Kaliabor revenue circle,
      which states that Zengani and Salpara are names of two different villages,
      although the two villages are nearby to each other.
      8.       The said instruction gives an indication that there is no such village in
      the name of Jengoni Salpara. In such view of the matter, the certificate dated
      12.09.2009 of the Gaon Bura certifying that the respondent No.6 is a resident
      of Jengoni Salpara village cannot be a basis to arrive at a conclusion that the
      respondent No.6 is a resident of the Salpara village.
      9.      Reference is also made to the Annexure-12 complaint of the
      concerned Gaon Bura that the original certificate given by him indicates that
      the respondent No.6 is a resident of Jengoni village and the word Salpara had
      been manipulated in the said certificate. In such view of the matter, in the
      absence of any further materials being produced by the respondent
      authorities, this Court is of the view that the respondent No.6 is not a resident
      of Salpara village and therefore, the said respondent is also not a resident
      within the jurisdictional area of No.44 Salpara Mini Anganwadi Center.
      10.     As the respondent No.6 had not entered appearance, this Court
      instead of setting aside the order of appointment, deems it appropriate that
      the Director of Social Welfare, Assam issues notice upon the respondent No.6
      giving the respondent No.6 a personal hearing on the aforesaid question by
      giving her an opportunity to produce the relevant materials to indicate that
      she is a resident of village Salpara and also a resident within the jurisdictional
      area of No.44 Salpara Mini Anganwadi Center.
      11.     The Director shall also give a personal hearing to the present
      petitioner and also allow her to produce any further material that the writ
      petitioner may desire to substantiate her case that the respondent No.6 is not
WP(C) No.1126 of 2010                                                             Page 3 of 4

      a resident within the jurisdictional area of the aforesaid Anganwadi Center.
      Depending upon such hearing and materials to be produced, the Director of
      Social Welfare, Assam shall pass a speaking order thereon and while doing so,
      the Director shall also bear in mind the aforesaid observation and prima-facie
      finding that this Court had arrived at.
      12.     After passing the speaking order, if the Director arrives at a conclusion
      that the respondent No.6 is not a resident of the jurisdictional area,
      appropriate orders in the circumstances be also passed by the Director.
      13.     It is stated by Mr. J. Roy, learned counsel for the petitioner that there
      is a possibility that pursuant to an earlier order dated 17.02.2010, wherein the
      concerned CDPO was directed to make an enquiry; certain actions may have
      been taken in the aforesaid matter.
      14.     The aforesaid submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner be
      also taken into consideration by the Director while giving the consideration.
      15.     The aforesaid exercise be carried out by the Director within a period of
      one month from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                              JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.1126 of 2010                                                           Page 4 of 4


