                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
  (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                              Writ Petition No. 1450/2011
                   Sri Bhabakanta Gayan,
                   S/o Late Gopal Ch, Gayan,
                   Resident of Vill-Bharaguri,
                   P.O.-Padumoni,
                   District-Nagaon, Assam.
                                                         ......Petitioner
                       - Versus –
               1. The State Bank of India,
                  represented by the Zonal Manager,
                  Guwahati-1.
               2. The Deputy General Manager (O&C),
                  State Bank of India, Local Head Office,
                  Guwahati.
               3. The Asstt. General Manager (Admin),
                  State Bank of India, Administrative
                  Unit, G.S. Road, Bhangagarh,
                  P.O.-Dispur, Guwahati-5.
               4. The Branch Manager,
                  State Bank of India, Raha Branch,
                  Nagaon, Assam.
                                                         ......Respondents
               For the Petitioner                 : Mr. S. Borthakur,
                                                    Advocate.
               For the Respondents                : Mr. S.S. Sharma,
                                                    Sr. Advocate
               Dates of hearing & Judgment        : 1.8.2017
                                          BEFORE
                   HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ARUP KUMAR GOSWAMI
                              JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
       Heard Mr. S. Borthakur, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. S.S.
Sharma, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondents.
WP(C) 1450/2017                                                           Page 1 of 7

2.     By this writ petition, the petitioner prays for quashing and setting aside the order
dated 18.8.2010 issued by the Assistant General Manager, State Bank of India, Raha
Branch (disciplinary authority), by which the petitioner was inflicted with the
punishment of dismissal from service without notice as per provision of Clause 6(a) of
the Memorandum of Settlement on Disciplinary Action and Procedure (for short,
Memorandum of Settlement) for committing gross misconduct in terms of paragraph
5(j) of the Memorandum of Settlement. Prayer is also made for issuance of a writ of
mandamus for a fresh departmental enquiry as well as to direct the respondents to re-
consider the quantum of punishment.
3.     The petitioner was appointed as Cashier-cum-Clerk by an order dated 5.4.1993
and was posted at the State Bank of India, Barpeta Branch. He was subsequently
transferred to State Bank of India, Raha Branch and while he was so posted there, by
an order dated 6.4.2009, he was suspended on the allegation of committing serious
irregularities in deposit account of some customers of the Bank by violating Bank’s laid
down norms and procedures.
4.     On 9.9.2009, a disciplinary proceeding was initiated against the petitioner with
the issuance of a show cause notice. The allegations against the petitioner read as
follows:
                “It is alleged that while you were posted as a Single Window Operator at
       Raha Branch, you have committed the following irregularities:
                Allegation 1: That you unauthorizedly paid the under noted withdrawal
       slips of account No. 11689553585 of Shri Biren Deka at Raha Branch in you ID,
       while the drawer’ s signature of these withdrawal slips were not tallied with the
       specimen signatures of the depositors recorded with the Bank.
                                Withdrawal slip dated  Amount
                                09.09.08               50,000/-
                                08.09.08               50,000/-
                                12.09.08               50,000/-
                                18.09.08               50,000/-
                                27.09.08               50,000/-
                                29.09.08               44,000/-
                                20.10.08               15,000/-
                                Total                  3,09,000/-
WP(C) 1450/2017                                                         Page 2 of 7

                Allegation 2: That you used the proceeds of the aforesaid withdrawals as
       mentioned in allegation-1) for your personall gain.
                Allegation 3: That you, violating the Bank’s extant instructions, paid the
       aforesaid withdrawal slips as mentioned in the allegation-1) produced for
       payment without pass book.
                Allegation 4: That you used your ID in paying these withdrawals for
       malafide intention.
                Allegation 5: That you paid these withdrawals (as mentioned in the
       allegation-1) with malafide intention to defraud the bank.”
5.     The petitioner responded to the said notice vide his reply which was received on
26.9.2009 by the authorities of the Bank (Annexure-P/6). The same reads as follows:
                “Allegation No.1: I paid the amount through withdrawal slips as
       mentioned in the above memo as per my eligibility. I have not crossed my
       eligibility level of payment and hence it is not unauthorized payment.
                Allegation No. 2 : I have not used the proceeds of withdrawal payment
       for my personal gain. I made the payment to the beneficiary.
                Allegation No. 3 : I did not make the payment without pass-book. Pass-
       book was accompanied with each withdrawal but could not be printed as the
       pass-book printing machine was not functioning at that time.
                Allegation No. 4 : I did not use my ID with malafide intention.
                Attention No. 5 : I did not make the payment of the withdrawal with
       malafide intention to defraud the Bank.”
6.     Not being satisfied with the reply furnished by the petitioner, an Enquiry Officer
was appointed, who after conclusion of the enquiry, submitted a report dated
6.10.2010 holding all the allegations to be proved. The disciplinary authority also
concurred that all the allegations had been proved and by the memorandum dated
14.6.2010, furnished a copy of the Enquiry Report to the petitioner along with the
comments of the disciplinary authority. By the said memorandum, it was indicated that
the petitioner may submit his representation within 7 days from the date of receipt of
the Enquiry Report. The petitioner submitted a representation on 29.6.2010 stating that
he made payment to Biswajit Bardhan, a colleague of his, who had submitted
withdrawal forms on behalf of the account holder on good faith. Subsequently, the
WP(C) 1450/2017                                                          Page 3 of 7

memorandum dated 2.8.2010 was issued by the Assistant General Manager to the
petitioner proposing to inflict upon him the punishment of “to be dismissed without
notice” as per the provision under Clause 6(a) of the Memorandum of Settlement and
indicated that if the petitioner so desired, he may submit in writing or appear before the
disciplinary authority for personal hearing to show cause as to why the proposed
punishment should not be inflicted upon him, within seven days from the date of
receipt of the memorandum. The petitioner by his letter dated 12.8.2010 contended
that the proposed punishment is disproportionate to the allegations levelled against
him. Thereafter, by order dated 8.8.2010, as noticed earlier, the petitioner was
dismissed from service without notice. The petitioner had preferred an appeal before
the appellate authority on 28.9.2010 and the same was also dismissed by order dated
4.12.2010.
7.      Mr. Borthakur has assiduously urged that having regard to the facts and
circumstances of the case, it is apparent that the petitioner did not have any malafide
intention and had not misappropriated any amount and that he had merely acceded to
the request of a colleague working with him in the same Branch by the name of Biswajit
Bardhan who had presented the withdrawal slips on behalf of the account holder and
had paid the money to Bardhan. While admitting that there was some negligence on
the part of the petitioner in not following the norms of the Bank while entertaining the
forms submitted for withdrawal of money, Mr. Borthakur submits that in the
background of the case, the penalty of dismissal from service is disproportionate and
therefore, the petitioner may be imposed with any other punishment by allowing the
petitioner to continue in service of the Bank. Mr. Borthakur has further submitted that
the disciplinary authority had not recorded as to why the penalty of dismissal from
service is to be imposed and that shows that there was no application of mind by the
disciplinary authority with regard to punishment that ought to be imposed having
regard to the gravity of the misconduct and mitigating circumstances.
8.      Mr. Sharma has submitted that the petitioner had taken a stand in the written
statement asserting that he had made payment to the beneficiary and thus had not
even remotely indicated that he had made the payment to his colleague and this shows
that the subsequent plea taken in the reply dated 29.6.2010 is an after-thought, the
irregularities having been exposed and proved in the enquiry. It is submitted by him
that it was established beyond doubt during the enquiry that the petitioner had
WP(C) 1450/2017                                                         Page 4 of 7

fraudulently violated the norms laid down for disbursement of money when a
withdrawal form is presented and that it is a good ground for dismissal of the
petitioner. The petitioner, being in the employment of the Bank, has to be vigilant and
has to strictly adhere to the norms for disbursement of money of the account holder, he
contends. He has relied on a judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of
Lalit Poply vs. Canara Bank, reported in (2003) 3 SCC 583.
9.      I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and
have perused the materials on record.
10.     At the very outset, it will be apposite to put on record that there is no assailment
of the departmental proceeding on account of any procedural infirmity and the sole
ground of challenge to the order dated 8.8.2010 imposing punishment of dismissal from
service is on the ground that the punishment is disproportionate to the charges and
therefore, the punishment is required to be suitably altered.
11.     Biren Deka, the account holder, was examined both by the prosecution and the
defence. The Enquiry Officer recorded a finding that the account holder had
categorically stated that he had not signed even one single withdrawal form. The
signatures in the withdrawal form PX-1 to PX-7 drawn on Account No. 1168955355 did
not tally with the specimen signature of the account holder recorded with the Bank vide
Ext. PX-14. It is also recorded that the account holder had received back the money
through a person representing Biswajit Bardhan after seven months.
12.     In the order dated 3.8.2010, by which the disciplinary authority proposed to
impose the penalty of dismissal from service without notice, it has been reflected that
the disciplinary authority had perused the details of the enquiry proceedings and
findings of the Enquiry Officer and other relevant records while deciding on the
punishment to be imposed. Merely because the details of the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances are not indicated, it cannot lead to the conclusion that the
disciplinary authority had mechanically imposed the order of punishment.
13.     The appellate authority had observed that the withdrawals were, prima facie,
forged as neither the signatures had tallied with the specimen signatures on record nor
the depositor had come to the Bank to receive the payment. It is opined that the fact
that the payment had been received by another staff member cannot absolve or
mitigate the misconduct of the petitioner.
WP(C) 1450/2017                                                          Page 5 of 7

14.    In the written statement a categorical stand was taken by the petitioner that he
had made the payment to the beneficiary (account holder) and accordingly, he had
professed his innocence. It transpires, later on, in the enquiry that the account holder
did not receive any money from the petitioner in the bank and the money was paid to
another staff member of the Bank. Thus, the petitioner had, at the first instance, taken
a false plea. Fact that the account holder was subsequently paid the amount after
seven months is hardly of any consequence.
15.    In Lalit Popli (supra), basic facts were that one customer of the Bank had lodged
a complaint with the police stating that there had been unauthorized withdrawal of Rs.
1.07 lakhs from his account. After an internal investigation, charge sheet was laid on
the allegation that he, by misusing his official position, in collusion with someone else,
got the cheque book issued for the A/C in question, utilized the cheque-leaves in
question by forging the signature of the account-holder and got the same presented to
encash the cheques fraudulently. The employee had accepted that there was some
lapse on his part but pleaded that there was lack of criminal intention. The Supreme
Court had observed that the Bank employees deal with public money and the nature of
the work demands vigilance with the inbuilt requirement to work carefully. Such a plea
put forward for interference with the order of dismissal was not accepted.
16.    While exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the
High Court does not act as an appellate authority and its jurisdiction is limited and
circumscribed by limits of judicial review to correct errors of law or procedural errors
leading to manifest injustice or violation of principles of natural justice. The disciplinary
authority and the appellate authority had based their conclusions on materials available
on record after considering the defence put forth by the petitioner and in the
considered opinion of the Court, the disciplinary authority had taken a decision to
impose the punishment of dismissal from service in a reasonable manner.
17.    In that view of the matter, I do not find any merit in the writ petition and the
same is dismissed. No cost.
                                                                       JUDGE
WP(C) 1450/2017                                                          Page 6 of 7

Madhu
WP(C) 1450/2017 Page 7 of 7


