                        IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                     WP(C) No.222 of 2009
                                    Smti Kalpana Roy and other
                                                                 ............ Petitioners
                                            - Versus –
                                     The State of Assam and others
                                                                  ........ Respondents
                                            BEFORE
                      HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                      For the petitioners:      Mr. A. Dasgupra, Sr. Adv
                      For the respondents:      Mr. M.R. Adhikary, State Counsel.
                                                Mr. A. Bhuyan, SC, BTC
                     Date of Hearing :         11.07.2017.
                     Date of Judgment:        11.07.2017.
                         JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
             Heard Mr. A. Dasgupta, learned senior counsel for the petitioners, Mr.
      M.R Adhikary, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate and Mr. A.
      Bhuyan, learned Standing Counsel for the BTC.
      2.     The petitioners herein, who have the qualification of appearing in the
      HSLC examination, but having not passed the same, had been appointed as
      Anganwadi Helpers under the Kokrajhar ICDS project. The petitioners have
      been working as Anganwadi Helpers in their respective centers since
      10.09.1997 when they were so appointed. It is stated that during their service
      tenure as Anganwadi Helpers, the petitioners have rendered satisfactory
      service and there is no complaint from any quarter against the services
      rendered by them.
WP(C) No.222 of 2009                                                           Page 1 of 3

      3.      In the year 2008, a process was undertaken to fill up certain vacant
      posts of Anganwadi Worker in different centers within the jurisdiction of the
      Kokrajhar ICDS project. The petitioners along with others had participated in
      the said selection process.
      4.      In this writ petition, the petitioners are aggrieved by the appointment
      of the respondent Nos. 7 and 8 respectively as Anganwadi Workers. The
      petitioners raised a claim that the respondent Nos. 7 and 8 are not residents
      within the jurisdictional area of the Anganwadi Center against which they
      were appointed. It is stated that the respondent No. 7 Ms. Sushree Roy earlier
      worked as Anganwadi Helper in the Dhubri district, whereas the respondent
      No.8 Ms. Bhanu Das had no occasion to work as Anganwadi Helper in Tilapara
      center. Apart from the aforesaid statement, no further particulars had been
      provided by the writ petitioners as to why the writ petitioners are of the view
      that the respondent Nos. 7 and 8 are not residents within the jurisdictional
      area of the concerned Anganwadi Center to which they were appointed.
      5.      Mr. A. Bhuyan, learned Standing Counsel for BTC on the other hand
      submits that the respondent Nos. 7 and 8 were appointed by following the
      procedure of due selection and as such, no infirmity can be subscribed .
      6.      Mr. M.R Adhikary, learned State Counsel also by relying an affidavit in
      opposition of the respondent No.4 being the Child Development Project
      Officer of Kokrajhar IDCS project dated 14.05.2009, submits that in the
      comparative merit in the selection process, the merit position of the
      respondent Nos. 7 and 8 were found to be superior than that of the
      petitioners and therefore, from the said point of view also no infirmity can be
      subscribed to the appointment of the respondent Nos. 7 and 8.
      7.      In such view of the matter, this Court is not inclined to interfere with
      the appointments of the respondent Nos. 7 and 8 as Anganwadi Workers of
      their respective Anganwadi Centers.
      8.      But at the same time, Mr. A. Dasgupta, learned senior counsel for the
      petitioners submits that the petitioner having been appointed as Anganwadi
      Helper in the year 1997, have already attained the qualifying service of 21
      years as Anganwadi Worker and therefore, they have also accrued a legal
      right to be considered for being promoted as Anganwadi Workers.
WP(C) No.222 of 2009                                                           Page 2 of 3

      9.      Mr. A. Bhuyan, learned Standing Counsel for BTC on the other hand
      agrees to the said submission of the learned senior counsel for the
      petitioners, but subject to the condition that their exists such a policy of the
      respondent authorities as regards promotion from Anganwadi Helper to
      Anganwadi Worker and if such policy exists and if the petitioners have met
      the required qualifying service, the respondent authorities would definitely
      consider the case of the petitioners for such promotion.
      10.     In view of such submission of the learned counsel for the parties, this
      writ petition is disposed of with a direction that the respondent No.6 being the
      Joint Director of ICDS, Kokrajhar, BTC shall give a due consideration to the
      claim of the petitioners for being promoted as Anganwadi Workers from their
      present post of Anganwadi Helper. In the event, the Joint Director is of the
      view that such policy is available and the petitioners do meet the required
      qualifying period prescribed therein, an appropriate consideration shall be
      made as to whether the petitioners can be promoted to the post of
      Anganwadi Workers.
      11.     The aforesaid exercise of considering as to whether the petitioners can
      be promoted as Anganwadi Workers shall be made within a period of three
      months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                            JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.222 of 2009                                                          Page 3 of 3


