                IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
       (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                      Case No: WP(C) 2500/2017
         Elite Computers and Communications Pvt. Ltd. …… Petitioner
                                      -Versus-
        The State of Assam and others                   ..... Respondents
                                   :: BEFORE ::
              HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE PRASANTA KUMAR DEKA
               For the Petitioner            :     Mr. KN Choudhury
                                                              Sr. Advocate
                                                   Mr. PD Nair
                                                              Advocate
               For the Respondents           :     Mr. D Saikia
                                                   Sr. Addl. Advocate General, Assam
                                                   Mr. B Gogoi
                                                              Advocate
               Date of Hearing               :     11.07.2017
               Date of delivery of
               Judgment and Order            :     11.07.2017
                     JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
       Heard Mr. KN Choudhury, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. PD Nair,
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner. Also heard Mr. D Saikia,
the learned Senior Additional Advocate General, Government of Assam assisted
by Mr. B Gogoi, the learned counsel and Mr. RK Agarwal, learned counsel for the
respondent No. 8.
2.     The respondent No. 4, Commissioner of Taxes, Assam had issued an E-
Tender Notice No. CP/COMP-56/2016/41 dated 28.10.2016 for the work of ‘The
supply of computer, network hardware and its peripherals, including the work of
                                                                           Page 1 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

power of supply and network cabling at various offices under the Commissioner
of Taxes, Assam’. The invitation for Bid No. NCB/FEB (WB-PMU) 10/2015/136
dated 01.11.2016 was issued by the respondent No. 6, the Project Director –
ASPIRe Project in respect of the National Competitive Bidding for the said work
with Bid Reference/ Tender No. ASPIRe/NCB/FEB (WB-PMU) 10/2015/136/2016-
2017. After changes made in the initial date for submission and opening of Bids,
ultimately the last date and time of submission of online Bids as well as hard
copy thereof was fixed on 1200 hrs. of 30.12.2016 and the date and time of
opening of the bids was fixed at 1400 hrs. of 30.12.2016.
3.      The tender document revealed a financial eligibility criterion as
incorporated in Section III (Evaluation And Qualification Criteria) thereof as
follows:-
“the Bidder must have minimum average annual turnover of INR 15 Crores in
each of the last 3 financial years.”
4.      The present petitioner was authorised to bid for supplying various
products by manufacturers of some IT, networking and other products required
for supply vide the instant tender and as such the present petitioner was
authorised by the said manufacturers to quote rates independently, negotiate
and sign the contracts for supplying their respective products and/or services to
the Commissioner of Taxes, Assam.
5.      Upon issuance of the said tender, finding sub-clause B of Clause 2 –
Financial Eligibility under the General Conditions of the Instructions to Bidders
(‘ITB’ in short) to be illogical, the petitioner made a request to the respondent
No. 4 for amendment of the said tender clause along with some other
                                                                      Page 2 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

clarifications vide letter No. ECC/2K16-17/Prebid-519 dated 09.11.2016. By the
said letter the petitioner had, inter alia, sought for clarifications, requesting that
Clause 2(B) of the General Conditions of ITB i.e. “The Bidder must have
minimum average annual turnover of INR 15 Crores in each of the last 3 financial
years. The revenues must be accrued from sale of similar items as per items”, be
changed to “average annual turnover of 15 Crores from the last three financial
years for sale of similar items”.
6.       The representatives of the petitioner company and others were called for
a Pre-Bid Meeting on 11.11.2016 in the office of the respondent No. 4. In the
said meeting it was informed that no change was required to be made to the
existing Clause 2(B) of the General Conditions of ITB and to that effect, minutes
of the said meeting was also prepared which forms the part of the petition as
Annexure-7.
7.       The technical bids in response to the said tender were opened on
30.12.2016 at 1400 hrs in the office of the respondent No. 4 in presence of the
representative of the petitioner company. After opening of the technical bids on
30.12.2016, the official respondents prepared the minutes of Bid Opening
Summary and as per the said minutes the petitioner was found to be a
responsive bidder including that of financial eligibility of minimum average annual
turnover.
8.       After opening of the financial bids on 01.02.2017, the representatives of
the petitioner company were called for meeting on 27.02.2017 by the respondent
No. 7, Inspector of Taxes and the said representatives attended the said meeting
on 27.02.2017 wherein the petitioner was asked to confirm furnishing of
                                                                          Page 3 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

additional Performance Bank Guarantee for being awarded the work. The
petitioner agreed to the said proposal and a letter dated 02.03.2017 was sent
conveying that the petitioner would additionally provide 5% Performance Bank
Guarantee for the annual maintenance contract for 5 years over and above the
10% Performance Bank Guarantee already assured by it.
9.       The respondent No. 7, Inspector of Taxes, Assam sent the impugned
email dated 19.04.2017 informing the petitioner company that as the petitioner
company had mentioned in its bid that its annual turnover of the years 2012-13
and 2013-14 were Rupees 8 Crores and Rupees 12 Crores respectively, it did not
fulfil the criteria of Minimum Average Annual turnover of Rupees 15 Crores in
each of the last 3 financial years. In the said impugned email dated 19.04.2017 it
was also specified therein that – “RPF criteria is ‘The Bidder must have minimum
average annual turnover of INR 15 crores in each of the last 3 financial years.
World Bank interpretation is that the annual turnover should be at least INR 15
crore in each year.”
10.      The petitioner, being aggrieved by the said email dated 19.04.2017
(Annexure-14), sent a representation dated 20.04.2017 expressing its grievances
and requesting to be awarded the work. However, the same was not responded
by the respondent authorities. The petitioner, being aggrieved, has filed this writ
petition wherein it is mentioned that Letter of Intent (LoI) has been issued to the
private respondent No. 8 for the tender work, however, the agreement for the
said work was yet to be signed and no work order has been issued to the
respondent No. 8. Later on, the petitioner by filing an additional affidavit brought
                                                                        Page 4 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

on record the Letter of Acceptance (LoA) issued by the respondent No. 3 to the
respondent No. 8 dated 10.04.2017.
11.     It is submitted by the petitioner that once having accepted that the
petitioner satisfied the Financial Eligibility Criteria and recording the same in the
minutes of the Bid Opening Summary and subsequent acts on the part of the
respondent No. 4 by opening the financial bid of the petitioner and calling it for
negotiations, such action tantamount to changing the rules of the game after it
had been played. The same is arbitrary, whimsical, capricious, unreasonable and
as such the impugned email dated 19.04.2017 is liable to be set aside and
quashed. It is also prayed that a writ of mandamus and/or any other direction be
issued commanding the respondent authorities not to issue any order and/or
allow the private respondent No. 8 to carry out the work tender vide the bid
reference stated hereinabove.
12.       Upon motion, this court vide order dated 05.05.2017 by way of an
interim order directed the respondent authorities to maintain status quo as on
05.05.2017 with respect to the Letter of Acceptance (LoA) dated 10.04.2017
(Annuxure-19).
13.      The respondent No. 4, in response to the writ petition, filed an affidavit-
in-opposition. It has been brought on record that the online bid opening date
was 30.12.2016. There were in total 6 (six) bidders including the present
petitioner and the respondent No. 8. A pre-bid meeting was held on 10.11.2016
in which different queries were raised by the bidders. The responses to the pre-
bid meeting were published online on 01.12.2016 in the website. One of the
queries raised by the petitioner was related to the average annual turnover in
                                                                          Page 5 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

each year mentioned in Clause 2(B) of Financial Eligibility of the bid document.
The petitioner requested to remove the word ‘each year’ and consider only the
‘the average annual turnover for 3 years’. It was clearly mentioned in the pre-bid
minutes informing that no changes would be carried out.
14.     By the said affidavit-in-opposition it was further brought on record that
the respondent No. 4 informed that both the technical and financial bids
submitted by the bidders would be scrutinised further and the final report in the
form of Bid Evaluation report would be sent to the World Bank for their approval
as the financial involvement in the project was funded by the World Bank.
Thereafter, on scrutiny of both the technical and financial bids, there remained 3
(three) bidders including the petitioner and the respondent No. 8. In the financial
bid of the petitioner, the price quoted under ‘operation and maintenance (AMC/
Warranty) caused for 5 years and preventive maintenance caused for 5 years’
were found to be very low. The petitioner being L1 bidder till that stage, the
respondent No. 4 held a meeting with the petitioner and in order to safeguard
the purpose of the project, the respondent No. 4 decided to enhance the
Performance Bank Guarantee from the existing 10% to 15% which it agreed to
comply. It is also brought on record that after preparation of the Bid Evaluation
Report, the same was sent to World Bank for review and issuance of NOC. The
World Bank while going through the report found out the mistake committed by
the Evaluation Committee related to Clause 2(B) under Financial Eligibility i.e.
“the Bidder must have minimum average annual turnover of INR 15 Crores in
each of the last 3 financial years.” The World Bank communicated the same vide
email dated 30.03.2017 highlighting that the average annual turnover should not
                                                                       Page 6 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

be less than INR 15 Crore in each of the 3 years. On the basis of the necessary
corrections carried out at the instruction of the World Bank, the respondent No. 8
became the L1 bidder and a revised Bid Evaluation Report was sent to the World
Bank for its review. The World Bank issued NOC vide email dated 05.04.2017
stating that the respondent No. 3 can award the contract to the respondent No.
8 subject to submission of valid additional performance bank guarantee by the
bidder. For the said reasons, the bid of the petitioner could not be accepted for
not fulfilling the financial eligibility criteria prescribed under Clause 2(B) of the
General Conditions of the tender. It is also submitted that the Tender Evaluation
Committee inadvertently considered the bid of the petitioner as technically
responsive which came to the notice of the respondent authorities only when the
World Bank pointed out the same.
15.     The respondent No. 8 through its affidavit-in-opposition submits that the
terms and conditions of Clause 2(B) under the Financial Eligibility Criteria are
without any ambiguity. The petitioner admittedly participated in the pre-bid
discussion and sought for clarification knowing consequences of terms and
conditions in the bid document and now cannot question the legality of the
clause on the ground of unreasonableness, arbitrariness and illegality. The
petitioner cannot approbate and reprobate. It is submitted further that the
respondent company had received a mail from the respondent authorities with a
request to provide additional bank guarantee of 5% over and above the existing
Performance Bank Guarantee of 10% of the contract value. The respondent No.
8 confirmed the said request and on receipt of the said confirmation, the
respondent authority had issued Letter of Acceptance (LoA) dated 10.04.2017
                                                                          Page 7 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

and notification of award of contract at quoted amount of INR 18,22,88,839.86
(Rupees eighteen crore twenty two lac eighty eight thousand eight hundred
thirty nine and eighty six paise) exclusive of taxes. By the said notification of
award, the respondent No. 8 was asked to furnish performance security of 15%
which was accordingly complied vide Performance Bank Guarantee dated
26.04.2017 for an amount of Rs. 2,73,40,000/-. The respondent authority
thereafter had sent the verification letter to the Bank for the verification of the
same on 03.05.2017. The same has been confirmed by Mizuho Bank Limited vide
their letter dated 04.05.2017. Accordingly, the respondent No. 8 prays for
dismissal of the writ petition.
16.      Mr. KN Choudhury, the learned senior counsel, submits that the petitioner
sought for removal of the term “each year turnover of Rs. 15 Crore” from the
Financial Eligibility Criteria which was not changed as per the minutes of the pre-
bid meeting held on 11.11.2016. From amongst the technically responsive
bidders, so far the financial bids are concerned, the present petitioner quoted the
bid amount of Rs. 18,86,48,581/- and on the other hand, the respondent No. 8
quoted Rs. 19,94,44,181/-. There is a difference of Rs. 1,07,95,600/- between
the two rates quoted by the petitioner and respondent No. 8. It is also submitted
that the brand of most of the items supposed to be supplied are same so far the
petitioner and the respondent No. 8 are concerned. The respondent authorities
knowing fully well about the said difference in the bid amount, are trying to allot
the work order to the respondent No. 8 by giving a wrong interpretation of the
criteria of the financial bid with an oblique intention to oust the petitioner.
                                                                           Page 8 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

17.       Further stressing the word ‘average’, Mr. Choudhury refers to the
meaning of the said word as per Black’s Law Dictionary. He submits that the
word ‘average’ means a single value that represents a broad sample of subjects.
It is also submitted that if the total turnover of the petitioner company is taken
into consideration for the period of 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15, it comes to
Rs. 48,10,59,278.31. From the said total turnover, the annual average turnover
for the last 3 financial years of the petitioner company comes to Rs.
16,03,53,092.77. Accordingly, the petitioner company satisfies the financial
eligibility criteria of its minimum average annual turnover to be above Rs. 15
Crore. It is also submitted that a plain interpretation of the language used in
Clause 2(B) of the General Conditions of ITB gives a clear indication that it is the
total annual turnover for last 3 financial years to be taken into consideration
before arriving at the average annual turnover.
18.       Mr. Choudhury submits that the respondent authorities have borrowed
the amount for the project from the World Bank and in such a situation, the
present petitioner is offering the bid amount with a difference of more than Rs. 1
Crore to that of the respondent No. 8. The respondent authorities are supposed
to consider the bid of the petitioner from the said angle keeping the public
interest, inasmuch as the said excess amount as quoted by the respondent No. 8
would ultimately be drawn from the public exchequer. In order to buttress, the
submissions of Mr. Choudhury so far the word ‘average’ and its connotation is
concerned, he relies on the case of Harbans K um ari and others v. State of
Uttar Pradesh reported in (1979) 2 SCC 239 paragraph 4 of which is quoted
below for ready reference:-
                                                                      Page 9 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

                   “4. ......... Now so far as the connotation of the word ‘average’
             is concerned, it does not admit of any doubt. According to Shorter
             Oxford English Dictionary, the word ‘average’ means ‘arithmetical
             mean: to estimate by dividing the aggregate of a series by the
             number of its units’. The same is the connotation of the word
             ‘average’ according to the Random House Dictionary of the English
             Language where the total receipt has been stated to mean the total
             receipt from sales divided by the number of the units sold.”
19.     Accordingly, Mr. Choudhury submits that the interpretation of Clause 2(B)
of the General Conditions has been misinterpreted by the respondent authorities
and the same is liable to be interpreted by this court inasmuch as the said
misinterpretation has been done in order to oust the present petitioner arbitrarily
which amounts to violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
20.     Mr. Saikia, the learned Senior Additional Advocate General, Government
of Assam, submits that the meeting for amendment sought on tender clause was
held on 09.11.2016. In the said meeting, the petitioner requested to change the
existing criteria of Clause 2(B) i.e. ‘INR 15 Crore in each of the last 3 financial
years’ to ‘average annual turnover of INR 15 Crore from the last 3 financial
years’. The said pre-bid meeting was held on 11.11.2016 and was communicated
on 01.12.2016 and the petitioner was aware that the request for change in the
said Clause 2(B) with regard to the financial eligibility was rejected. But without
challenging the said rejection order before this court, the petitioner belatedly
approached this court which itself is fatal considering the delay and laches on the
part of the petitioner. Not only that, the petitioner also participated knowing fully
well about the requirements for financial eligibility. Under such circumstances,
                                                                        Page 10 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

question of judicial review does not arise at all. On the part of respondent
authorities, once the said request for changing the criteria of the financial
eligibility was rejected, there was no point in waiting further, inasmuch as the
importance of such criteria for being eligible to participate in the bidding was
purely to examine the financial capability of the party/ parties participating in the
bidding process. In such a situation, the respondent authority cannot change the
said criteria in order to satisfy the grievance of a particular bidder.
21.       Mr. Saikia further submits that initially an inadvertent error was carried
out by the Tender Evaluation Committee. On the basis of such error, the
petitioner was declared to be a technically qualified bidder following which the
financial bid of the petitioner was considered. The petitioner was the L1 bidder,
for which the same was sent to the World Bank for giving its NOC in awarding
the contract to the petitioner. But the World Bank detected the said erroneous
view of the Tender Evaluation Committee and rejected the financial eligibility of
the petitioner. Subsequent to that, the respondent No. 8 became the L1 bidder
whose name was cleared by the NOC after verifying the financial eligibility as per
Clause 2(B) of the General Conditions of the ITB. It is submitted further that
there is no hide and seek policy maintained by the respondent authorities rather
everything is transparent as per the terms stipulated in the General Conditions.
22.       With respect to the interpretation of the word ‘average’, Mr. Saikia
submits that the criteria as specified in Clause 2(B) of the General Conditions, the
same must be read as a whole and in totality without leaving aside the word
‘each’ inasmuch as the complete reading of the said eligibility criteria gives the
interpretation which is very well understood by the petitioner following which the
                                                                        Page 11 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

petitioner had requested to change the said criteria bringing amendment to it.
This, the petitioner sought for, knowing fully about its disqualification considering
its financial eligibility as per the criteria mentioned in the General Conditions. The
respondent authorities cannot deviate from the said financial criteria prescribed
as the same would mean doing injustice to various other bidders who did not
participate owing to their incapability for compliance on their part of the financial
eligibility criteria. In order to support his submissions, Mr. Saikia relies on the
case of Central Coalfields Lim ited and another v. SLL-SM L (Joint Venture
Consortium ) and others along with the case of PLR-R PL-SM ASL (JV) v.
SLL-SM L (Joint Venture Consortium ) and others reported in (2016) 8
SCC 622 paragraphs 33, 34, 35 and 43 of which are quoted below for ready
reference:-
                     “33. In Ramana Dayaram Shetty V. International Airport Authority of
              India this Court held that the words used in a document are not superfluous
              or redundant but must be given some meaning and weightage:
                            “7. ......... It is a well settled rule of interpretation applicable
                     alike to documents as to statutes that, save for compelling necessity,
                     the Court should not be prompt to ascribe superfluity to the language
                     of a document “and should be rather at the outset inclined to suppose
                     every word intended to have some effect or be of some use”. To
                     reject words as insensible should be the last resort of judicial
                     interpretation, for it is an elementary rule based on common sense
                     that no author of a formal document intended to be acted upon by
                     the others should be presumed to use words without a meaning. The
                     court must, as far as possible, avoid a construction which would
                     render the words used by the author of the document meaningless
                     and futile or reduce to silence any part of the document and make it
                     altogether inapplicable.”
                     34. In Ramana Dayaram Shetty case, the expression “registered IInd
              Class hotelier” was recognised as being inapt and perhaps ungrammatical;
              nevertheless common sense was not offended in describing a person
              running a registered IInd grade hotel as a registered IInd class hotelier.
              Despite this construction in its favour, Respondent 4 in that case were held
              to be factually ineligible to participate in the bidding process.
                                                                                  Page 12 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

                   35. It was further held that if others (such as the appellant in
           Ramana Dayaram Shetty case) were aware that non-fulfilment of the
           eligibility condition of being a registered IInd class hotelier would not be a
           bar for consideration, they too would have submitted a tender, but were
           prevented from doing so due to the eligibility condition, which was relaxed in
           the case of Respondent 4. This resulted in unequal treatment in favour of
           Respondent 4 – treatment that was constitutionally impermissible.
           Expounding on this, it was held:-
                          “10. ... It is indeed unthinkable that in a democracy governed
                   by the rule of law the executive Government or any of its officers
                   should possess arbitrary power over the interests of the individual.
                   Every action of the executive Government must be informed with
                   reason and should be free from arbitrariness. That is the very essence
                   of the rule of law and its bare minimal requirement. And to the
                   application of this principle it makes no difference whether the
                   exercise of the power involves affectation of some right or denial of
                   some privilege.”
                   43. Continuing in the vein of accepting the inherent authority of an
           employer to deviate from the terms and conditions of an NIT, and
           reintroducing the privilege-of-participation principle and the level playing
           field concept, this Court laid emphasis on the decision-making process,
           particularly in respect of a commercial contract. One of the more significant
           cases on the subject is the three-Judge decision in Tata Cellular v. Union of
           India which gave importance to the lawfulness of a decision and not its
           soundness. If an administrative decision, such as a deviation in the terms of
           NIT is not arbitrary, irrational, unreasonable, mala fide or biased, the courts
           will not judicially review the decision taken. Similarly, the courts will not
           countenance interference with the decision at the behest of an unsuccessful
           bidder in respect of a technical or procedural violation. This was quite clearly
           stated by this Court (following Tata Cellular) in Jagdish Mandal v. State of
           Orissa in the following words:-
                          “22. Judicial review of administrative action is intended to
                   prevent arbitrariness, irrationality, unreasonableness, bias and mala
                   fides. Its purpose is to check whether choice or decision is made
                   “lawfully” and not to check whether choice or decision is “sound”.
                   When the power of judicial review is invoked in matters relating to
                   tenders or award of contracts, certain special features should be
                   borne in mind. A contract is a commercial transaction. Evaluating
                   tenders and awarding contracts are essentially commercial functions.
                   Principles of equity and natural justice stay at a distance. If the
                   decision relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public
                   interest, courts will not, in exercise of power of judicial review,
                   interfere even if a procedural aberration or error in assessment or
                   prejudice to a tenderer, is made out. The power of judicial review will
                   not be permitted to be invoked to protect private interest at the cost
                                                                            Page 13 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

                   of public interest, or to decide contractual disputes. The tenderer or
                   contractor with a grievance can always seek damages in a civil court.
                   Attempts by unsuccessful tenderers with imaginary grievances,
                   wounded pride and business rivalry, to make mountains out of
                   molehills of some technical/procedural violation or some prejudice to
                   self, and persuade courts to interfere by exercising power of judicial
                   review, should be resisted. Such interferences, either interim or final,
                   may hold up public works for years, or delay relief and succour to
                   thousands and millions and may increase the project cost manifold.”
                   This Court then laid down the questions that ought to be asked in
           such a situation. It was said:-
                          “22. ...... Therefore, a court before interfering in tender or
                   contractual matters in exercise of power of judicial review, should
                   pose to itself the following questions:
                          (i)     Whether the process adopted or decision made by the
                   authority is mala fide or intended to favour someone;
                                                  OR
                          Whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary
                   and irrational that the court can say: “the decision is such that no
                   responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with
                   relevant law could have reached”;
                          (ii)    Whether public interest is affected.
                   If the answers are in the negative, there should be no interference
           under Article 226.”
23.    Mr. Saikia further relies on the case of Directorate of Education and
others v. Educom p Datam atics Ltd. and others reported in (2004) 4 SCC
19 paragraph 12 of which is quoted below for ready reference:-
                   “12. It has clearly been held in these decisions that the terms of the
           invitation to tender are not open to judicial scrutiny the same being in the
           realm of contract. That the government must have a free hand in setting the
           terms of the tender. It must have reasonable play in its joints as a necessary
           concomitant for an administrative body in an administrative sphere. The
           courts would interfere with the administrative policy decision only if it is
           arbitrary, discriminatory, mala fide or actuated by bias, it is entitled to
           pragmatic adjustments which may be called for by the particular
           circumstances. The courts cannot strike down the terms of the tender
           prescribed by the government because it feels that some other terms in the
                                                                            Page 14 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

             tender would have been fair, wiser or logical. The courts can interfere only if
             the policy decision is arbitrary, discriminatory or mala fide.”
        Thus Mr. Saikia submits that there is no scope at all by this court neither
to interprete and give a fresh meaning with regard to the financial eligibility nor
is there any scope for judicial review, inasmuch as, the action of the respondent
authorities is not in any way arbitrary, discriminatory or actuated by bias.
24.     Regarding the price difference as submitted by Mr. Choudhury, learned
counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Saikia submits that the project requires
maintenance after installation of the various items by the successful bidder. To
that effect, rates were asked to be quoted and so far the present petitioner is
concerned, it quoted a very low rate insofar as maintenance is concerned.
Finding the same to be low, the respondent authorities asked the petitioner to
enhance the Performance Bank Guarantee to which it agreed. So Mr. Saikia
submits that the question of payment in excess from the State Exchequer cannot
be considered at all, sacrificing the performance intended by the respondent
authorities.
25.     Mr. RK Agarwal, learned counsel for the respondent No. 8, argues in the
similar line as that of Mr. Saikia. He submits that the submission of the learned
counsel for the petitioner that there is a wide difference in the bid amount
cannot be a criterion in changing the financial eligibility clause favouring the
petitioner. It is submitted further that the price may not be the sole criterion for
awarding a contract rather it is the best offer that is to be chosen by the
Evaluation Committee of experts. In support of the said submission, Mr. Agarwal
relies on the case of R aunaq International Ltd. v. I.V.R . Construction Ltd.
                                                                             Page 15 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

and others reported in (1999) 1 SCC 492 paragraph 16 of which is quoted
below for ready reference:-
                    “16. It is also necessary to remember that price may not always be
             the sole criterion for awarding a contract. Often when an evaluation
             committee of experts is appointed to evaluate offers, the expert committee’s
             special knowledge plays a decisive role in deciding which is the best offer.
             Price offered is only one of the criteria. The past record of the tenderers, the
             quality of the goods or services which are offered, assessing such quality on
             the basis of the past performance of the tenderer, its market reputation and
             so on, all play an important role in deciding to whom the contract should be
             awarded. At times, a higher price for a much better quality of work can be
             legitimately paid in order to secure proper performance of the contract and
             good quality of work – which is as much in public interest as a low price.
             The court should not substitute its own decision for the decision of an expert
             evaluation committee.”
        Thus, Mr. Agarwal submits that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
26.     Considered the submissions of the learned counsels. Clause 2(B) of the
General Conditions of the ITB for financial eligibility reads as follows:-
        “The Bidder must have minimum average annual turnover of INR 15
        Crores in each of the last 3 financial years. The revenues must be accrued
        from sale of similar items as per items”.
        As against the said conditions of financial eligibility, the petitioner has
submitted     before    the    respondent     authorities    as   follows    claiming   their
qualification:-
                    “21. That the turnover of the petitioner company in the financial years
             2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 were Rs. 8,21,86,246.86, Rs.
             12,43,34,6278.97 and Rs. 27,45,26,752.48 respectively, as certified by its
             Chartered Accountant. The total turnover of the petitioner company for the
             said last 3 years is :
                    Rs. 8,21,86,246.86 + Rs. 12,43,34,6278.97 + Rs. 27,45,26,752.48
                    = Rs. 48,10,59,278.31
                    Therefore, its average annual Turnover of last 3 financial years is :
                    Rs. 48,10,59,278.31 ÷ 3 = Rs. 160353092.77 i.e. Rs. 16,03,53,093
             (rounded off)
                                                                               Page 16 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

                   This is as per the Annual Turnover Statement dated 21/09/2015
             prepared by the petitioner company’s Chartered Accountant.”
27.      From the aforesaid turnover it is very much apparent that the total
average turnover shown is for the 3 (three) financial years but not in each of the
last 3 financial years. It is also on record that the petitioner finding itself difficult
to overcome the criteria set out for the financial eligibility, also requested the
respondent authorities to change the said criteria to “Average Annual Turnover of
INR 15 Crore for the last 3 financial years” in place of “each of the last 3 financial
years”. However, the respondent authorities refused to carry out the said
amendment of the criteria set out for the financial eligibility. Even then, the
petitioner submitted their average annual turnover for the last 3 financial years
taking the mean for a block of 3 financial years against the term set out by the
respondent authorities. The respondent authorities accepted the said average
annual turnover of last 3 financial years of the petitioner and informed the
petitioner about acceptance of their financial eligibility. However, the said
erroneous acceptance of the criteria was detected by the World Bank following
which the bid of the petitioner was rejected by the World Bank. Upon such
rejection, the respondent No. 8 became the L1, inasmuch as, the said respondent
No. 8 fulfils the financial eligibility criteria set out by the respondent authorities
as required by the World Bank.
28.      Being aggrieved by the said rejection, the petitioner has preferred this
writ petition seeking an interpretation by this court of the said financial criteria
set out by the respondent authorities. As held in (2016) 8 SCC 622 (supra), the
court should not be prompt to ascribe superfluity to the language of a document
                                                                         Page 17 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

and should be rather at the outset inclined to suppose every word intended to
have some effect or be of some use. As submitted by Mr. Saikia, that the project
is a very important one and the same requires not only the technical expertise of
the bidders but they must be financially capable and strong enough to carry out
and complete the project and the requisite maintenance thereafter. Behind such
a backdrop the said standard has been introduced by the World Bank in order to
examine/ scrutinise the financial capability of the bidders. For the said reasons, it
has been stipulated that the bidder must have minimum average annual turnover
of INR 15 Crore in each of the last 3 financial years. In other words, the bidder
must have a minimum average annual turnover of INR 15 Crore in each of the
last 3 financial years. In such a situation, if the criterion so set out is read
without the word ‘each’, it would amount to downgradation of the financial
eligibility of the bidders which would affect immensely to the respondent
authorities. Accordingly, keeping in view the ratio accepted by the Hon’ble Apex
Court, this court cannot enter into tender documents and interprete the
conditions so laid down which have its own meaning and set out by the
respondent authorities keeping in view their necessity.
29.       The rejection of the petitioner’s bid owing to failure to satisfy the financial
eligibility cannot be considered to be arbitrary, irrational, unreasonable or biased.
The petitioner knowing fully well their capability with regard to the financial
eligibility criteria so set out by the respondent authorities, sought for the
amendment of the said clause which was disallowed and knowing fully well that
the petitioner cannot overcome the said criteria, participated in the tender. The
act of respondent authorities, keeping in view the criteria, though belatedly
                                                                           Page 18 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

pointed out by the World Bank, in the opinion of this court has done so correctly,
because the petitioner knew about its fate at the time of participation in the
tender process. On the other hand, if this court gives an interpretation, as
submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner, the same would amount to
crossing the limit by this court the jurisdiction circumscribed for judicial review of
the terms set out in the NIT. On the submission of the learned counsel for the
petitioner, that an interpretation of the said criterion is to be given by this court,
it would amount to taking over the function of the tender issuing authority by
this court, which cannot be done. This court cannot even examine the soundness
of the decision arrived at by the respondent authorities until and unless the
petitioner discharges its burden showing that the action of the respondent
authorities is with a discriminatory attitude towards it.
30.      As submitted by Mr. Saikia that the petitioner ought to have come to this
court when their request for amendment of the said criterion was rejected also
cannot be accepted, inasmuch any condition set out in the NIT has its intrinsic
value known to the authority issuing the NIT and the case in hand does not call
for such interpretation by this court. However, if there are glaring irregularities in
setting out the conditions, then the matter would be a different one. But until
and unless the same could be shown that the said terms and conditions are
superfluous, in order to give some undue benefit to any party, then this court to
some extent has the jurisdiction to look into it. Accordingly, this court refrain
itself from interpreting the said criterion with regard to financial eligibility of the
bidders, other than the one which gives the plain and simple meaning by reading
                                                                        Page 19 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017

the sentence as a whole and understood by any prudent man including the
respondent authority.
31.     The submission of Mr. Choudhury that while rejecting the bid of the
petitioner on the ground of financial ineligibility, the respondent authorities ought
to have considered that there is a vast difference against the rate quoted
between the petitioner and the respondent No. 8 and keeping in view the public
interest, the petitioner company ought not have been disqualified only on the
ground of non satisfaction of its financial eligibility. Against the said submission
this court is of the view that if the respondent authorities allowed the petitioner
company as the successful bidder, that would be a clear act of discrimination
towards the other prospective bidders who owing to their incapability to meet the
financial eligibility criteria could not participate in the tender process. Accordingly,
such submission is rejected.
32.     Finally, this court finds that the petitioner has failed to bring out a case
for judicial review of the decision making process of the respondent authorities,
inasmuch as, the petitioner has failed to show any of the requisite ingredient
required for judicial review by this court. Accordingly, this writ petition stands
dismissed.
33.     Interim order passed earlier stands vacated.
                                                                              JUDGE
BiswaS
                                                                           Page 20 of 20
WP(C) 2500/2017


