                   IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                  WRIT PETITION (C) NO.2229 OF 2015
                            Aloke Kumar Ghoshal,
                            Son of Shri Jagabandhu Ghoshal,
                            Resident of Quarter No.F-26, IIT Guwahati Campus, IIT
                            Guwahati, PO & PS: Jalukbari, Kamrup (R),Guwahati-39.
                                                                     ……..Petitioner
                                     -Versus-
                            1. The Union of India, represented by the Ministry of
                            Human Resource, New Delhi.
                            2. The Director,
                            Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Guwahati, PO & PS:
                            Jalukbari, Kamrup (R), Guwahati-39.
                            3. The Dean of Faculty Affairs, Indian Institute of
                            Technology (IIT), Guwahati, PO & PS: Jalukbari, Kamrup
                            (R), Guwahati-39.
                                                                  ……..Respondents
                               B E F O R E
 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ARUP KUMAR GOSWAMI
For the petitioner                 : Mr. D. Saikia, Senior Advocate.
                                      Mr. B. Gogoi, Advocate.
For respondent No.1                : Ms. R. Devi, Central Government Counsel.
For respondent Nos.2 & 3           : Mr. R.P. Kakoti, Senior Advocate.
                                      Mr. A.K. Dutta, Advocate.
Date of hearing                    : 20th June, 2017.
Date of Judgment & Order           : 28th July, 2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER
          Heard Mr. D. Saikia, learned senior counsel for the petitioner. Also heard
Ms. R. Devi, learned Central Government counsel, appearing for the respondent
No.1 and Mr. R.P. Kakoti, learned senior counsel, appearing for the respondent
Nos.2 & 3.
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                       Page 1 of 13

2.        This writ petition is directed against the order dated 17.12.2014
(Annexure-C of the writ petition), whereby the Director of Indian Institute of
Technology Guwahati (for short, “IITG”) suspended the petitioner, who is a
Professor of Department of Chemical Engineering, with immediate effect in view of
lodging of All Women Police Station Case No.130/2014 under Sections 376(2)(b)/
506 IPC against him and his subsequent arrest. By the said order, it was also
indicated that terms and conditions of the suspension order would be governed as
per the provisions of Clause 15(9) of the Statutes of IITG.
3.        The petitioner had joined as Assistant Professor, Chemical Engineering
Department in IITG in December, 2002 and was subsequently promoted to the post
of Associate Professor and to the post of Professor in the year 2005 and 2007,
respectively. Prior to the posting of the petitioner in IITG, the petitioner had served
as Assistant Professor in Birla Institute of Technology & Sciences (for short, “BITS”),
Pilani from 1998 to 2002. In the year 2014, the petitioner was posted as Dean
Academic Affair and was made In-charge of Peer Review Section. One lady (name
withheld, hereinafter referred to as “X”) was working as Senior Assistant, Academic
Affairs and Peer Review Section.
4.        “X” lodged an ejahar on 11.12.2014 before the Officer-in-Charge, All
Women Police Station, Panbazar, Guwahati, stating, inter alia, that she had to report
only to the petitioner in respect of her work and she is the only staff member in that
section. She was initially disturbed by the petitioner during office hours by indecent
insinuation, which she tolerated being a subordinate staff. However, on 01.12.2014
at about 5:30 PM, as she was about to leave office, the petitioner asked her to meet
in the Peer Review Section and dictated some notes and in the process of dictating,
he closed the door of the room from inside and switched off the light and grabbed
her. Protest being made by her, the petitioner threatened her to spoil her career and
pushed her towards a sofa by gagging her, as a result of which she got hurt in the
head. She was overpowered and then raped. The petitioner threatened her to
terminate her as well as her husband’s service, if the matter was disclosed to
anyone. She had contemplated committing suicide. Being in mental trauma and
because of fear of social stigma, immediately she did not inform anybody about the
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                         Page 2 of 13

incident but had taken leave from 02.12.2014 to 04.12.2014. The petitioner had
threatened her over telephone on 03.12.2014, 04.12.2014 and 05.12.2014.
However, mustering enough courage, she informed her husband about the incident
on 04.12.2014, who counselled her to lodge complaint against the petitioner and
finally being persuaded, she had lodged the ejahar. This resulted in All Women
Police Station Case No.130/2014 under Sections 376(2)(b)/506 IPC, which is already
referred to earlier.
5.         In connection with the aforesaid Police Station case, the petitioner was
arrested on 16.12.2014 and thereafter, the suspension order, as noted above, was
passed. The petitioner was released on bail on 16.03.2015 by an order passed by
the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kamrup in terms of Section 167(2) of the Cr.PC after
expiry of 90(ninety) days as Final Form was not submitted by the Investigating
Officer.
6.         The petitioner submitted a representation on 19.03.2015 before the
Director, IITG requesting revocation of the suspension order and release of
subsistence allowance.
7.         A show-cause notice under Rule 14 of the Central Civil Services
(Classification, Control & Appeal) Rules, 1965 (for short, “1965 Rules”) read with
Article 311 of the Constitution of India was served upon the petitioner on
15.06.2015 by the Director, IITG, foundation of which lay in the police case lodged
by “X”. Subsequently, vide his letter dated 05.08.2016, on the ground of technical
reasons, the Director, IITG, had withdrawn the aforesaid show-cause notice.
8.         An affidavit was filed by the respondent Nos.2 & 3 to which a reply
affidavit was also filed by the writ petitioner.
9.         Mr. Saikia submitted that the petitioner has been falsely implicated in the
alleged offence for harassing and humiliating him due to personal grudge and the
petitioner had an otherwise unblemished record of service. It is submitted by him
that in absence of a departmental proceeding, continued suspension of the
petitioner due to pendency of the police case is unjustified. He has contended that
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                      Page 3 of 13

the informant and her husband, who is also an employee of the IITG, had instigated
the employees to oppose revocation of the suspension order of the petitioner and
the authorities meekly succumbed to such unwarranted pressure tactics. The
petitioner and his family is residing in the official quarter inside the campus even
during the suspension period and in the above view of the matter, it is wholly
unjustified not to utilise the service of the petitioner by revoking the order of
suspension, if necessary, by adjusting the service of the informant in any other
section. He has submitted that no review was conducted in terms of the provisions
contained in Sub-rules (6) and (7) of Rule 10 of the 1965 Rules and as such
continued suspension is rendered illegal. It is also submitted by him that as the
charge-sheet was not submitted within a period of 90(ninety) days of his arrest, in
view of the judgment rendered in Ajay Kumar Choudhary -Vs- Union of India,
through its Secretary & Anr., reported in (2015) 7 SCC 291, the petitioner is
entitled to be re-instated in service. He has also placed reliance on the judgment of
the Apex Court in the case of Union of India & Ors. -Vs- Dipak Mali, reported in
(2010) 2 SCC 222.
10.        On the other hand, relying on the affidavit filed on 22.03.2017, Mr. Kakoti
has submitted that Review Committee, set up to review the suspension of the
petitioner, had met on 01.04.2015, 19.10.2015, 01.04.2016 and 30.09.2016 and the
Review Committee had recommended extension of suspension period considering
the pendency of the criminal case, which is of sensitive nature. He has also
submitted that the Employees’ Association of IITG is also opposing reinstatement of
the petitioner and revocation of the suspension order before conclusion of the trial
may result in unrest, jeopardising academic environment as well as functioning of
the Institute. The learned senior counsel has submitted that sufficient materials
having been found against the petitioner, charge-sheet was submitted against the
petitioner by the Investigating Officer in G.R. Case No.12972/2014 under Section
376(2)(b) of IPC on 24.06.2015. He has also brought to the notice an Office
Memorandum dated 07.01.2004 issued by the Director (E-II), Government of India,
Ministry of Personnel, PG & Pensions (Department of Personnel & Training) on the
subject of review of suspension order. He has relied on Paragraph 11 of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Allahabad Bank & Anr. -Vs-
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                       Page 4 of 13

Deepak Kumar Bhola, reported in (1997) 4 SCC 1 to contend that the continued
suspension of the petitioner is justified.
11.       Ms. R. Devi has only submitted that it is essentially a matter between the
petitioner and IITG.
12.       I have considered the submissions advanced by the learned counsel
appearing for the parties and have perused the materials available on record.
13.       At the very outset, it will be useful to extract relevant portion of Rule 10 of
the 1965 Rules as under:-
          “10. Suspension. – (1) The appointing authority or any authority to which
          it is subordinate or the disciplinary authority or any other authority
          empowered in that behalf by the President, by general or special order,
          may place a Government Servant under suspension –
                (a)    where a disciplinary proceeding against him is contemplated or
                       is pending; or
                (aa) where, in the opinion of the authority aforesaid, he has
                       engaged himself in activities prejudicial to the interest of the
                       security of the State; or
                (b)    where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence is
                       under investigation, inquiry or trial:
                   Provided that, except in case of an order of suspension made by
          the Comptroller and Auditor-General in regard to a member of the Indian
          Audit and Accounts Service and in regard to an Assistant Accountant-
          General or equivalent (other than a regular member of the Indian Audit
          and Accounts Service), where the order of suspension is made by an
          authority lower than the appointing authority such authority shall,
          forthwith, report to the appointing authority the circumstances in which
          the order was made.
                   (2) A Government Servant shall be deemed to have been placed
          under suspension by an order of appointing authority, -
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                          Page 5 of 13

                (a)    with effect from the date of his detention, if he is detained in
                       custody, whether on a criminal charge or otherwise, for a
                       period exceeding forty-eight hours;
                (b)    with effect from the date of his conviction, if, in the event of a
                       conviction for an offence, he is sentenced to a term of
                       imprisonment exceeding forty-eight hours and is not forthwith
                       dismissed or removed or compulsorily retired consequent to
                       such conviction.
                   Explanation. – The period of forty-eight hours referred to in clause
          (b) of this sub-rule shall be computed from the commencement of the
          imprisonment after the conviction and for this purpose, intermittent period
          of imprisonment, if any, shall be taken into account.
                   (3) ******
                   (4) ******
                   (5) (a)    Subject to the provisions contained in sub-rule (7), any
          order of suspension made or deemed to have been made under this rule
          shall continue to remain in force until it is modified or revoked by the
          authority competent to do so.
                   (b) Where a Government Servant is suspended or is deemed to
          have been suspended (whether in connection with any disciplinary
          proceeding or otherwise), and any other disciplinary proceeding is
          commenced against him during the continuance of that suspension, the
          authority competent to place him under suspension may, for reasons to be
          recorded by him in writing, direct that the Government Servant shall
          continue to be under suspension until the termination of all or any of such
          proceedings.
                   (c) An order of suspension made or deemed to have been made
          under this rule may, at any time, be modified or revoked by the authority
          which made or is deemed to have made the order or by any authority to
          which that authority is subordinate.
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                          Page 6 of 13

                   (6) An order of suspension made or deemed to have been made
          under this rule shall be reviewed by the authority which is competent to
          modify or revoke the suspension before expiry of ninety days from the
          effective date of suspension on the recommendation of the Review
          committee constituted for the purpose and pass orders either extending or
          revoking the suspension. Subsequent reviews shall be made before expiry
          of the extended period of suspension. Extension of suspension shall not be
          for a period exceeding one hundred and eighty days at a time.
                   (7) An order of suspension made or deemed to have been made
          under sub-rule (1) or (2) of this rule shall not be valid after a period of
          ninety days unless it is extended after review, for a further period before
          the expiry of ninety days.
                   Provided that no such review of suspension shall be necessary in
          the case of deemed suspension under sub-rule (2), if the Government
          servant continues to be under suspension at the time of completion of
          ninety days of suspension and the ninety days’ period in such case will
          count from the date of Government servant detained in custody is released
          from detention or the date on which the fact of his release from detention
          is intimated to his appointing authority, whichever is later.”
14.       Sub-rule (6) of Rule 10 of the 1965 Rules enjoins that an order of
suspension made or deemed to have been made under Rule 10 shall be reviewed by
the authority which is competent to modify or revoke the suspension before expiry
of 90(ninety) days from the effective date of suspension on the recommendation of
the Review Committee constituted for the purpose and pass orders either extending
or revoking the suspension. Subsequent reviews shall also have to be made before
expiry of the extended period of suspension and that suspension period shall not be
extended for a period exceeding 180(one hundred and eighty days) at a time. It is
also made explicitly clear by Sub-rule (7) that an order of suspension made or
deemed to have been made under Sub-rule (1) or (2) of Rule 10 shall not be valid
after a period of 90(ninety) days unless it is extended after review, for a further
period before the expiry of 90(ninety) days.
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                       Page 7 of 13

15.       Sub-rules (6) and (7) of Rule 10 of the 1965 Rules were inserted by way of
amendment and had taken effect from 02.06.2004. It will be also relevant to note
that the words “before expiry of ninety days from the effective date of suspension”,
as appearing in Sub-rule (6) was substituted by Notification dated 06.06.2007, which
was published in the Gazette on 16.06.2007.
16.       In view of the proposed amendment of Rule 10, as indicated above, an
Office Memorandum dated 07.01.2004 was issued, which was referred to by Mr.
Kakoti. The relevant portion of the said Office Memorandum reads as follows:
                                   “No.11012/4/2003 – Estt. (A)
                                        Government of India
                               Ministry of Personnel, P.G. & Pensions
                               (Department of Personnel & Training)
                                                “New Delhi, dated the 7th January, 2004
                                      OFFICE MEMORANDUM
          Sub:     Suspension of Government servants – Review of – Instructions reg.
                   The undersigned is directed to say that Rule 10 (Suspension) of
          the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 is being amended to provide that an order of
          suspension made or deemed to have been made under this Rule shall be
          reviewed by the competent authority on recommendation of the Review
          Committee constituted for the purpose. It is also being provided in the
          Rules that an order of suspension made or deemed to have been under
          Sub-Rules (1) or (2) of Rule 10 shall not be valid after 90 days unless it is
          extended after review for a further period before the expiry of 90 days. It
          is further being provided that extension of suspension shall not be for a
          period exceeding 180 days at a time.            (Copy of the Notification is
          enclosed).
          2.       It is, therefore, necessary to constitute Review Committee(s) to
          review the suspension cases. The composition of Review Committee(s)
          may be as follows:-
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                         Page 8 of 13

                   (i)   ***
                   (ii)  ***
                   (iii) ***
          3.       The Review Committee(s) may take a view regarding revocation/
          continuation of the suspension keeping in view the facts and
          circumstances of the case and also taking into account that unduly long
          suspension, while putting the employee concerned to undue hardship,
          involve payment of subsistence allowance without the employee
          performing any useful service to the Government. Without prejudice to
          the foregoing, if the officer has been under suspension for one year
          without any charges being filed in a court of law or no charge-memo has
          been issued in a departmental enquiry, he shall ordinarily be reinstated in
          service without prejudice to the case against him. However, in case the
          officer is in police/judicial custody or is accused of a serious crime or a
          matter involving national security, the Review Committee may recommend
          the continuation of the suspension of the official concerned.”
17.       A perusal of the aforesaid Office Memorandum goes to show that the
Memorandum provides that if an Officer is under suspension for 1(one) year without
any charge being filed in Court or if no charge-memo had been issued in a
departmental enquiry, he shall ordinarily be reinstated in service without prejudice to
the case against him. It is clarified that in case the Officer is accused of a serious
crime or is an accused in a matter involving national security, the Review Committee
may recommend the continuation of the suspension of the official concerned.
18.       In Allahabad Bank (supra), the Bank employee was facing serious
charges of corruption and misappropriation of money. In the aforesaid context, the
Supreme Court had held that the mere fact that nearly 10(ten) years have elapsed
since the charge-sheet was filed, cannot be a ground for allowing the employee to
come back to duty on a sensitive post in the Bank, unless he is exonerated of the
charge.
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                       Page 9 of 13

19.        In Ajay Kumar Choudhary (supra), the Supreme Court laid down as
follows:-
           “21.     We, therefore, direct that the currency of a suspension order
           should not extend beyond three months if within this period the
           memorandum of charges/charge-sheet is not served on the delinquent
           officer/employee; if the memorandum of charges/charge-sheet is served, a
           reasoned order must be passed for the extension of the suspension. As in
           the case in hand, the Government is free to transfer the person concerned
           to any department in any of its offices within or outside the State so as to
           sever any local or personal contact that he may have and which he may
           misuse for obstructing the investigation against him. The Government may
           also prohibit him from contacting any person, or handling records and
           documents till the stage of his having to prepare his defence. We think this
           will adequately safeguard the universally recognized principle of human
           dignity and the right to a speedy trial and shall also preserve the interest
           of the Government in the prosecution. We recognise that the previous
           Constitution Benches have been reluctant to quash proceeding on the
           grounds of delay, and to set time-limits to their duration. However, the
           imposition of a limit on the period of suspension has not been discussed in
           prior case law, and would not be contrary to the interests of justice.
           Furthermore, the direction of the Central Vigilance Commission that
           pending a criminal investigation, departmental proceedings are to be held
           in abeyance stands superseded in view of the stand adopted by us.
20.        Ajay Kumar Choudhary (supra) was rendered in the context of a
disciplinary proceeding initiated against an employee. In categorical terms, it was
laid down that if the memorandum of charges/charge-sheet is not served within a
period of 3(three) months from the date of suspension, suspension order shall not
be extended.
21.        The question of review of suspension order in connection with a
disciplinary enquiry will arise only in the event the memorandum of charges/charge-
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                        Page 10 of 13

sheet is served within a period of 3(three) months from the date of suspension. It is
an admitted position that no departmental proceeding is pending against the
petitioner and that suspension of the petitioner was not in contemplation of a
disciplinary proceeding. The petitioner’s suspension was a deemed suspension under
Rule 10(2) of the 1965 Rules on account of he being in custody for a period
exceeding 48(forty-eight) hours. Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that the
ratio of Ajay Kumar Choudhary (supra) is not applicable to the facts of the case
and the submission advanced by Mr. Saikia that charge-sheet in the criminal case
having not been filed within a period of 3(three) months from his arrest, which is the
deemed date of suspension also, the petitioner is entitled to be reinstated in service,
is found to be without any merit.
22.        In Dipak Mali (supra), the Supreme Court had held that review for
modification or revocation of the order of suspension is required to be done before
the expiry of 90(ninety) days from the date of order of suspension and placing
reliance on Sub-rule (7), it was held that as the review had not been conducted
within 90(ninety) days from the date of suspension, the suspension order became
invalid after 90(ninety) days. It was further held that subsequent review and
extension would not revive the order which had already become invalid after the
expiry of 90(ninety) days from the date of suspension.
23.        The provisions of Sub-rules (6) and (7) of Rule 10 of the 1965 Rules are
mandatory and, therefore, the authority as envisaged therein has to mandatorily
undertake an exercise of review of the order of suspension within the time-frame, as
indicated therein, irrespective of the fact whether the suspension is on account of
pendency of a disciplinary proceeding or of a criminal case, failing which the order of
suspension shall be rendered invalid.
24.        In the instant case, as noticed earlier, the petitioner was arrested on
16.12.2014. The admitted position is that the first review had taken place on
01.04.2015 and the result of review was communicated to the petitioner by letter
dated 07.04.2015. Order of suspension of the petitioner dated 17.12.2014 recited
that the petitioner was suspended with immediate effect. Going by the dates, in the
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                        Page 11 of 13

first blush, it would appear that the first review had taken place beyond the period
of 90(ninety) days. But a closer scrutiny of proviso to Sub-rule (7) of Rule 10 of the
1965 Rules would demonstrate that the period of 90(ninety) days in case of a
deemed suspension will count from the date the Government servant detained in
custody is released from detention or the date on which the fact of his release from
detention is intimated to the appointing authority, whichever is later. It is not in
dispute that the petitioner had remained in custody till 16.03.2015 and the petitioner
had brought to the notice of the authorities about his release on bail by letter dated
19.03.2015. Therefore, the first review was made well within the period of
90(ninety) days.
25.        In view of the provisions of Rule 10 of 1965 Rules, extension of suspension
cannot have exceed 180(one hundred and eighty) days at a time. In the first review
conducted on 01.04.2015, which was communicated to the petitioner vide order
dated 07.04.2015, decision was taken to recommend extension of the suspension
period for another 90(ninety) days from the date of expiry. Even if the effective date
of suspension is taken to be 19.03.2015, the period of 90(ninety) days expired on
19.06.2015. As the suspension period was extended for another 90(ninety) days by
the review conducted on 01.04.2015, the extended period expired on 19.09.2015.
Admittedly, next review of the order of suspension was made on 19.10.2015, which
was beyond the extended period of suspension.
26.        In view of the above discussion, when the review of the order of
suspension was not carried out within the time prescribed under Sub-rules (6) and
(7) of Rule 10 of the 1965 Rules, there is no escape from the conclusion that the
order of suspension lapsed and had become invalid when review was undertaken on
19.10.2015. Subsequent extension could not have revived the order of suspension,
which had already become invalid after expiry of 90(ninety) days of extension.
27.        In view of the above determination, the petitioner will stand reinstated in
service in his substantive post of Professor of Chemical Engineering. It is noted that
a stand is taken in the affidavit of the respondents, which is not disputed, that Dean
Academic Affairs and In-charge of Peer Review Section are purely administrative
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                       Page 12 of 13

posts offered at the prerogative of the Institute. It is provided that on reinstatement,
it will not be necessary for the authorities to engage the service of the petitioner as
Dean Academic Affairs and In-charge of Peer Review Section, where the informant is
working as a Senior Assistant. The order of reinstatement, will, however, be subject
to the outcome of G.R. Case No.12972/2014.
28.        With the above observations and directions, the writ petition stands
allowed to the extent, as indicated above. No cost.
                                                     JUDGE
M. Sharma
WP(C) No.2229/2015                                                         Page 13 of 13


