                  THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT AT GUWAHATI
               (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                   PRINCIPAL SEAT AT GUWAHATI
                                           WP(C) No. 2782/2010
            1.      Shri Nirmal Kakati,
                    S/O Lt. Harendralal Kakati,
                    Asstt. Teacher, Uparhowly Girls M.E. School,
                    Vill.-Azara, Kalitapara, PO-Azara,
                    Dist.-Kamrup, Assam.
            2.      Shri Nibaran Kakati,
                    S/O Shri Jatindra Ch. Kakati,
                    Vill.-Sarpara, PO-Jharobori, Dist.-Kamrup, Assam,
                    Asstt. Teacher, Dakhala M.V. School,
                    Dist.-Kamrup, Assam.
            3.      Mrs. Tarulata Devi,
                    Asstt. Teacher of Abhipara Bartari M.E. School,
                    W/O Shri Sailen Bhattacharjee,
                    Resident of Kochpara, PO-Mirza, PS-Palashbari,
                    Dist.-Kamrup, Assam.                                 ……Petitioners.
                             -Versus-
            1.      The State of Assam,
                    Represented by the Secretary to the Govt. of Assam,
                    Education Department,
                    Dispur, Guwahati-6.
            2.      The Director,
                    Elementary Education, Assam,
                    Kahilipara, Guwahati-19.
            3.      The District Elementary Education Officer,
                    Kamrup, Chatribari, Guwahati.
            4.      The Block Elementary Education Officer,
                    Chaygaon, Dist.-Kamrup, Assam.
            5.      The Block Elementary Education Officer,
                    Ramrup, Dist.-Kamrup, Assam.
            6.      The Block Elementary Education Officer,
                    Boko, Dist.-Kamrup, Assam.                          ……Respondents.
WP(C) 2782/2010                                                               Page 1 of 5

                                                 BEFORE
                             THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE HRISHIKESH ROY
            For the Petitioners:                  Mr. R.M. Choudhury,
                                                  Mr. R. Baruah.                ……Advocates.
            For the Respondents:                  Mr. N. Sarma,
                                                  SC, Elementary Education.     ……Advocate.
            Date of Hearing & Judgment :          11 th July, 2017
                                     JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
                    Heard Mr. R.M. Choudhury, the learned counsel for the petitioners. The
            respondents are represented by Mr. N. Sarma, the learned standing counsel for
            the Department of Elementary Education.
            2.      The challenge here is to the speaking order dated 04.02.2010 (Annexure-
            VII), whereby, the Director of Elementary Education, Assam (hereinafter referred
            to as the ‘DEE’) has rejected the petitioners’ representation for arrear increment
            from August 1995 to August 2005. The teachers were found to have been illegally
            appointed by the S. Monoharan Committee, but subsequently they were
            adjusted/regularised against other vacant posts. The petitioners claim that they
            are entitled to annual increments from the date of joining service and not from the
            date of regularisation.
            3.      Although there are 3 petitioners in this case, the appointment order only of
            the 1st petitioner Nirmal Kakati is enclosed in the writ petition. The process of
            induction into service as can be seen from the appointment order does not inspire
            confidence since the appointments were never recommended by the Sub-
            Divisional Advisory Board as per norms. In fact the appointment was curiously
            made subject to approval of the Advisory Board.
            4.      In Assam, between 1991–1996, large numbers of illegal appointments of
            teachers were made and accordingly the Government constituted the S.
            Monoharan Committee to examine the bonafide of those appointments. After an
            elaborate exercise, those who are appointed after selection and recommendation
            of the Sub-Divisional Advisory Board, were categorised as irregular appointees,
WP(C) 2782/2010                                                                       Page 2 of 5

            but those who were appointed without such selection, were categorised as illegal
            appointees. The Government however at the first instance, decided to
            adjust/regularise the service of the irregular category. But later on, phase wise
            regularisation of the illegal category, was also allowed by the State.
            5.       Following the Government’s communication dated 25.05.2005, the service
            of the illegal category were adjusted/regularised by the District Elementary
            Education Officer (DEEO), Kamrup on 02.06.2005 (Annexure-II). But as noted
            earlier, this group were never selected nor they were appointed against
            existing/available vacancies. That is how they were placed in the illegal category
            by the S. Monoharan Committee. However, following the cabinet decision as also
            the direction issued by this Court on 26.11.2002 for consideration of the claim for
            regularisation in the WP(C) No.7433/2002, the petitioners were adjusted/
            regularised in different M.E. Schools, where vacancies were available. It may be
            mentioned that initially the petitioners were appointed in schools where vacancies
            were unavailable and that is why, they had to be adjusted in schools, where posts
            became available.
            6.1      Mr. R.M. Choudhury, the learned counsel submits that since the service of
            the petitioners have been adjusted/regularised, they are retrospectively entitled to
            increments since the date of their initial appointment and therefore increment
            benefits during 1995—2005, is contended to be justified by the counsel.
            6.2      In support of his contention, Mr. Choudhury submits that the Block
            Elementary Education Officer (BEEO), Boko had allowed annual increments from
            August 1995 to January 2005 for similarly regularised teachers and therefore the
            petitioners must also get the same benefit.
            7.1      On the other hand, the respondents contend that the petitioners were
            illegally appointed without selection or due process, when vacancies were
            unavailable for such appointment. That is how, salary was not paid to the illegal
            appointees for most period prior to regularisation of service in 2005. The
            departmental lawyer argues that because posts were unavailable and the illegal
            appointees had to be adjusted in vacancies of other schools, the benefit of
            increment cannot be claimed retrospectively.
WP(C) 2782/2010                                                                       Page 3 of 5

            7.2      The standing counsel argues further that BEEO had no authority to allow
            increments for the teachers and projects that steps have been taken for recovery
            of the excess drawal made on the strength of the DEEO’s illegal order.
            7.3      To justify the rejection of the claim, the learned counsel Mr. N. Sarma
            refers to the order passed on 03.11.2010 in the WP(C) No.5705/2010 (Abdul
            Hoque Abbasi Vs. State of Assam), whereby, the learned Single Judge rejected the
            claim for salary for the pre-regularisation period for those, described as illegal
            category by the S. Monoharan Committee. This decision of the Single Judge was
            affirmed by the Division Bench on 25.02.2015 by dismissing the Writ Appeal
            No.326/2011, filed by the aggrieved writ petitioners.
            8        The Monoharan Committee found that the petitioners were amongst the
            3511 illegal teachers who were appointed without selection against non-existent
            posts. However notwithstanding the illegality, as a humanitarian gesture, the
            illegal appointees were adjusted/regularised against available posts in other
            middle schools. Since their adjustments/regularisation on 02.06.2005, the
            petitioners are receiving their regular salary.
            9        But the question is whether by virtue of the regularisation order of
            02.06.2005, the beneficiaries would be retrospectively entitled to annual
            increment from the date of entering service, through an illegal process. In my
            perception, if increment benefit is granted to such a group who never deserved to
            be retained in service, it will create a bad precedent for multiple reasons. Firstly,
            the petitioners who were beneficiaries of an illegal process will get retrospective
            benefits for the period prior to adjustment/regularisation of their service.
            Secondly, when appointments were made without posts being available, to direct
            the     State   to    bear   additional    burden    for   the    period      prior    to
            adjustment/regularisation, will not be in public interest. Thirdly, if relief is granted
            in such a case, a wrong message will go since the beneficiaries under the
            benevolent dispensation of the Government, would receive unmerited further
            benefits for the period, prior to adjustment/regularisation. Such reward in my
            considered opinion can hardly be justified for a group, who were categorised as
            illegal appointees, by the Monoharan Committee. Here one must also bear in mind
            the distinction between the irregular and the illegal categories, as the former were
WP(C) 2782/2010                                                                            Page 4 of 5

            appointed after selection whereas the illegal group were appointed, without any
            recommendation.
            10       In so far relief sought on the basis of the order passed by the BEEO, the
            Court repeatedly asked the petitioners’ lawyer Mr. R.M. Choudhury as to whether,
            the BEEO has the competence to grant increment. However the counsel avoided
            answering the question. The BEEO is a lower level officer at the block level and is
            not competent to grant annual increments. Therefore parity claimed on the
            strength of increment granted to others by an incompetent authority, cannot in
            my view be allowed by a judicial forum. Moreover the authorities have decided to
            recover the undeserved payment.
            11       For those who were placed in the illegal category by the Monoharan
            Committee, the salary for the pre-regularisation period was claimed by the
            affected teachers before this Court. However such claim was found to be
            untenable in the WP(C) No.5705/2010 and the case was dismissed on 03.11.2010.
            The resultant WA No.326/2011 filed by the claimants was dismissed on
            25.02.2015 by the Division Bench. Thus retrospective pay benefit for the pre-
            regularisation period for those described as illegal category by the S. Monoharan
            Committee, was rejected by the High Court. The present group before me is also
            of the illegal category and therefore I see no justification to allow undeserved
            retrospective benefit to this category of teachers, who entered service through an
            illegal process.
            12       Following the foregoing discussion and finding no infirmity with the
            speaking order passed by the DEE on 04.02.2010 (Annexure-VII), this case is
            found devoid of merit and the same is accordingly dismissed. No cost.
                                                                                  JUDGE
  Roy
WP(C) 2782/2010                                                                       Page 5 of 5


