                                                     WP(C) No.2123 of 2017
                                     BEFORE
                      HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SUMAN SHYAM
01.08.2017
        Heard Mr. H. Talukdar, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also
heard R. K. Talukdar, learned counsel representing respondent Nos.1 and
2 as well as Mr. Debojit Barkakati, learned counsel representing
respondent No.3. Mr. S. S. Roy, learned Govt. Advocate, Assam, appears
for respondent No.4.
        The case of the petitioner, in brief, is that his land covered by dag
No.49, Patta No.1 of village – Tamulkuchi, Mouza and Circle – Sonapur in
the district of Kamrup was acquired by the respondent No.4 in connection
with widening of National Highway 37 by making it a 4 Lane Highway. The
compensation for the land including building and jirat standing thereon
was assessed at Rs.10,17,127/- by the National Highway Authority of India
(NHAI). Being dissatisfied with the assessment of the compensation
amount, the petitioner had approached the authority under section
3G(5) of the National Highways Act, 1956 seeking enhancement of the
award by filing Arbitration Case RR No.278/2014. In the said proceeding
the arbitrator had issued notice upon the respondents pursuant whereto
respondent NHAI authorities had appeared therein and filed objection
through the respondent No.4. After considering the case of both the
parties, the learned arbitrator had passed the award dated 30.07.2016
directing payment of additional compensation of Rs.3,58,086/- to the writ
petitioner within a period of one month from the date of receipt of the
order. In view of the determination made by the learned Arbitrator, the
final amount due and payable to the writ petitioner was worked out to be
Rs.3,93,895/-. Accordingly, by a communication dated 03.11.2016 issued
to the respondent No.3, the respondent No.4 had recommended
disbursal of the payment to the petitioner at an early date.
        Neither the award of the arbitrator nor the communication dated
03.11.2016 has been assailed by the respondent No.3. Since the payment

was not made despite the communication dated 03.11.2016 the
petitioner has approached this Court by filing the instant writ petition
seeking a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to make payment
of the amount of Rs.3,93,895/- together with interest at the rate of 12% per
annum with effect from the date of the award i.e. 30.07.2016 till
realization.
        The respondent No.1 has filed a counter affidavit opposing the
prayer made in the writ petition on the ground that the exercise of
jurisdiction by the learned arbitrator under Section 3G(5) of the National
Highways Act, 1956         was erroneous and therefore, the award was not
liable to be implemented.
        Mr. Barkakati, learned counsel appearing for respondent No.3 has
made an attempt to impress upon this Court that the arbitrator was not
competent to pass the impugned award directing the payment of
additional compensation in favour of the petitioner since the earlier
notification was still holding the field. The learned counsel further submits
that since the work executed by the respondent No.3 is step towards the
nation building process, hence, this Court should take a view in favour of
the department in such matters where expenditure from the public
exchequer is involved.
        The aforesaid submission of Mr. Barkakati cannot be accepted by
this Court for the following reasons.       Firstly, the respondents have not
challenged the award of the learned arbitrator nor have they raised any
objection against the communication dated 03.11.2016 issued by the
respondent No.4. It is only in the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the
respondent No.1 in the present proceeding that an attempt has been
made to assail the arbitration award in a manner which is not permissible
in law.
        Secondly, the appeal preferred by the petitioner was evidently as
per Section 3G(5) of the National Highways Act which is a statutory forum
available to the writ petitioner. The learned arbitrator has exercised the
jurisdiction strictly in accordance with the mandate of the statute. Under

the circumstances, the fruits of the award cannot be denied to the
petitioner by taking the plea of public interest in the present fashion.
       For the reasons stated herein above, I do not find any merit in the
contention advanced by the learned counsel for the respondent No.3.
       Consequently, this writ petition must succeed and is hereby
allowed.
        It is directed that the amount of Rs.3,95,895/- found due and
payable to the petitioner shall be disbursed to him within a period of three
months from today, failing which, the amount will carry interest at the rate
of 12% per annum with effect from the date of this order till realization.
       The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
       No order as to cost.
                                                               JUDGE
TUC


