                          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.2386 of 2010
                                     M/s Ahar and two others
                                                                   ............ Petitioners
                                             - Versus –
                                      The State of Assam and others
                                                                    ........ Respondents
                                             BEFORE
                        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioners:      Mr. R. Karim, Adv
                       For the respondents:      Mr. M.R. Adhikary, State Counsel.
                                                 Mr. P.K. Roy, Adv
                       Date of Hearing :        12.07.2017.
                       Date of Judgment:       12.07.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. R.Karim, learned counsel for the petitioners, Mr. P.K. Roy,
      learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 2 to 5 being the
      authorities in the Provident Fund Organization and Mr. M.R Adhikary, learned
      counsel appearing for the respondent No.1 being the Union of India.
      2.      The petitioners are the proprietors, functioning under the name M/s
      Ahar, M/s Ahar Hotel and M/s Aheli and they have their principle place of
      business at Sib-bari Road, Karimganj. The petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 are
      represented by Mr. Nikhil Ranjan Mazumdar being the proprietor whereras the
      petitioner No.3 is represented by Mr. Nirupam Majumdar being the son of
      Nikhil Ranjan Mazumdar, who projects himself to be the partner of the
      petitioner No.3.
WP(C) No.2386 of 2010                                                            Page 1 of 3

      3.      What is noticeable is that all the three petitioners being M/s Ahar, M/s
      Ahar Hotel and M/s Aheli are all conducting their businesses from Sib-Bari
      Road, Karimganj and that the businesses are being conducted from one single
      premise. It is also noticed that in the proforma for coverage to be submitted
      by the employer under the Employees Provident Funds Miscellaneous
      Provisions Act, 1952, the name of the establishment was shown as Aheli
      Restaurant, Ahar Restaurant and Ahar Hotel, where the respective functions
      are said to be of serving non-veg food, veg-food and lodging. The aforesaid
      information provided by the petitioner also gives an indication that all the
      three petitioners are in fact a part of one single establishment.
      4.      Be that as it may, the petitioners are aggrieved by a coverage letter
      dated 31.08.2009 of the Employees Provident Fund Organization, Regional
      Office, North Eastern Region at Bhangagarh. In the said coverage letter, it is
      stated that the establishment of the petitioners has 21 employees and
      therefore, they come within the purview under Employees Provident Funds
      Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (in short Act of 1952). It is stated by the
      authorities that the minimum number of employees required for an
      establishment to be covered by the said Act of 1952 is 20. By the said
      coverage letter of 31.08.2009, the petitioner’s establishment had been
      included within the purview of the said Act of 1952 by providing them with
      code No.AS/8807. The petitioners assail the said coverage letter of
      31.08.2009 on the ground that the petitioners in fact are employing less than
      20 numbers of employees.
      5.      Mr. R. Karim, learned counsel for the petitioners has made a
      statement that in the coverage letter dated 31.08.2009, 21 numbers of
      employees name were reflected. But the names of the two proprietors of the
      petitioners’ establishment had also been included and as the proprietors
      cannot be construed to be employees, therefore, the total number of
      employees for the petitioners ought to be 19 and not 21.
      6.      Mr. P.K. Roy, learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 2 to 5
      on the other hand refers to Annexure-A page 21 of their affidavit in
      opposition. The page-20 of Annexure-A is a covering letter of Sri Nikhil Ranjan
      Mazumdar being the proprietor of petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 addressed to the
      Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Guwahati, by which, a coverage
WP(C) No.2386 of 2010                                                           Page 2 of 3

      proposal was submitted by the said proprietor of the petitioner Nos. 1 and 2.
      The following page-21 is a copy of the proforma for coverage submitted by
      the employer being the said proprietor of petitioner Nos. 1 and 2. In Clause-5
      of the said proforma for coverage, it is stated that the employment strength
      of the establishment is 21 in number. In column-12 of the said proforma for
      coverage, which requires the details of the employees to be provided, it is
      seen that there appears 22 numbers of employees of the petitioners’
      establishment and the names of the said 22 numbers of employees are also
      provided therein. The said proforma for coverage is under the signature of Sri
      Nikhil Ranjan Mazumdar being the proprietor of petitioner Nos. 1 and 2.
      7.      As the proforma coverage under the signature of the proprietor of the
      petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 clearly states that the petitioner establishment has 22
      number of employees, the contention of the petitioners in this writ petition
      that they have in fact 19 numbers of employees cannot be prima-facie
      accepted. Further the said 22 numbers of employees reflected in the proforma
      for coverage also do not show the name of any proprietor of the petitioners’
      establishment, which would enable the petitioners to reduce their number of
      employees.
      8.      In such view of the matter, this Court does not find any reason in
      interfering with the coverage letter dated 31.08.2009. But, however, as the
      learned counsel for the petitioners is strenuously urging that the petitioners
      establishment had lesser numbers of employees than 20, this Court deems it
      appropriate that the petitioners may file a representation before the
      appropriate authority stating the detail particulars of the employees that the
      petitioners establishment had as on 12.08.2009 when the said proforma for
      coverage was submitted before the authority.
      9.      In the event, the petitioners can satisfy the appropriate authority of
      the respondent Employees Provident Fund Organization that in fact the
      number of employees on the said date was less than 20, the said authority
      may pass appropriate orders on the same.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands closed.
                                                                            JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.2386 of 2010                                                          Page 3 of 3


