                          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.2323 of 2008
                                     Assam       Geology       and       Mining      Service
                                     Association and another
                                                                   ............   Petitioners
                                             - Versus –
                                      The State of Assam and others
                                                                        ........ Respondents
                                             BEFORE
                        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioners:     Mr. T.N. Srinivasan, Adv
                       For the respondents:      Mr. M.R.Adhikary, State Counsel.
                       Date of Hearing :        11.07.2017.
                       Date of Judgment:       11.07.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. T. N. Srinivasan, learned counsel for the petitioner and
      Mr.M. R Adhikary, learned Additional Senior Government Advocate appearing
      on behalf of the State respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
      2.      The petitioner is an association of the personnel under the Geological
      Wing of the Directorate of Geology and Mining, Government of Assam and it
      had been formed and recognized under Rule-23 of the Assam Services
      (Conduct) Rules, 1965.
      3.      It is stated that the organizational structure of the Directorate of
      Geology and Mining consists of four different wings (1) Geology, (2)
      Chemixtry (3) Drilling and (4) Mining and each of the wing have different
      qualifications and experience for their respective disciplines. The minimum
      required qualification at the entry point of the four wings are as follows:-
WP(C) No.2323 of 2008                                                               Page 1 of 8

              Wing          Entry Pointy                     Minimum Qualification
              Geology       Assistant Geologist              M.Sc/M.Tech
              Chemistry     Assistant Chemist/Chemist        B.Sc/M.Sc
              Drilling      Drilling Engineer                B.E/B.Sc
              Mining        Assistant Mining Engineer        Degree/Diploma
      4.      According to the petitioner, it is noticeable that for the Geology wing,
      the minimum entry qualification is a master degree in the relevant subject or
      a master degree in technology, whereas in case of the other wings, the
      minimum required qualification is a bachelor degree. It is also the case of the
      petitioner association that the Geology wing is the primary wing in the
      Directorate, whereas the other wings are supportive wings to work along with
      the Geology wing.
      5.      The issue involved in this writ petition flows from certain preliminary
      facts and it is stated that as per the recommendation of the Assam Pay
      Commission, 1973, the prescribed scale of pay was higher in respect of the
      Geologists, whereas it was comparatively lower for the Senior Chemist of the
      Chemistry Wing. But the Assam Pay Commission of 1979 while revisiting the
      pay structure had brought the pay scale of Geologist and Senior Chemist at
      per even though the minimum entry qualification were different for both the
      wings. Subsequently, the Assam Pay Commission of 1988, in its report, which
      was published in the year 1990, had recommended a higher scale to the
      Senior Chemist and correspondingly lower scale of pay was recommended for
      the Geologist. Subsequent thereto the Assam Pay Commission of 1994 had
      recommended a pay structure whereby the maximum pay prescribed, were at
      disparity with each other. Consequently, the Officers in the Geology Wing had
      preferred a writ petition before this Court, which was numbered as CR
      No.4494/1994 and disposed of by the order dated 16.11.1994 by providing
      that the Assam Pay Commission, 1994 would go into the grievances raised on
      behalf of the Geology Wing. Subsequently, the present petitioner had
      preferred another writ petition being WP(C) No.4816/2000, inter-alia seeking
      for a direction from the Court for a parity of pay with that of Senior Chemist.
WP(C) No.2323 of 2008                                                           Page 2 of 8

      During the pendency of the said writ petition, an Expert Committee was
      constituted by the Government of Assam by notification dated 27.03.2006 to
      decide upon the issue of pay parity between the personal in the Geology Wing
      and that of the Chemistry wing in the Directorate of Geology and Mining.
      Accordingly, this Court by its order dated 15.06.2006 in WP(C) No.4816/2000
      had provided that the writ petition stood closed with a direction that the
      Committee constituted by the Notification dated 27.03.2006 shall submit its
      report to the said Government within the prescribed period and thereafter the
      State Government shall take a final decision in the matter within the next two
      weeks.
      6.      In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the Expert Committee
      constituted by the Notification dated 27.03.2006 had submitted its report,
      which is available as Annexure-9, page-47 to the writ petition. The Expert
      Committee in its report dated 17.05.2006 had made certain observation after
      examining the entire matter regarding the parity of pay in respect of the
      Geologist and others. Clause-3 and 4 of the observations are as follows:-
              “3. The post of “Sr Chemist is also a promotion post of Chemist on
          completion of 10 years of service like Sr Drilling Engineer/Mining
          Engineer as recommended by the Assam Pay Commission, 1994. So,
          same pay scale of Rs.8100/--13,025/- have been allowed to the post
          of Sr Chemist at par with the Sr Drilling Engineer/Mining Engineer.
              4. It is found that the post of Geologist (Rs.6600-12,625/-) is the
          intermediate post between Assistant Geologist (Rs.4390-11,425/-)
          and the Sr Geologist (Rs.8100-13,025/-). The Committee found that
          there are not such intermediate post in other wings of the
          Directorate. “
      7.      Consequent upon the aforesaid observations, the Expert Committee
      had made the following recommendation:-
              “To solve the above problem the cadre of Geologist and the Senior
          Geologist may be amalgamated into a single cadre of Senior
          Geologist in the pay scale of Rs.8100-13,025/-. As a result of the
          amalgamation the Assistant Geologist shall be eligible for getting the
          next promotion as Senior Geologist on completion 10 years of service
WP(C) No.2323 of 2008                                                          Page 3 of 8

           in the line of service condition of posts of other wings of the
           Directorate.”
      8.      From a perusal of the observations of the Expert Committee, it can be
      seen that the Committee was of the view that the post of Geologist in the pay
      scale of Rs.6600-12,625/- is an intermediate post between that of Assistant
      Geologist in the pay scale of Rs.4390-11,425/- and that of Senior Geologist in
      the pay scale of Rs.8100-13,025/-. The Committee was also of the view that
      there are no such intermediate posts in the other wings of the Directorate like
      that of the Geologist wing. On the basis of the aforesaid observation, it is
      noticed that the Expert Committee had given a recommendation that in order
      to solve the problem of the intermediate cadre of Geologist between the cadre
      of Senior Geologist and Assistant Geologist, there may be a amalgamation of
      the cadre of Geologist and Senior Geologist into a single cadre in the pay
      scale of Rs.8100-13,025/-. It was further recommended that as a result of the
      amalgamation, the incumbents would be eligible for being promoted from the
      cadre of Assistant Geologist to that of Senior Geologist on completion of 10
      years of service in the line of service condition of post of other wings of the
      Directorate.
      9.      In a common parlance, the expression amalgamation indicates that
      one of the entity is totally merges with the other entity and acquires the other
      identity to which it is merged, meaning thereby, that the earlier preexisting
      entity loses its earlier identity and acquires entity to which it is stands
      merged.
      10.     It is noticed that perhaps there may be one difficulty in construing of
      the Geologist to be a Senior Geologist in view of the fact that as per the
      service order, the qualifying period for being promoted as Geologist from
      Assistant Geologist is five years and that from Geologist to Senior Geologist is
      another five years. Whereas, as per the recommendation, the minimum
      qualifying period for an Assistant Geologist to be promoted to Senior Geologist
      would be now ten years. Therefore, it is factually possible that there may be
      certain persons in the cadre of Geologist, who had been promoted as
      Geologist after completing five years of qualifying service, but have not
      completed the required total period of ten years for being qualified as a
      Senior Geologist. The question for determination of the status of such class of
WP(C) No.2323 of 2008                                                           Page 4 of 8

      Geologist, who had completed five years of service as Assistant Geologist, but
      have not completed five years of service as Geologist meaning thereby that
      they have not completed a total of ten years as Assistant Geologist and
      Geologist taken together would be left open for the respondent authorities to
      decide upon.
      11.     But in any view of the matter, the recommendation of the Expert
      Committee is that upon the recommendation being given its effect, there
      would remain no further person in the cadre of Geologist and all such persons
      in the Geologist Wing would either in the cadre of Assistant Geologist or they
      would be in the cadre of Senior Geologist.
      12.     In the aforesaid background, the Assam Geologist and Mining
      (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Order, 1988 (in short Service Order
      of 1988) was amended by the present impugned notification, which notifies
      the Assam Geologist and Mining (Recruitment and Conditions of Service)
      (Amendment Order, 2007), which in fact brought an amendment to the earlier
      Service Order of 1998. Clause -5 of the Service Order of 1988 provides for the
      mode of recruitment to the Services, where sub clause 8 of clause-5 provides
      for the mode of recruitment to the cadre of Deputy Director/Senior Geologist,
      whereas Sub clause-5 of clause-5 provides for the method of recruitment to
      the cadre of Geologist and Petrologist. Clasue-5(3) and 5(5) of the Service
      Order of 1988 is as follows:-
                  “5(3). Deputy Director/Sr Geologist:- The post of Deputy
           Director/Senior Geologist shall be filled up by promotion from the
           cadre of Geologist, Petrologist or Geophysicist. To be eligible for
           promotion to the post of Deputy Director/Sr Geologist the incumbent
           must have atleast 10 years service experience including atleast 3
           years as Geologist, Petrologist or Geophysicist.
                  5(5). Geolotist and Petrologist:- The post of Geologist or
           Petrologist shall be filled up by promotion from the cadre of Assistant
           Geologist. In order to become eligible for promotion, the incumbent
           must have a minimum of 5 years service experience in the cadre of
           Assistant Geologist.”
WP(C) No.2323 of 2008                                                           Page 5 of 8

      13.     From the aforesaid provisions of Clause-5(3), it is noticeable that the
      post in the cadre of Deputy Director/Senior Geologist would be filled up by
      promotion from the cadre of Geologist having ten years of service as
      Geologist. Whereas Clause-5(5) provides that a post in the cadre of Geologist
      shall be filled up by promotion from the cadre of Assistant Geologist by an
      incumbent having a minimum qualifying service of five years.
      14.     As observed, as per the recommendation of the Expert Committee, the
      cadre of Geologist would be amalgamated with that of Senior Geologist,
      meaning thereby that there would be no further cadre of Geologist remaining
      in the Geologist Wing of the Directorate of Geology and Mining. In such
      event, if the recommendations of the Expert Committee is given effect, the
      requirement of clause-5(5) of the Service Order of 1998 would become
      redundant and would have no further purpose in respect of its provision
      relating to promotion to the cadre of Geologist. In other words, in order to
      give effect to the recommendations of the Expert Committee, appropriate
      amendment would be required to the provisions of clause-5(3) of the Service
      Order of 1988, which otherwise provides that the post in the cadre of Deputy
      Director/Senior Geologist would be filled up from amongst candidates from
      the cadre of Geologist having ten years of service experience.
      15.     In the aforesaid background, by the impugned notification dated
      06.10.2007, an amendment had been incorporated to the service order of
      1988. As per clause-2 of the amendment order of 2007, the existing sub
      clause-3 of clause-5 had been deleted and in its place, the amended sub
      clause-3 had been substituted. The substituted Clause-5(3) is as follows:-
              “The post of Deputy Director/Senior Geologist shall be filled up by
           promotion from the cadre of Assistant Geologist. To be eligible for
           promotion to the post of Deputy Director/Sr. Geologist the incumbent
           must have at least ten years of service experience as Assistant
           Geologist. This shall be without prejudice to the incumbents presently
           holding the post of Geologist, who will continue to remain as
           Geologists till their promotion or superannuation. The incumbents
           presently holding the posts of Geologists shall be eligible for promotion
           to the post of Deputy Director/Sr. Geologist who have completed
           atleast ten years of service experience. However, for the purpose of
WP(C) No.2323 of 2008                                                           Page 6 of 8

           10(ten) years experience, their service as Geologists shall be counted
           along with their service as Assistant Geologist.
      16.     From a reading of the substituted clause 5(3), it is noticed that a post
      in the cadre of Deputy Director/Senior Geologist shall now be filled up by
      promotion from the cadre of Assistant Geologist having a qualifying period of
      at least 10 years as Assistant Geologist. But at the same time, the amended
      clause 5(3) also provides that without prejudice to the incumbents presently
      holding the post of Geologist, they would continue to remain as Geologist till
      their promotion or superannuation and that the present incumbents presently
      holding the post of Geologist shall be eligible for promotion to the post of
      Deputy Director/Senior Geologist after having completed at least 10 years of
      service experience.
      17.     The aforesaid provisions of the amended Clause-5(3) appear to this
      Court to be in conformity with the recommendations of the Expert Committee
      made in its recommendation dated 17.05.2006. As already discussed, the
      effect of the recommendations is that in order to be promoted as a Senior
      Geologist, an incumbent is required to have at least 10 years of service as an
      Assistant Geologist. The amendment provides that this category of Geologist
      who have not attained a combined qualifying period of 10 years as Assistant
      Geologist and Geologist, will continue to remain as Geologist for the time
      being till they attain the minimum qualifying period of 10 years of service and
      only upon attaining such minimum qualifying period of 10 years, they will be
      considered for promotion as Senior Geologist.
      18.     In such view of the matter, this Court does not find any reason to
      interfere with the amendment to Clause-5(3) of the Service Rules of 1988 as
      notified in the notification dated 06.10.2007.
      19.     But at the same time, it is also clarified that the incumbents in the
      cadre of Geologist, who had not attained the combined qualifying period of 10
      years as Assistant Geologist and Geologist at the time of incorporating the
      amendment, shall have to be construed as Senior Geologist upon such
      Geologist having completed the combined minimum qualifying period of 10
      years. If such view is not taken, the ultimate effect of the recommendations
      of the Expert Committee would remain frustrated and category of employees
      who had already been promoted in the meantime as Geologist after
WP(C) No.2323 of 2008                                                           Page 7 of 8

      completing 05(five) years of qualifying service as Assistant Geologist would
      continue to remain as such without there being any further benefit being
      accrued to them as per the recommendations. The aforesaid confusion in the
      view of this Court had arisen in view of the fact that although Clause-5(3) of
      the Service Order of 1988 had been amended to Clause 5(5) remains as such
      and no amendment had been brought in to the said clause.
      20.    Accordingly, in terms of the above observation, this writ petition is
      disposed   of   with  an   observation   that  upon    giving  effect   to  the
      recommendations of the Expert Committee, the respondent authorities shall
      construe the Class of Geologist, who were promoted as Geologist prior to the
      amendment upon attaining the qualifying period of 05(five) years as Assistant
      Geologist shall now be construed to be Senior Geologist upon completing of
      10 years of combined qualifying service as Assistant Geologist and Geologist
      respectively. The aforesaid observation in the view of this Court would be
      consistent with the recommendations with the Expert Committee dated
      17.05.2006 and would also serve the purpose, for which the amendment to
      Clause-3 of the Service Order of 1988 was brought in to effect.
                                                                            JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.2323 of 2008                                                          Page 8 of 8


