                  IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
    (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM AND
                        ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                         WP(C)No.2180/2012
       Md. Amir Hussain
                                                                  …Petitioner
                                  -Versus-
       The State of Assam & 4 Others
                                                              … Respondents
                                BEFORE
    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
       Advocates for the Petitioner         :      Mr. AR Sikdar
                                                   Mr. MH Talukdar
                                                   Mr. M Ahmed
                                                   Mr. N Ahmed
                                                   Mr. A Kalam
       Advocates for the Respondents        :      Mr. SS Roy
                                                   Govt. Advocate
                                                   Assam
       Date of hearing & Judgment            :     17.07.2017
                   JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
     Heard Mr. AR Sikdar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner. Also
heard Mr. SS Roy, learned State counsel for the respondents.
2.   The office note dated 11.06.2013 indicates that A/D card in respect of
respondent No.5 has been received back after service of notice with his

                                        2
signature. Thereafter, by order dated 19.05.2017, this Court had accepted
that the service as regards respondent No.5 is complete and that the matter
be posted for hearing after 2(two) weeks.
3.     Inspite of the notice being served, the respondent No.5 chooses not to
appear before this Court, as such, the matter is proceeded for disposal in his
absence.
4.     A process was initiated for grant of a fair price shop license in the
village Takuamari, in the district of Bongaigaon. Both the petitioner as well as
the respondent No.5 had participated in the process for grant of the fair price
shop license. But subsequently by the communication dated 03.04.2008, the
respondent No.5 was requested to deposit the amount of Rs.300/- as NSCFVP
and Rs.25/- as license fee through treasury challan. The implication of such
requirement to deposit the amount is that the respondent authorities had
decided to grant the PDF license in favour of the respondent No.5.
5.     The petitioner being aggrieved had preferred an earlier writ petition
being WP(C)No.2554/2008. In the said writ petition, the petitioner had raised
two-fold grievances, inasmuch as, firstly the said respondent No.5 had earlier
availed the benefit of belonging to a BPL family and secondly, he is also
involved in some criminal cases.
6.     This Court by order dated 03.02.2011 had disposed of the said writ
petition by providing that upon consideration of the criminal antecedent of
respondent No.5 and also the fact that he was a BPL card holder till
02.11.2007, his selection for grant of PDF license in Takuamari village in
preference over the petitioner cannot be considered to be reasonable and that
this Court further expressed the view that the license granted to the
respondent No.5 was unjustly given. Accordingly the said communication
dated 03.04.2008 as well as the PDS license granted to the petitioner on
02.06.2008 were set aside and quashed and the Licensing Authority was
directed to decide afresh as to who should be granted the license as per the

                                          3
norms in force for distribution of PDS articles for the consumers in Takuamari
village.
7.     Against the said order, the respondent No.5 had preferred a writ appeal
being WA No.101/2011. The writ appeal was disposed of by the order dated
09.09.2011, wherein the writ appellate Court had declined to interfere with
the order of the learned Single Judge dated 03.02.2011 passed in
WP(C)No.2554/2008, by providing the respondent authorities to give due
consideration to the application of the respondent No.5 for renewal of the
license, in accordance with law.
8.     As already held in an earlier adjudication, when this Court directs the
respondent authorities to give due consideration to a matter, it does not mean
that the respondent authorities without any further consideration straightway
grant the concerned favour to the person whose application is to be
considered. The expression consideration means that appropriate application
of mind and due deliberation be made and appropriate reasons be recorded
as to why the concerned relief sought for in the application is to be granted in
favour of the applicant.
9.     In this writ petition, it has been brought to the notice of this Court that
subsequently without undertaking the aforesaid exercise of making an
appropriate application of mind and deliberating upon the matter, the license
of the respondent No.5 had been renewed. Such procedure adopted by the
respondent authorities is found to be unacceptable to this Court. Further, as
the Division Bench had refused to interfere with the order of the learned
Single Judge dated 03.02.2011, and the order of the learned Single Judge
providing that the license granted in favour of the respondent No.4 was found
to be unacceptable in view of his criminal antecedent and that he was a BPL
card holder earlier, would also have to be given its due credence, while
passing any order in favour of the respondent No.5.
10.    Neither it is the case of the respondent authorities and nor that any
records have been produced to indicate that the concerned authorities had

                                         4
undertaken such an exercise as indicated hereinabove. In such view of the
matter, this Court has no other option but to direct the respondent authorities
to give a fresh consideration as to whether PDS license was required to be
granted in favour of the respondent No.5 or not. While giving the said
consideration, it is to be understood that consideration does not mean
straightway giving the license and that there is a requirement for appropriate
application of mind and also to make the required deliberation as to whether
the license should be granted in favour of the respondent No.5 or not.
11.    While undertaking the aforesaid exercise, the respondent authorities
shall also keep in mind the earlier observation of this Court that considering
the criminal antecedent of the respondent No. 5 and also of the fact that he
was a BPL card holder until 02.11.2007, any license granted to him would be
un-just.
12.    Accordingly, the required consideration as directed hereinabove, be
given by the respondent authorities within a period of 1(one) month from the
date of receipt of a certified copy of this order. Further, it is provided that the
said consideration shall be given strictly in terms as provided hereinabove.
13.    Upon giving fresh consideration, if the respondent authorities are of the
view that the license should not be granted in favour of the petitioner, the
said decision shall have a precedence over its earlier decision to grant the
renewal in favour of the petitioner, and, while doing so, the authorities shall
further take a decision as to who should be given the license.
14.    In terms of the above this writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                           JUDGE
Shivani


