           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
 (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
       Case No:         WP(C) 2898/2016
       Mrs. Manju Sunar
                                                           ………..…… Petitioner
                             -Versus-
       1. Union of India, Represented by the Secretary to the Govt. Of India,
       Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi-110001.
       2. Director General of Assam Rifles Shillong Meghalaya-11.
       3. The Commandant 16 Assam Rifle C/O 99 APO PIN 932016.
                                                            …........ Respondents
                            BEFORE ::
          HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Writ Petitioner       :       Ms. S. Bora.
For the Respondents           :       Mr. D.C. Borah.
Date of Hearing               :       20.07.2017
Date of delivery of
Judgment and Order            :       20.07.2017
                                                                          Page 1 of 4

                    JUDGMENT AND ORDER
1.      By this writ petition, the petitioner claims family pension on account of
the death of her husband, who was serving as Havildar (General Duty) under the
Assam Rifles since enrolled on 09.12.1986. He retired on 31.01.2012 on medical
grounds after rendering about 25 (twenty five) years of service. On his
retirement, the petitioner received his pension dues but however after he expired
on 18.12.2013, his pension was stopped. The petitioner therefore approached
the respondent authorities for family pension but, the respondent authorities
rejected her claim vide communication dated 10.10.2014 (Annexure-11).
2.      It may be noticed that the deceased employee/husband of the petitioner
was initially married to Smt. Sabina Sunar but however, she eloped and her
whereabouts were not known since the year 1996. The late husband of the
petitioner lodged an FIR but the police authority were unable to trace out Smt.
Sabina Sunar. After the husband of the petitioner expired on 18.10.2013, the
petitioner obtained a police report on 20.11.2013, which was prepared after
examining the elder brother of the deceased employee. The petitioner also
obtained the ‘next of kin’ certificate, whereby the name of the petitioner was
shown to be the wife of the deceased employee along with 4 (four) other
children. It may be also noticed here that from the earlier marriage of the late
husband of the petitioner with Smt. Sabina Sunar, 2 (two) daughters were born
and later on with his marriage with the present petitioner, a son and a daughter
were born. The next of kin certificate was issued by the Additional Deputy
Commissioner of Karbi Anglong on 30.12.2013 (Annexure-8).
3.      The petitioner along with her application had submitted the police report
dated 20.11.2013, the next of kin certificate dated 30.12.2013 and other
documents in her power and possession. However, the respondent authorities
vide communication dated 10.10.2014 informed the petitioner that the deceased
employee during his life time furnished no information about his marriage with
the petitioner. However, the nomination of Hrithik Sunar, who according to the
petitioner was born out of her wedlock with the deceased employee towards
Group Insurance Scheme was not disputed. The respondent authorities therefore
                                                                        Page 2 of 4

rejected the claim of the petitioner and advised her to file a civil suit to establish
the fact that she is the legally married wife of the deceased employee.
4.       Ms. S. Bora, the learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioner submits
that the petitioner was married to her husband in the year 1997, after the first
wife had left him and out of their marriage 2 (two) children namely Miss Prity
Sunar and Hrithik Sunar were born. The 2 (two) children born out of the earlier
marriage of her late husband with Smt. Sabina Sunar were also retained and
looked after by the petitioner and her late husband as their own children. While
the petitioner’s late husband was receiving the family pension as due to him till
October, 2013, the same was stopped by the respondent authorities when he
expired on 18.10.2013. She submits that the petitioner’s claim for family pension
by approaching the respondent authorities with all the necessary documents in
her power and possession, has not been fruitful and was only rejected on the
technical ground that the records of the respondent authorities do not reveal
that the petitioner was married to the late employee at any point of time. In
such situation Ms. Bora submits that the petitioner and her 4 (four) children are
facing great financial hardship and are before this Court through the instant writ
petition seeking appropriate direction for release of family pension to the
petitioner and her children.
5.       Mr. D.C. Borah, the learned CGC appearing for the respondents submits
that the respondents have no alternative but to go by the records available in
their possession which in fact was submitted by the late employee himself. The
official records in the possession of the authority concerned nowhere reveal that
the late employee was married to the petitioner. In fact, the husband of the
employee retired on invalid pension on 31.01.2012 and pursuant to which, he
was drawing his family pension. The employee during his lifetime although
drawing his pension neither informed the respondent authorities nor submitted
any document showing that he married the petitioner after his first wife went
missing in the year 1996. Under such circumstances, the respondent authorities
are not in a position to disburse the family pension to the petitioner.
                                                                           Page 3 of 4

6.      I have considered, the submissions advanced by the rival parties and
perused the materials available on record. On perusing the communication dated
10.10.2014 (Annexure-11) of the writ petition by which the claim of the
petitioner for family pension was rejected by the respondent authorities, it may
be noticed that the late employee amongst others had nominated one of his son
Shri Hrithik Sunar as a nominee towards General Insurance Scheme. The said
son in fact has not been disputed to be born out of his wedlock with the
petitioner and he is also still a minor. The petitioner in the given circumstance
may perhaps not be entitled to the family pension but however the late
employee has 4th children and out of which one of them is a nominee as per his
service records. In that view of the matter, the respondent authorities cannot
turn a blind eye upon the entitlement of the children of the deceased employee
with regard to family pension amongst other and therefore, in any considered
opinion, the respondent authorities should examine and consider this aspect of
the matter.
7.       Having opined thus, the respondent authorities more particularly the
respondent No. 2 shall consider the representation containing all the details of
the family and supporting documents to be filed by the writ petitioner within the
next 3 (three) weeks from today before him compassionately as per the relevant
rules applicable for grant of family pension in the name of the 4 (four) children
of the deceased employee and dispose the same within a period of 3 (three)
months thereafter. This direction has been passed considering the fact that as
per the records available as submitted by the rival parties, there is none other
than the petitioner claiming family pension of the deceased employee.
8.      With the above observation and direction, the writ petition stands
disposed of. No cost.
                                                                   JUDGE
B. DEY
                                                                        Page 4 of 4


