                        IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
         (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM AND
                              ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                               WP(C)No.2965/2012
         Sri Dinaram Bora
                                                                           …Petitioner
                                         -Versus-
         The State of Assam & 4 Others
                                                                       … Respondents
                                      BEFORE
          HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
         Advocates for the Petitioner          :     Ms. D Singha
         Advocate for the Respondents          :     Mr. A Chakrabarty
                                                     Government Advocate
                                                     Assam
         Date of hearing & Judgment             :    14.07.2017
                         JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
         Heard Ms. D Sinha, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. A
Chakraborty, learned State counsel.
2.       The respondent No.5, as per the Office Note is represented by Ms. S Bora
and Ms. M Bhuyan by filling the respective Vakalatnama along with their learned
Senior counsel. It is stated that the learned Senior counsel is no more. Therefore, on
record, it would be Ms. S Bora and Ms. M Bhuyan who would represent the
respondent No.5. However, none appears for the respondent No.5, when the matter
is called upon.

                                           2
3.      It is stated that the respondent No.5 is a member of the public of
Gohaingaon village in the district of Golaghat and at the instance of the said
respondent No.5, certain complaints were lodged against the present petitioner, who
is a Gaonburah, resulting in the impugned termination order against the Gaonburah.
4.      In view of the order proposed to be passed, this Court deems it appropriate
that the said respondent No.5 in any view of the matter, need not be heard for the
present.
5.      The petitioner was appointed as a Gaonburah of Gohaingaon village as per
the order dated 13.09.2005 of the Deputy Commissioner, Golaghat. It is the case of
the petitioner that although the petitioner was discharging his duties as Gaonburah
with honesty and sincerity by implementing various welfare schemes of the
Government, but certain individuals of the village who had the intention of
misappropriating the Government funds were dissatisfied, and, accordingly, had
lodged a complaint against the petitioner.
6.      On the basis of such complaint, the petitioner was initially placed under
suspension. Thereafter, by the order dated 19.07.2011, the Deputy Commissioner,
Golaghat had constituted an enquiry committee to enquire into the allegations made
against the petitioner. It is stated that neither the petitioner was allowed to
participate in the said enquiry nor the petitioner was provided with any report of
such enquiry.
7.      It is also stated that subsequently, the petitioner came to learn from the
Circle Officer, Golaghat Revenue Circle that a group of less than 10% of the
population of the villagers led by respondent No.5 had filed a complaint against the
petitioner for some other vested interest.
8.      In the aforesaid circumstances, the order dated 24.04.2012 had been issued
by the Deputy Commissioner, Golaghat by which the services of the petitioner was
terminated with immediate effect based upon the public complaint raised by

                                             3
respondent No.5, Sri Mineswar Bora and 134 other persons and also on the basis of
the same report of the Circle Officer dated 20.12.2012.
9.      In the affidavit-in-opposition filed on behalf of the respondent Nos.2 and 3, in
paragraph 8, it has been stated that after the suspension of the petitioner as the
Gaonburah, departmental proceeding was initiated by the order No.GRC.6/2011/56
dated 24.04.2012 by filing proper norms of departmental proceeding.
10.     It is further noticed that the order of termination is also dated 24.04.2012.
11.     In such view of the matter, this Court cannot avoid the inevitable conclusion
that the writ petitioner was terminated from services without conducting any proper
departmental proceeding against him, inasmuch as, the date of order of termination
and the date of initiation of the disciplinary proceeding i.e., 24.04.2012 are one and
the same.
12.     In such view of the matter, this Court is of the view that the order of
termination dated 24.04.2012 is not sustainable in law and the same is set aside.
However, as the departmental proceeding is said to have been initiated by the order
dated 24.04.2012, the respondent authorities would be at liberty to bring the said
proceeding to its logical end. However, it is provided that while bringing the same to
its logical end, the respondent authorities would strictly follow the proper
departmental norms and procedure and the same cannot be made in a truncated
manner.
13.     In terms of the above, this writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                                 JUDGE
Shivani


