          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
        Case No:        WP(C) 2652/2010
        1. Sri Papu Khanikar,
            S/O Pobin Khanikar,
            Vill. Charing Napam Khanikar
            P.S. Gaurisagar,
            Dist. Sivasagar, Assam.
        2. Sri Diganta Gogoi,
            S/o Ajoy Gogoi,
            Vill. Charing Baruati,
            P.O. Charing,
            Dist, Sivasagar, Assam.
        3. Sri Nripen Sarma,
            S/o Luhit Sarma,
            Vill. Demow Kenduguri,
            P.O. Konwar Dihingia,
            Dist. Sivasagar, Assam.
        4. Sri Arup Gogoi,
            S/o Bireswar Gogoi,
            Vill. Baruah Changmai Gaon,
            P.O. Demow,
            Dist. Sivasagar, Assam.
        5. Sri Mojesh Gorh,
            S/o late Motilal Gorh,
            Vill. Gaharisua Gaon,
            P.O. Rajabari,
            Dist. Jorhat, Assam.
        6. Sri Anuj Bharali,
            S/o Gobin Bharali,
            Vill. Pekmonia,
            P.O. Bhitorual,
            Dist. Sivasagar, Assam.
                             Page 1 of 4
                                                             WP(C) 2652/2010

7. Sri Alok Jyoti Gogoi,
    S/o Shadananda Gogoi,
    Vill. Badulipar,
    P.O. Badulipar Patia Pathar
    Dist. Jorhat, Assam.
8. Sri Dipak Majhi,
    S/o Ram Nath majhi,
    Vill. Teok Tea Estate,
    P.O. Teok,
    Dist. Jorhat, Assam.
9. Sri Amor Borah,
    S/o Robin Borah,
    Vill. Charingia Napam,
    P.O. Khonamukh,
    Dist. Jorhat, Assasm.
                                 ………..…… Petitioners
                     -Versus-
1. The Union of India, represented by the Secretary to the Govt. Of
India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi-1.
2. The Inspector General of Police, NES, CRPF, Shillong, Meghalaya.
3. The Deputy Inspector General of Police, CRPF, P.O. Amerigog, 9th
Mile, Guwahati, District Kamrup, Assam.
4. The Additional Deputy Inspector General of Police (Admn), NES,
CRPF, Shillong, Meghalaya.
5. The Additional Deputy Inspector General of Police, Group Centre,
CRPF, P.O. Amerigog, 9th Mile, Guwahati, Dist. Kamrup, Assam.
                                                   ...... Respondents
                     Page 2 of 4
                                                   WP(C) 2652/2010

                           BEFORE ::
         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Writ Petitioners       :        Mr.S. Borthakur.
For the Respondents            :        Mr. A. Das.
Date of Hearing                :        19.06.2017
Date of delivery of
Judgment and Order             :        19.06.2017
                   JUDGMENT AND ORDER
        Heard Mr. S. Borthakur, the learned counsel for the writ petitioners as
well as Mr. A. Das, the learned CGC appearing for the respondents.
        2. The case of the petitioners in brief is that they responded to the
advertisement issued by the respondent authorities in the advertisement No.
1 for the year 2008 for filing up the post of constable under the CRPF.
Against the vacancy for the State of Assam (Male) there were 312 posts in
all. The advertisement further provided that the number of candidates to be
considered against the vacancy would be the total number of vacancy
advertised plus 2 % of the vacancies of the category would be considered
after medical examination. The petitioners accordingly participated in the
selection process and they were also medically examined. However, the
petitioners were not selected and therefore being aggrieved, they have
approached this Court.
        3. Mr. S. Borthakur, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
submits that the petitioners amongst others had also furnished their
respective caste certificate under the OBC category for consideration by the
selection committee and therefore they ought to have been selected to the
post of constable under the CRPF.
        4. Mr. A. Das, the learned CGC appearing for the respondents submits
that the petitioners failed to obtain marks above the cut-off range and
moreover, the caste certificate produce by the petitioners were not in the
                            Page 3 of 4
                                                            WP(C) 2652/2010

standard format prescribed by the advertisement No. 1 for the year 2008.
The format was clearly prescribed as annexure-2 of the advertisement. In
support of her submission, she refers to paragraph 8 of the affidavit-in-
opposition, whereby the respective marks obtain by the petitioners have been
highlighted. She therefore submits that in such a situation, the petitioners
having failed to obtain marks required as well as having failed to produce the
caste certificate in terms of the advertisement, the petitioners cannot have
any legitimate grievance for not being appointed.
        5. Mr. S. Borthakur, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
submits that had the caste certificate produced by the petitioners, more
particularly by the petitioner No. 4 if accepted, the petitioner No. 4 surely
would have been selected for the post.
        6. I have heard both the learned counsel appearing for the parties
and also perused the materials available in the records. The admitted position
is that the petitioners failed to obtain the minimum cut-off marks for the
category of the caste concerned. The cut-off for the OBC category has been
reflected as 45 marks while for the General category the cut-off is 53 marks.
With regard to the proposition that had the caste certificate of the petitioners
been accepted, at least, the petitioner No. 4 would have been selected for
the post, the same will be of no relevance at this juncture considering the
fact that the selection pertains to the year 2008 and writ petition having been
filed only 2010. Therefore, no positive direction can be issued at this stage.
Moreover, no interim relief was granted by this Court, when the notice was
issued.
        7. In that view of the matter, this writ petition fails and accordingly,
the same is dismissed. However, the petitioners would be at liberty to apply
for the post of constable in the CRPF as an when such posts are notified
subject to their fulfilment of the eligibility criteria as may be prescribed. With
the above observations, this writ petition is disposed of. No Cost.
                                                                         JUDGE
B. DEY
                            Page 4 of 4
                                                                WP(C) 2652/2010


