                     IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
 (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                      Writ Petition (C) No.3622/2015
1.Mr. Rajesh Kumar Ghosh
S/O Sri Dhirendra Kumar Ghosh
Vill-Goaltuli, PO & PS- Goalpara
Assam
2.Sri Bedanta Bikash Dutta
S/O Lt Lila Ram Dutta
Vill- Jolagaon, PO Keteka
Dist. Sibsagar, Assam
                                               …….Petitioner
                  -Versus-
1.The State of Assam
Represented by the Commissioner & Secretary
To the Govt. of Assam, Political (B) Department
Dispur
Guwahati-6
2.The Deputy Commissioner
Goalpara, Assam
3.The Additional Deputy Commissioner
Goalpara, Assam
4.The Treasury Officer, Goalpara Treasury
Goalpara, Assam
5.The Member, Foreigner Tribunal No.1
Goalpara, Assam
                                                    ……. Respondents
                                                          Page 1 of 9

                                    BEFORE
                 THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Petitioner                          : Ms. SP Hussain, Advocate.
For the Respondents                         : Mr. Y Doloi, Additional Advocate
                                               General
Date of Hearing                             :09.06.2017
Date of Judgment                            :21.06.2017
                         JUDGMENT AND ORDER( CAV)
                  Heard Ms. SP Hussain, learned counsel for the petitioner and
Mr. Y Doloi, learned Additional Advocate General for the respondents.
2.                Ms. SP Hussain, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
as the petitioner No.1 has already got the relief, cause of action survives only in
respect of the petitioner No.2. Therefore, only the case of petitioner No.2 shall
be examined and he shall be referred to as the petitioner for convenience
hereafter.
3.                The facts of the case in brief is that the petitioner was
appointed as orderly peon and attached to the Member, Foreigners Tribunal,
Goalpara w.e.f 1.7.2008 in the pay scale of Rs.2450-3670 per month vide order
       WP (C) No. 3622 of 2015                                  Page 2 of 9

dated 22.8.2008 (Annexure-2). The approval of the Finance was also accorded
for such appointment as can be seen from his communication made by the Under
Secretary to the Government of Assam, Finance (Budget) Department to the
Treasury Officer of Goalpara on 3.4.2009 (Annexure-3).
4.                 Since the office of the Member, Foreigners Tribunal at Goalpara
was functioning with the deputed staff from the establishment of the Deputy
Commissioner of the Goalpara, the Member of the said Tribunal wrote to the
Deputy Secretary, Goalpara, Political (B) Department on 17.6.2014 ( Annexure-5
A) to accord permission to recruit the peon and chowkidar by mentioning that it
was a sanctioned post against the establishment. Consequently, the Member,
Foreigners Tribunal at Goalpra vide order dated 27.2.2015 posted the petitioner
working as orderly peon to the post of office peon in the office of the Foreigners
Tribunal in his existing pay scale vide order dated 27.2.2015 (Annexure-7).
5.                 Thereafter, pending enquiry for the alleged illegal appointment
in   the  office   of  the   Member,     Foreigners  Tribunal,  Goalpara,   Deputy
Commissioner, Goalpara vide communication dated 1.6.2015 (Annexure-8) wrote
to the Treasury Officer, Goalpara not to pass salary bills in respect of the
petitioner posted as office peon.
6.                 Consequently, the petitioner not having received his salary
pursuant to the communication dated 1.6.2015 has approached this Court
through the instant writ petition.
         WP (C) No. 3622 of 2015                                Page 3 of 9

7.                 Against the writ petition, the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 have
filed their affidavit–in-opposition on 18.8.2015 whereby they have contended
that the Member of Foreigners Tribunal at Goalpara illegally appointed the
petitioner on 27.2.2015 on the eve of his retirement on 28.2.2015 which was a
Sunday and that too without any consultation with the Deputy Commissioner,
Goalpara who is otherwise the Chairman of the Selection Board. Therefore , the
Treasury Officer, Goalpara on 1.6.2015 was informed not to pass salary bills of
the petitioner pending finalization of the enquiry. The Deputy Commissioner also
entrusted the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Goalpara to enquire into the
illegal appointment in the establishment concerned vide letter dated 22.5.2015
and the enquiry concluded with the findings that the then Member, Foreigners
Tribunal, Goalpara illegally appointed the petitioner without observing due
procedure established by law and therefore the appointment of the petitioner on
27.2.2015 cannot be sustained. The enquiry report was submitted to the Deputy
Commissioner, Goalpara by the Additional Deputy Commissioner on 16.7.2015
with the findings that Sri NC Dutta, the then Member, Foreigners Tribunal-1
Goalpara posted the petitioner who was an orderly peon as peon of the
establishment on the last day of his retirement as 28.2.2015 was a Sunday and it
was without due process. It was therefore suggested that the Government in
political (B) Department be informed to cancel the posting immediately and fresh
recruitment process by following due procedure as prescribed be undertaken.
         WP (C) No. 3622 of 2015                               Page 4 of 9

8.                 The respondent No.5 also filed affidavit in opposition on
9.9.2015 contending inter-alia that the petitioner who was appointed as orderly
peon and attached to the Member, Foreigners Tribunal vide order dated
22.8.2008 and the post is coterminous with the tenure of the Member as
provided    under    the    Clause–U(d)    of   the   Assam    Foreigners    Tribunal
Establishment(Ministerial)Services,2012. Such appointment without constitution
of Selection committee and much less without consulting the Deputy
Commissioner is illegal and cannot be sustained.
9.                 Appearing for the writ petitioner Ms. SP Hussain submits that
the petitioner was not appointed as office peon but he was posted as such and
since his posting, he has been rendering his service as office peon to the post.
Although the enquiry board termed the petitioner’s appointment as illegal
appointment, petitioner is in fact still working as office peon despite not receiving
his salary ever since his appointment. She therefore submits that the petitioner is
liable to be paid his salary in terms of the work he has discharged as office peon.
She submits that as the petitioner has been rendering his service as office peon,
the respondents be directed to release the salary of the petitioner as office peon.
Despite the enquiry report submitted on 16.6.2015, the respondent authorities
have nevertheless utilized the service as office peon and the petitioner has not
been terminated from his service and is working till date. Ms. SP Hussain in
support of her submissions relied upon the decision of the Apex Court rendered
in the case of State of Punjab & Ors. –vs- Jagjit Singh & Ors reported in 2017 (1)
         WP (C) No. 3622 of 2015                                 Page 5 of 9

SCC 148 wherein the Apex Court in view of the discharging of similar dues by a
temporary employee with that of a regular employee, the parity of pay has to be
maintained.
10.               Appearing for the State respondents, Mr. Y Doloi, learned
Additional Advocate General on the other hand submits that the appointment of
the petitioner having not been routed through due process and such
appointment having been made by the Member of the Foreigners Tribunal on the
last day of his retirement, cannot be sustained. The substantive appointment of
the petitioner was as orderly peon at to which he was entitled to his salary as
per the salary fixed for orderly peon and that too till the Member concerned of
the Foreigners Tribunal was holding the office. Since the employment of the
orderly peon is co-terminus with the service of the Member, Foreigners Tribunal,
the petitioner was not allowed to continue in the illegal appointment as office
person. In that view of the matter, he submits that the Court may permit the
respondents to fill up the post of office peon on regular basis since the
appointment of the petitioner is illegal.
11.               In support of his submissions, the learned Additional Advocate
General Mr. Y Doloi referred to the decision of the Apex Court in the case of
Secretary, State of Karnataka & Others –vs- Uma Devi & Ors reported in 2006(
4) SCC 1 to contend that the concept of equal pay for equal work cannot be
pressed into service when the appointment to the post in question is without any
process of selection described in that regard. The petitioner under no
        WP (C) No. 3622 of 2015                               Page 6 of 9

circumstance can claim pay of a regular employee considering the illegal
appointment.
12.                I have considered the submissions made by the rival parties
and I have perused the materials available on record. At the outset what is to be
noticed is that despite the appointment and posting of the petitioner being
termed illegal, the petitioner has not been terminated from his service and he
admittedly continues to render his service as on date despite their being no such
order from this Court. This would indicate that the establishment of the Member,
Foreigners Tribunal in Goalpara is in need of the service of the office peon.
However, one cannot ignore the fact that the petitioner’s appointment/ posted as
office peon in the establishment was not preceded by any selection while the
procedure for such appointment is duly prescribed. The Deputy Commissioner is
the Chairman of the Selection Board for any appointment to be made in the
district and in the instant case, no consultation with the Selection Board or the
Deputy Commissioner was made by the then Member of the Foreigners Tribunal.
Therefore, it would be proper that the post of office peon as sanctioned by the
respondent authorities should be filled up by following due process of law as
envisaged in this regard. In that view of the matter, respondents, more
particularly, respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 are directed to initiate the process of
filling up the post of peon held by the writ petitioner as per procedure prescribed
immediately and the entire exercise shall be completed not later than 3 months
from the date of the receipt of the certified copy of this order. The petitioner
shall also be at liberty to participate in the selection process. In such even, the
         WP (C) No. 3622 of 2015                                 Page 7 of 9

respondent authorities concerned shall take into consideration his experience and
relaxation of age if so required.
13.                In view of the fact that the petitioner’s service has been
continued although without salary despite the fact that the enquiry concluded
with the findings that his appointment was illegal, the petitioner shall be allowed
to work till the post is filled up as has been directed.
14.                On the question of the salary entitled to the petitioner,
although he may have been irregularly appointed or posted to the post in
question but nevertheless, the petitioner undisputedly has been discharging the
duty of an office peon in absence of any pleadings or submissions to the
contrary. The Apex Court in the case of Jagjit Singh (supra) examined the
various decisions rendered by the Apex Court with regard to the absorption on
regularisation of employees who were otherwise not engaged after following due
process. The Apex Court at the same time examined the case of Uma Devi
(Supra) referred to by the learned Additional Advocate General. The Apex Court
observed that the Constitution Bench consciously distinguished the issue of pay
parity from the issue of absorption/ regularisation in service. It was held that on
the issue of pay parity, the High Court ought to have directed that the daily
wages workers be paid wages equal to the salary at the lowest Grade of their
cadre. The Constitution Bench expressed the view that concept of the equality
would not be applicable to the issue of absorption /regularisation in service.
Conversely on the subject of pay parity, it was unambiguously held that daily
wage should be equal to the salaries at the lowest grade (without any
        WP (C) No. 3622 of 2015                                  Page 8 of 9

allowances). Therefore taking the ratio of the decision laid down by the Apex
Court in the case of Jagjit Singh (supra), I find that the petitioner is entitled to
the pay scale of a regular office peon in the minimum regular scale of pay
attached to the post from the date of his appointment up to the date he is
retained in the post. The same shall however be subject to proper verification by
the respondent No. 5 of actual work performed as claimed by the petitioner.
15.               With the observations and directions, this writ petition stands
disposed of. No cost.
                                                            JUDGE
Nivedita
         WP (C) No. 3622 of 2015                                Page 9 of 9


