                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.3586 of 2017
                                     Rangagorah Fishermen Co-operative Society
                                     Limited, a registered Fishery Co-operative
                                     Society having its registered office at Guijan,
                                     Post Office- Rangagorah,
                                     District- Tinsukia, Assam
                                     Represented by its Secretary
                                     Sri Prassanna Das
                                     S/0- Late Parshuram Das
                                     Resident of Guijan
                                     Post Office- Rangagorah
                                     Police Station- Tinsukia, District- Tinsukia
                                                                 ............ Petitioner
                                            - Versus –
                                      The State of Assam and others
                                                                  ........ Respondents
                                            BEFORE
                       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioner:      Mr. N. Das. Adv
                       For the respondents:     Mr. S.P. Choudhury, State Counsel
                      Date of Hearing :        14.06.2017.
                      Date of Judgment:        14.06.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. N. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner.
      2.      A tender notice for sale of fisheries was issued by the Deputy
      Commissioner, Tinsukia by a Notice Inviting Tender dated 10.08.2016, for
      settlement of, amongst others, Dangari Nadi Part-I Fishery. The last date of
      receipt of tender was fixed on 29.08.2016.
      3.      By a communication dated 04.03.2017 of the Additional Deputy
      Commissioner, Tinsukia, the petitioner society was required to submit certain
WP(C) No.3586 of 2017                                                          Page 1 of 3

      additional documents on or before 10.03.2017 or else it was indicated that
      the bid of the petitioner would be rejected. Accordingly, by a communication
      dated 09.03.2017, the petitioner had submitted the required documents and
      thereafter by another communication dated 18.03.2017, the Deputy
      Commissioner, Tinsukia had forwarded the same to the Additional Secretary
      to the Government of Assam in the Fishery Department. Thereafter, the
      petitioner came to learn that the Secretary of one of the tenderer, namely,
      Dibru Dangari Part-I Meen Samabay Samity was illegally trying to include
      certain documents along with their bid, which was already submitted. Being
      aggrieved by the same, the petitioner had preferred a writ petition before this
      Court being WP(C) No.2798/2017, wherein notices had been issued.
      4.       It is the case of the petitioner that during the pendency of the said
      writ petition, the communication dated 12.05.2017 had been issued by the
      Additional Secretary to the Government of Assam, Fishery Department by
      which a decision had been conveyed that the earlier Notice Inviting Tender
      dated 18.03.2017 does not include certain major terms and conditions like
      deposition of earnest money of 15% of the bid value along with the tender,
      bakijai clearance certificate, actual fisherman certificate, PAN Card and also
      audited account of the Society. The petitioner assails the said communication
      dated 12.05.2017 on the ground that issuance of a fresh tender at this stage
      would prejudicially affected the earlier tenderers, which also includes the
      petitioner.
      5.       On the other hand, this Court is also of the prima-facie satisfaction
      that the inclusion of the said terms and conditions like depositing of earnest
      money of 15% of the bid value along with the tender, bakijai clearance
      certificate, actual fisherman certificate, PAN Card and also audited account of
      the Society are not extraneous documents and are relevant and vital for the
      purpose of determining the settlement.
      6.       In such view of the matter and also as agreed to by the learned State
      Counsel, this Court deems it appropriate that issuance of the fresh tender
      notice may prejudicially affect the vital interest of the tenderers, who had
      already submitted their tender bids. But at the same time, the requirements
      of including the aforesaid five documents are also found to be relevant
      documents for making a proper evaluation of the tendered bids. Further, it is
      also noticed that the requirements of the said five documents would be made
WP(C) No.3586 of 2017                                                          Page 2 of 3

      equally applicable in respect of all the bidders, who may have submitted their
      tendered bid pursuant to the Notice Inviting Tender dated 18.03.2011.
      7.      In such view of the matter, this Court does not find that the action of
      the departmental authorities in making the requirement of the said documents
      to be discriminatory or arbitrary. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the
      petitioner that the aforesaid documents were also earlier called for, but the
      learned counsel for the petitioner could not indicate anything that the earlier
      terms and conditions also required the said documents.
      8.      In such view of the matter, this Court is of the view that the ends of
      justice would be met if the respondent authorities are directed to issue an
      appropriate notification by providing a copy of the same to each and every
      tenderer requiring them to produce the aforesaid five documents and upon
      the said documents being produced, the same shall be considered to be part
      of the tendered bids of the respective tenderers.
      9.      In the event, any of the tenderer had already submitted the aforesaid
      five documents, the same also be construed to be included as a part of the
      tendered bid of the respective tenderer.
      10.     In terms of the above, the order dated 12.05.2017 of the Additional
      Chief Secretary stands modified to the extent that no fresh Notice Inviting
      Tender shall be issued and whereas the respective tenderers would be
      required to submit the aforesaid five documents and the same be included to
      be a part of the tendered bids of the tenderers.
      11.     Accordingly, the State respondent authorities shall bring the Notice
      Inviting Tender dated 18.03.2017 to its logical end on the basis of the
      tendered bids submitted by the tenderers and by including the aforesaid five
      documents indicated in the order dated 12.05.2017.
      12.     The aforesaid exercise be carried out within a period of three months
      from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
              In terms of the above, this writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                            JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.3586 of 2017                                                           Page 3 of 3


