                          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.3473 of 2010
                                     Smt. Mahamaya Nath
                                                                     ............ Petitioner
                                               - Versus –
                                      The Oriental Insurance Company and other
                                                                      ........ Respondents
                                            BEFORE
             HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioner:         Mr. S.K. Medhi, Sr. Adv
                       For the respondents:        Mr.S. Dutta, Sr. Adv
                       Date of Hearing :          02.08.2017.
                      Date of Judgment:          02.08.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. Mr. S.K. Medhi, learned senior counsel for the petitioner and
      Mr. S. Dutta, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent No.1 being
      the Insurance Company. The respondent No.2 being the permanent Lok
      Adalat, which is a judicial authority, is not required to be represented.
      2.      The petitioner is the registered owner of a vehicle of brand Mahindra
      Max bearing registration No.AS-10-4622. The said vehicle was duly insured
      with the respondent Insurance Company, bearing Policy No.31/2007/1170. On
      12.08.2006 at about 2.00 p.m., while the vehicle of the petitioner was
      proceeding from Patherkandi to Karimganj Town on the National Highway 44,
      it met with an accident near Kanishail-Powamara Tri Junction in the district of
      Karimganj. The accident had occurred due to some mechanical fault of the
      vehicle and in spite of best effort of the driver, the accident could not be
      averted. Consequent thereof, Karimganj Police Station Case No.363/2006 was
WP(C) No.3473 of 2010                                                              Page 1 of 4

      registered. The vehicle of the petitioner had sustained certain damages in the
      said accident and accordingly, the petitioner had to incur an expenditure of
      `1,25,000/- for repairing of the vehicle. Thereafter, the petitioner made a
      claim for payment of the aforesaid amount under the policy, which she had
      taken from the respondent Insurance Company. Along with the claim, the
      required documents like registration book, fitness certificate, pollution control
      certificate, MVI report, particulars of police case, driving license of the driver
      etc were also produced.
      3.       By a letter dated 09.03.2007, the respondent Insurance Company
      required the petitioner to submit photocopy of both the original as well as the
      renewed driving license of the driver. Accordingly, the petitioner by the letter
      dated 02.03.2007 had enclosed the photocopy of the driving license of the
      driver bearing License No.F/19208/C which was issued from the office of the
      District Transport Office (DTO), Silchar. As regards the old driving license, the
      petitioner stated that the same was surrendered at the time of renewal and
      therefore, it was not possible to submit a copy of the same.
      4.       By a letter of 29.03.2007, the Insurance Company writes to the
      petitioner informing that on a verification being made by the concerned
      authority, it was revealed that the original driving license was in the name of
      one Manik Khandakar and not in the name of Karan Singh, who was said to
      be the driver of the vehicle. The petitioner subsequently issued a legal notice
      dated 28.12.2007 and also filed a claim petition before the Permanent Lok-
      Adalat, Karimganj, who is a authority constituted u/s 22(B) of the Legal
      Services Authorities Act, 1987.
      6.       The claim of the petitioner was registered as PLA No.07/2008. As
      against the stand of the respondent authorities that the original driving license
      was in the name of one Manik Khandakar and not in the name of Karan Singh
      being the driver, the petitioner had taken a stand that the respondent
      Insurance Company had not provided the petitioner with a copy of the report
      on the basis of which such stand had been taken.
      7.       Be that as it may, based on the aforesaid claim of the petitioner, the
      Permanent Lok-Adalat by its judgment and order dated 23.12.2009 had
      rejected the claim of the petitioner for repudiating her claim under the
      Insurance Policy. As per the said judgment dated 23.12.2009, the reason for
WP(C) No.3473 of 2010                                                            Page 2 of 4

      which the claim of the petitioner was rejected was that the original driving
      license issued by the DTO, Kamrup was in the name of one Manik Khandakar
      and not in the name of Karan Singh, who was in fact driving the vehicle at the
      time of the accident. Accordingly, the Permanent Lok-Adalat was of the view
      that the owner of the vehicle is required to prove that the owner had
      employed a driver having a valid license and in case of renewal of driving
      license if the original driving license was in the name of different person, the
      subsequent issuance of driving license by authority will not make the renewed
      driving license genuine. Accordingly, the Permanent Lok-Adalat had taken the
      view that the renewed driving license of the driver produced by the petitioner
      was a fake license.
      8.      It is noticed that the Permanent Lok-Adalat had not arrived at any
      conclusion as to whether the said renewed driving license of the driver of the
      petitioner was genuinely issued by the appropriate authority of the DTO,
      Silchar or the same license had been obtained by the driver of the petitioner
      through manipulation.
      9.      Unless a license had not been genuinely issued by the DTO, Silchar,
      the said license cannot be called to be a fake license. In order for a license to
      be called fake, it is necessary that the license had been procured from any
      other source other than the appropriate source being the DTO, Silchar.
      10.     Merely because the renewed driving license of the driver had
      contained a reference of the earlier driving license and such reference of the
      earlier driving license does not pertain to the concerned driver, the same by
      itself would not be a conclusive enough to conclude that the renewed driving
      license of the driver of the petitioner was a fake driving license.
      11.     In such view of the matter and as also agreed to by the learned senior
      counsel for the petitioner and the respondent Insurance Company, this Court
      is of the view that the interest of justice would be met if the matter is
      remanded back to the Permanent Lok-Adalat for a proper adjudication as to
      whether the renewed driving license of the driver of the petitioner as
      submitted before the Permanent Lok-Adalat was genuinely issued by the
      authority of the DTO, Silchar or not.
WP(C) No.3473 of 2010                                                            Page 3 of 4

      12.     Accordingly, on being remanded, the Permanent Lok-Adalat shall take
      an exercise to obtain the required evidence from the parties, if necessary by
      examining the appropriate authority in the office of the DTO, Silchar and also
      by verifying the original records as to whether the renewed license issued to
      the driver of the petitioner Karan Singh had been genuinely issued or the
      same is a manufactured or manipulated one. Depending upon the outcome of
      such enquiry, the Permanent Lok-Adalat would pass its order in the given
      case.
      13.     Let the LCR be send back immediately.
      14.      The parties are directed to appear before the Permanent Lok-Adalat
      on 01.09.2017.
      15.     As the matter has been remanded back for fresh adjudication by
      taking appropriate evidence as indicated above, the earlier judgment and
      order dated 23.12.2009 of the Permanent Lok-Adalat, Karimganj in PLA Case
      No.07/2008 is hereby set aside.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                           JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.3473 of 2010                                                         Page 4 of 4


