                     IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
 (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     Writ Petition (C) No.3039/2016
Mr. Nirmal Roy Choudhury
S/O of Late Rajkeswar Roy
Resident of Jyotinagar (West)
PS-Chandmari, Dist.Guwahati-21
Kamrup(M), Assam
                                              …….Petitioner
                -Versus-
1.The State of Assam
Represented by the Commissioner and Secretary to the
Government of Assam, Public Heath Engineering Department
Assam Sachibalaya, Dispur, Guwahati-6
Kamrup(M).
2.The Chief Engineer, Public Heath Engineering(P)
Hengrabari, Department
Dispur, Guwahati-6
Kamrup(M).
3. The Executive Engineer, Public Heath Engineering
Guwahati Division No.II, Bamunimaidam, Guwahati-21
PS Chandmari, Kamrup(M).
4. The Assistant Executive Engineer,
Public Heath Engineering
Dispur Sub- Division, Guwahati-6
PS Chandmari, Kamrup(M).
5. The Junior Engineer,
Site in-Charge, Public Heath Engineering
Capital Water Supply Scheme, Dispur, Guwahati-6
PS Chandmari, Kamrup(M) Assam
                                              ……. Respondents
                                                         Page 1 of 7

                                       BEFORE
                  THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Petitioner                             : Mr. S Sharma, Advocate.
For the Respondents                            : Mr. PN Goswami, Standing
                                               Counsel, PHE.
Date of Hearing                                : 12.06.2017
Date of Judgment                               : 12.06.2017
                           JUDGMENT AND ORDER( ORAL)
                   Heard Mr. S Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the writ
petitioner and Mr. PN Goswami, learned Standing Counsel for the Public Health
Engineering Department.
2.                 By this writ petition, the petitioner has sought for a direction to
the respondents to release his current salary as well as the arrear salaries at the
revised rates being recommended by the Pay Commissions and given to all the
employees of the State and regularisation of his leave period under the relevant
provisions of the State Leave Rules and Fundamental Rules. The petitioner has
also sought for a direction for his promotion from the post of Sub-Engineer
Grade-II to the post of Sub-Engineer Grade-I w.e.f. the date his junior has been
W.P( C) No.3039 of 2016
                                                                    Page 2 of 7

promoted. The petitioner has also sought for adequate compensation on account
of losing his right eye vision completely due to the negligence of the respondent
authorities. It is may be noticed herein that the petitioner is currently holding the
post of Sub-Engineer of Grade-II in the office of the Executive Engineer, Public
Health Engineering , Guwahati Division No.2.
3.                  In response to the writ petition, the respondent PHE
Department filed their affidavit-in-opposition on 3.8.2016 and thereafter the
petitioner filed his re-joinder affidavit on 17.2.2017.
4.                  Appearing for the writ petitioner, Mr. S Sharma, the learned
counsel submits that the petitioner has not received his salary since the month of
March, 2008 till date. He submits that although the petitioner submitted leave
applications from time to time for his medical treatment, the respondents have
failed to regularize his leave period and as a result,     he has been denied his
salary. The learned counsel further submits that when the petitioner joined his
post after his medical treatment, respondent authorities still continued to mark
him as ‘absent ‘ from duty. Therefore grave injustice has been caused to the writ
petitioner. He therefore submits that the respondent authorities should be
directed to regularize his leave period and pay him his due salaries both current
and arrear along with all other reliefs that he has prayed in his writ petition.
W.P( C) No.3039 of 2016
                                                                    Page 3 of 7

5.                  Appearing for the respondent, PHE Department, the learned
Standing Counsel Mr. PN Goswami submits that the petitioner has been most
irregular in performing his duty in the department. The petitioner is in the habit
of taking leave by submitting applications and he used to proceed on leave even
before permission is granted by the respondent authorities. Time and again, the
petitioner was duly informed and warned that if he continued to repeat such
irregularities, disciplinary action would be taken against him. However, despite
such warnings, the petitioner continued to remain off and on from his duty
without proper authorisation. Consequently, the petitioner was issued a show
cause notice on 14.8.2009 ( Annexure-61) whereby charges were drawn up
against him for specific period in which he remained absent from duty
unauthorisedly. The show cause notice was issued under Rule 9 of the Assam
Civil Services (Disciplines and Appeals) Rules, 1964 read with Section 311 of the
Constitution of India requiring him to show cause within 10 days as to why any
of the penalty under Rule 7 of the Rules should not be inflicted upon him. Along
with the show cause notice, the statements of allegations, list of witnesses and
documents were also enclosed. The petitioner was given 7 days’ time to inspect
the documents which were proposed to be examined during the enquiry. Mr. PN
Goswami, learned Standing Counsel submits that pursuant to the show cause
notice, the petitioner submitted his reply on 13.11.2009 ( Annexure-71). Since
the petitioner was not placed under suspension, petitioner was required to
continue attending the office to perform his duty but however since the
petitioner refrained from attending the office, explanation for unauthorized
W.P( C) No.3039 of 2016
                                                                 Page 4 of 7

absent from duty was issued to him on 23.11.2011 (Annexure-76) and to which
the petitioner submitted his reply on 30.12.2011 (Annexure-74). He submits that
on several occasions, dates were given for conducting hearing in the
departmental enquiry, but, however the petitioner invariably for one pretext or
the other, failed to participate and appear in the date fixed. He further submits
that although petitioner submitted his report for duty on 6.6.2014 and 19.6.2014,
the petitioner did not actually join his post for duty and continued to remain
absent. The learned counsel further submits that while his department was
contemplating finalization of the enquiry process, the petitioner in spite of
cooperating with the enquiry process approached this Court through the instant
writ petition and therefore, the enquiry proceeding could not be finalised.
6.                 Mr. S Sharma, learned counsel for the writ petitioner on the
other hand submits that the petitioner’s absence is duly justified by medical
examination report as well as explanation which was submitted to the authorities
concerned. Despite the petitioner having submitted his joining report, the
respondent authorities have failed to acknowledge the same and have been
always marking him ‘absent’. Therefore, in such situation, there is no action for
the petitioner to join his post and resume his duty while at the same time his
salaries have been withheld from him.
7.                 I have considered the submissions advanced by the learned
counsel for the parties. I have also perused the materials available on record.
W.P( C) No.3039 of 2016
                                                                  Page 5 of 7

Granting the prayer of the writ petitioner in the given circumstance would
amount to allowing the writ petition without there being any conclusion in the
departmental proceedings initiated by the department as may be noticed herein
above. The various documents referred to by the writ petitioner and the
documents relied upon by the respondents would require meticulous examination
which in my considered opinion can only be exercised in a proper departmental
enquiry. In that view of the matter instead of dwelling upon the various
documents presented before this Court, the writ petition is disposed of with the
following directions:-
     (i)           The respondent Department will proceed with the enquiry
            proceedings from the stage of the show cause notice dated 14.8.2009
            issued to the writ petitioner and the writ petitioner shall submit his
            reply to the same afresh in terms of the notice within 10 days and the
            petitioner shall also be permitted to examine and inspect all
            documents proposed to be relied upon in the enquiry proceedings.
     (ii)          The petitioner shall join his post immediately and the
            respondent authorities shall examine the admitted dues pending
            against his salary . He shall be entitled to his salary otherwise from
            the date of his joining to his post.
     (iii)         Considering the fact that the petitioner is due to superannuate
            in the month of December, 2017, the Departmental authorities shall
W.P( C) No.3039 of 2016
                                                                   Page 6 of 7

            conduct the enquiry proceedings as expeditiously as possible and
            within the outer limit of 3 months.
    (iv)           The enquiry proceedings shall commence immediately from the
            date of receipt of a certified copy of this order. It is also hereby
            provided that the petitioner will be allowed to put his signature in
            attendance register and he in turn shall give full co-operation in the
            enquiry proceedings.
    8.             With the above directions and observations, the writ petition
    stands disposed of.
                                                           JUDGE
Nivedita
W.P( C) No.3039 of 2016
                                                                  Page 7 of 7


