                          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.3098 of 2014
                                     Haji Mofur Ali Barbhuiya
                                                                  ............   Petitioner
                                            - Versus –
                                      The Power Grid Corporation of India & others
                                                                        ....... Respondents
                                            BEFORE
                        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioner:                  Ms. S.B. Choudhury, Adv
                       For the respondents:                 Mr. S.K. Medhi, Sr Adv.
                                                            Mr. D. Nath, State Counsel
                       Date of Hearing & Judgment :         25.07.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Ms. S.B. Choudhury, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. S.K.
      Medhi, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent Power Grid
      Corporation of India being the respondent Nos. 1 and 3 and Mr. D.Nath,
      learned Additional Senior Government Advocate appearing for the respondent
      Nos. 4 and 5. It is stated by the parties that the respondent No.2, the APDCL
      had wrongly been arrayed as a respondent in this writ petition and as such,
      the said respondent need not be heard for the purpose of adjudicating this
      writ petition.
      2.      The petitioner is an owner and possessor of a plot of land measuring 7
      bighas in village Nishchintapur, Lala Road in the district of Hailakandi. The
      said land had been given on lease for a period of 30 years to a trust for
      constructing and operating a residential school by the name of Spring Valley
      Central School. For the purpose, a deed dated 22.07.2010 was executed
WP(C) No.3098 of 2014                                                              Page 1 of 6

      between the parties. It is stated that since then the school had been made
      operational and it has been successfully running with about more than 500
      students and staffs.
      3.      It is the case of the petitioner that while the school was being so
      operated, the respondent Power Grid Corporation of India had erected a
      tower for transmission of 400 KV power line over the land of the petitioner
      and that the said power line is located within 10 to 12 meters from the
      concerned school. It is stated that the school has a large number of students
      as well as staffs and there is also a girl’s hostel in the northern side of the
      school, apart from plantations and other available trees.
      4.      It is the case of the petitioner that before the installation of the tower,
      the petitioner had made several objections/representations before the
      respondent authorities, but the respondent authorities did not give a due
      consideration to the same. It is stated that one such representation is dated
      26.02.2014 made before the respondent No.4, which is still pending.
      5.       On a perusal of the said representation dated 26.02.2014, it is noticed
      that one of the grounds taken therein is that the distance between the school
      and that of the over head power line would be about 10 to 12 meters. It is
      also stated that the petitioner school authorities desire to construct a girl’s
      hostel on the northern side of the available land and the said construction
      would be just under the over head power line. A grievance has also been
      raised that although at the time of construction of the tower, the petitioner
      had raised objections and the respondent authorities had assured that
      adequate compensation will be paid, but no such compensation was paid to
      the petitioner. It is also stated that because of the operation of the over head
      power line, the guardians of the students of the school are not willing to
      further admit their children in the school and as a result of the same, the
      petitioner had suffered a huge loss. In the aforesaid premises, this writ
      petition has been preferred for a direction to the respondent authorities to
      pay an adequate compensation to the petitioner for the purported huge
      financial loss that they had incurred because of the installation of the
      overhead power line for transmission of 400 KV of tower.
WP(C) No.3098 of 2014                                                              Page 2 of 6

      6.      The respondent Power Grid Corporation of India on the other hand
      had filed an affidavit in opposition, wherein in paragraph-6, it had been stated
      that after the survey of the land in question was completed in the year 2010
      and all preparations were made for payment of compensation under the
      Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Indian Electricity Act, 2003, the petitioner
      had been creating a problem in exercise of the right of way by demanding
      exorbitant compensation and as a result of such obstruction, the construction
      of the overhead power line could be completed only in the year 2013.
      7.        In paragraph-7, a stand has been taken that in any view of the
      matter, the boundary wall of the school is located at a distance of 35 meters
      from the center of the transmission line and to that effect a sketch map has
      also been annexed. It is also stated that the actual location of the school
      premises is situated in the southern side of the plot of land in question and it
      is much further away from the transmission line.
      8.      Further stand has been taken that as per the provisions of the Indian
      Electricity Act, 2003 and the rules framed there-under, the right of way (RoW)
      for erecting an overhead power line is 23 meters on either side of the center
      of the line and in the instant case, the boundary wall of the petitioner’s school
      is located much beyond the required 23 meters. It is stated that in such view
      of the matter, the concerned school is located outside the right of way
      corridor of the overhead power line in question and therefore, under the
      provisions of the Indian Electricity Act, 2003, no compensation is payable to
      the school in question.
      9.      In the affidavit in reply, the petitioner takes a stand that although he
      had raised an objection regarding the installation of an electricity tower by the
      respondent corporation, the said objection had not been given its due
      consideration. A stand has also been taken that the respondent authorities as
      per their own admission had stated that consideration for payment of
      compensation had been made under the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and
      Indian Electricity Act, 2003 and therefore, the said respondents now cannot
      deny the entitlement of the petitioner for receiving compensation.
      10.     On a reading of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, it is noticed that
      Section 16(1) of the Act provides that if the exercise of the powers mentioned
      in section 10 in respect of property referred to in clause (d) of that section is
WP(C) No.3098 of 2014                                                            Page 3 of 6

      resisted or obstructed, the District Magistrate may, in his discretion, order that
      the telegraph authority shall be permitted to exercise them. Section 16(2)
      further provides that if, after the making of an order under sub section (1),
      any person resists the exercise of those powers, or does not give all facilities
      for the power to be exercised, he shall be deemed to have committed an
      offence under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code. The further provisions of
      the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 is that under section 16(3), if any dispute
      arises concerning the sufficiency of the compensation to be paid under section
      10, clause (d), an application for that purpose, by either of the disputing
      parties would be maintainable before the District Judge of the concerned
      jurisdiction for appropriate determination.
      11.     In view of the aforesaid provisions of Section 16 of the Indian
      Telegraph Act, 1885, the relevant provision of the law is that when an
      overhead power line is sought to be erected by the concerned authority, no
      person, be it the owner of the land can either resist or obstruct to such
      construction and in the event of such resistance or obstruction be made, it
      would be for the District Magistrate to exercise his jurisdiction to allow the
      concern authority to go ahead with the construction. If, even after exercising
      such discretion by the District Magistrate, the concerned person still further
      resists such construction, such act shall be deemed to be an offence under
      Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code.
      12.     In view of such stringent provisions of Section 16(1) and (2) of the
      Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, this Court is of the considered view that the
      owner of the land, like that of the petitioner, cannot obstruct or object to the
      construction of an overhead power line.
      13.     In such view of the matter, one of the contention raised by the
      petitioner that in spite of several objections being made, the same was not
      given its due consideration is found to be unacceptable.
      14.     The aforesaid view of this Court also finds place in paragraph-21 of
      the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, rendered in Pow er Grid
      Corporation of India Lim ited –vs- Century Tex tiles and Industries
      Lim ited and others , reported in (2017) 5 SCC 143 . In paragraph-21 of
      the said decision, the Hon’ble Supreme Court, inter-alia, expressed the view
      that all such powers which are vested in a telegraph authority under the
WP(C) No.3098 of 2014                                                            Page 4 of 6

      provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 including power to eliminate any
      obstruction in installation of power transmission lines is also available to the
      authority installing the overhead power line. The Hon’ble Supreme Court also
      was of the view that the legislature having not permitted any kind of
      impediment/obstruction in achieving this objective, the scheme of the Indian
      Telegraph Act, 1885, is also applicable in respect of erecting the overhead
      power line.
      15.      In such view of the matter, the paragraph-21 of the judgment of the
      Hon’ble Supreme Court has to be interpreted in a manner that it is a statutory
      provision of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 that a concerned person is not
      empowered to either cause impediment or obstruct the installation of an
      overhead power line and therefore, any objection to the installing of such line
      would not be maintainable.
      16.      Another aspect of the matter as referred in paragraph-26 of the
      aforesaid judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court is regard to shifting of the
      overhead power line, which had already been established. The Hon’ble
      Supreme Court was of the view that it is apparent that not only it was
      unfeasible to change the alignment and that such overhead power line had to
      be in a straight line to the extent possible for eliminating loss of transmission.
      But, such considerations can be raised only at a stage before the overhead
      power lines are being erected, so as to enable the authorities to explore the
      feasibility of a change in the alignment.
      17.      The Hon’ble Supreme Court was also of the view that electricity lines
      are usually drawn over agricultural land, where minimum lands are utilized for
      erecting the towers and the agricultural activities are not prejudiced and only
      where it becomes inevitable that towers are placed on private lands. Such
      view of the Hon’ble Supreme Court also leads us to a conclusion that it is not
      wholly impermissible to locate the towers and the overhead power lines over
      any private land, provided the technical aspects so require.
      18.      It is noticed that no such specific stand had been taken by the
      petitioner at a stage prior to the installation of the overhead power line for
      requiring the respondent authorities to change the alignment.
WP(C) No.3098 of 2014                                                            Page 5 of 6

      19.      The only statutory remedy made available to a prospective land
      owner, who may suffer any damage because of the installation of the over
      head line is to claim for appropriate compensation under section 16(3) of the
      Indian Telegraph Act, 1885. In the instant case, the second prayer in the writ
      petition is that appropriate compensation be paid to the petitioner keeping in
      view the huge financial loss that may have suffered due to drawl of over head
      electricity line.
      20.      In view of the statement made by the petitioner that appropriate
      compensation had not been paid to the petitioner although he has suffered
      damage, it is provided that the writ petitioner shall file an appropriate
      application before the District Judge having competent jurisdiction over the
      matter under section 16(3) of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and upon such
      application being filed, the said application would be given its due
      consideration by following the due procedure of law including the procedure
      of hearing the petitioner/claimant as well as the respondent Power Grid
      Corporation of India.
               In terms of the above, the writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                            JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.3098 of 2014                                                         Page 6 of 6


