                          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM : NAGALAND : MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                WP(C) 4016/2012
                 Sri Rajesh Shah
                                                                  ……..Petitioner
                         - VER SUS -
                 The State of Assam & Ors.
                                                                  ………Respondents
                                         BEFORE
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
         Advocate for the petitioners :-Ms. R. Jain
         Advocate for the respondent PWD:- Mr. G. Pegu
         Date of hearing & judgment:- 02.08.2017
                              JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
 Heard Ms. R. Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. G. Pegu, learned
 state counsel for the respondent PWD.
 2.      Oil India Ltd., and the respondent authorities in the PWD had entered into a
 Memorandum       of   Understanding   (MOU)    dated  26.02.2011   for  repairing  and
 strengthening of a portion the road Bor-Ali (5.64 kms in length) from        NH 37 at
 Gaurisagar. As per the said MOU, the Oil India Ltd. agreed to provide the respondent
 PWD with an estimated cost amounting to Rs.1,76,54,365/- for the purpose of repairing
 and strengthening of the concerned road. Consequent thereto, a notice inviting tender
 dated 11.02.2011 was issued by the Chief Engineer, PWD (Roads) for repairing and
 strengthening of the aforesaid road which was divided in the two chainages which were
 marked as Group-I and Group-II.
                                                                  Page 1 of 3

3.      As per the NIT, the required period for completion was three months.
Consequent to the aforesaid tender process, the petitioner was issued with a formal
work order dated 23.05.2011 and immediately thereafter, he had mobilized his
resources for proceeding with the work . But the timing of the work order was such that
it was issued on the verge of the onset of the rainy reason during which, it was neither
feasible nor possible to carry out the earth work which was required to be performed
and even if such earth work is done, the same would be subjected to being washed
away in the rain.
4.      Hence, it is the case of the petitioner that it was due to circumstances beyond
his control that he could not perform the work within the stipulated period of three
months.
5.      In this writ petition, the petitioner is aggrieved by a letter dated 26.07.2012 by
which, the Executive Engineer PWD, Sivasagar Rural Roads Division had taken a view
that there was no progress in the work awarded to the petitioner and that the petitioner
had stopped the work for more than 3 ½ months. Accordingly, a compensation for delay
being an amount equal to 10% of the estimated cost was imposed on the petitioner. By
the said order, the petitioner was also directed to personally attend or depute an
authorized representative at the work site for recording final measurement.
6.      It is stated by Ms. Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner that the aforesaid work
allotted to the petitioner is also governed by the special conditions of contract and that
the special conditions of contract provides for a procedure for dispute resolution in the
event of therebeing is a dispute between the contractor and the PWD authorities, as
regards the performance of any work. The procedure for dispute resolution as provided
in the special condition of contract provides that the dispute resolution shall be carried
out through the process of arbitration in accordance with the procedure as laid down in
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act of 1996 and that the dispute be referred to the
                                                                      Page 2 of 3

arbitrator within 30 days as per the procedure laid down in the F2 form. The procedure
for dispute resolution also further provides as to what procedure is to be adopted for
appointment of an arbitrator as well as number of arbitrators to be appointed.
7.      In view of such provision for dispute resolution, learned counsel for the petitioner
submits that interest of justice would be met, if the petitioner is allowed to approach the
arbitrator for an appropriate resolution of the dispute involved in this writ petition.
        Mr. G. Pegu, learned state counsel does not have any objection to such proposal
of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
8.      Accordingly, as agreed by the parties, this petition stand disposed of by providing
that the petitioner would be at liberty to approach for a arbitration proceeding as
provided under the procedure for dispute resolution contained in the special condition of
contract.
        Writ petition stands disposed of.
        Interim order, if any, passed earlier stands vacated.
                                                                                      JUDGE
Anamika
                                                                      Page 3 of 3


