                          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                       WP(C) No.407 of 2017
                                      Dr. Akhil Ch Kalita
                                                                    ............ Petitioner
                                              - Versus –
                                       The State of Assam and others
                                                                     ........ Respondents
                                              BEFORE
                         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                        For the petitioner:       Mr. S.K. Medhi, Sr. Adv
                        For the respondents:      Mr. B. Kaushik, SC, Education Dept.
                                                  Mr. B. Chakrabarty, Adv
                        Date of Hearing :        09.06.2017.
                        Date of Judgment:       09.06.2017.
                           JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
               Heard Mr. S.K. Medhi, learned senior counsel for the petitioner, Mr. B.
      Kaushik, learned Standing Counsel for Higher Education Department and Mr.
      B. Chakrabarty, learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 3 and 4,
      being the Governing Body of the Lumding College.
      2.       Pursuant to an advertisement dated 02.02.2016, inviting applications,
      inter-alia, for the post of Assistant Professor in the Hindi Department of the
      Lumding College, the petitioner had participated in the selection process. The
      petitioner was aggrieved by the allotment of 05(five) marks to one of the
      candidate namely, Dr. Bind Kumar Chauhan in respect of teaching experience.
      It was the case of the petitioner that while the petitioner had secured a total
      mark of 61.40, the said Dr. Bind Kumar Chauhan had secured 62.95 marks. If
      the 05(five) marks allotted to Bind Kumar Chauhan is held to have given
WP(C) No.407 of 2017                                                              Page 1 of 3

      illegally and the same is deducted, the petitioner would be the first candidate
      in order of merit.
      3.       Accordingly, the petitioner had preferred an earlier writ petition being
      WP(C) No.6538/2016, which was disposed of by the order dated 04.11.2016.
      In the said order of 04.11.2016, it was provided that the issuance of
      appointment order by the Director is not an empty formality and the Director
      while passing such order is required to scrutinize the selection record and only
      upon the satisfaction, he is to issue the consequential appointment order.
      Accordingly, the matter was remanded back to the Director of Higher
      Education for due consideration.
      4.       Consequently, the Director of Higher Education had passed the order
      dated 28.12.2016, wherein it had been held that the 05(five) marks awarded
      to Dr. Bind Kumar Chauhan is deleted and the entire selection is altered. But
      at the same time, the Director had also provided that he had withheld the
      approval and directed the college authorities to hold re-interview amongst the
      candidates who had responded to the earlier advertisement of the college.
      5.       This writ petition is preferred by the writ petitioner being aggrieved by
      the aforesaid provision in the order dated 28.12.2016, by which the Director
      had directed the college authorities to hold re-interview amongst the
      candidates, who had responded to the earlier advertisement.
      6.       The College authorities on the other hand had filed an affidavit in
      opposition, wherein a stand had been taken that on the deletion of the
      05(five) marks being awarded to Dr. Bind Kumar Chauhan, the writ petitioner
      automatically becomes the first candidate in the merit. It is further stated that
      if the interview is held once again amongst those candidates, who had
      responded to the earlier advertisement, nothing will change as regards the
      marks allotted to the respective candidates.
      7.       It is also taken into consideration that presently the selection is made
      on the basis of the marks obtained by the respective candidates in their
      qualifying examination and therefore, the evaluation is quantified and
      objective and not open to any discretion on the part of the Selection
      Committee. In such view of the matter, the stand of the Governing Body is
      found to be correct that nothing will be changed, if the re-interview is held as
WP(C) No.407 of 2017                                                             Page 2 of 3

      directed by the Director. Further it is also seen that the direction of the
      Director to hold the re-interview is without any basis.
      8.       A re-interview may be permissible in the circumstance when the
      illegality committed in the earlier interview cannot be segregated and isolated
      and no remedial measure can be taken. But when it is the case of the Director
      himself that the 05(five) marks has to be deleted from the marks awarded to
      Dr. Bind Kumar Chauhan, no discernible reason is made out as to why a re-
      interview should be held.
      9.       In such view of the matter, this writ petition is disposed of by directing
      the Director to send the matter back to the Governing Body to act accordingly
      by taking into consideration that 05(five) marks awarded to Dr. Bind Kumar
      Chauhan had been deleted from the marks awarded to him.
      10.      Upon the matter being remanded back, the Governing Body shall
      proceed in the matter and bring the selection process to its logical end. The
      aforesaid requirement be carried out within a period of two months from the
      date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
               In terms of the above, the writ petition stands closed.
                                                                               JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.407 of 2017                                                             Page 3 of 3


