                                                WP(C) No.4456 of 2017
                                 BEFORE
          HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
             HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
31.7.2017
(Ajit Singh, C.J.)
        Mr. B Choudhury, learned counsel for the petitioners.
        Mr.D Saikia, learned Senior Additional Advocate General,
        Assam assisted by Mr. P Nayak, learned for Respondent No.4
        and Mr. RK Talukdar, learned counsel for Respondent No.6.
        The petitioners were appointed as Support Staff in the Fast
Track Courts, which were established under a Scheme. Their
appointments were made in terms of the requirement of the Scheme.
It is to be noted that initially the Fast Track Courts were established
for 5 years, but they have been made to continue. The State
Government also later vide Notification dated 29.9.2012 made 20
existing Fast Track Courts as regular courts of Additional District and
Sessions Judges and created various posts for proper functioning of
such courts.
        Some of the similarly situated employees of the Fast Track
Courts filed WP(C) No.5153/2010 for regularisation of their services
against the newly created posts, but the Division Bench of this High
Court, vide order dated 20.12.2012, disagreed with them and
disposed of the writ petition with certain directions. The order dated
20.12.2012 was then challenged in Special Leave Petition to Appeal
(Civil) No.12560/2013 before the Supreme Court, which was
dismissed as withdrawn, vide order dated 12.4.2013, but with a
liberty to file review petition on a limited issue. In the result, the
Review Petition No.82/2013 was filed.
        On 16.12.2016, for amicable settlement of dispute of the
review petitioners therein, the learned Senior Additional Advocate
General made the following offer:-
                                                            page 1 of 3

        i)       That their services will not be dispensed with (but for
        disciplinary action) till they attain the age of superannuation;
        ii)      That they will be paid wages minimum of the regular
        pay scale;
        iii)     That at the time of superannuation, they will be
        brought under Medical Insurance Scheme.
        But only Condition Nos. (i) & (ii) of the offer of settlement was
accepted by the review petitioners and as such, vide order dated
23.1.2017, this court directed the State Government as under:-
        “That the services of 8 petitioners mentioned above will not be
        dispensed with (but for disciplinary action) by the State
        Government till they attain the age of superannuation and that
        they shall be paid minimum wages of the regular pay scale
        from March, 2017 onwards.”
        On the same date, a liberty was sought on behalf of the
Review Petitioners for making a representation to the State
Government for extending the benefit of pension to them and
counting of their past services for computing the pensionary dues and
also for grant of medical benefit during the period they are in service.
And for this liberty, the learned Senior Additional Advocate General,
Assam, had fairly agreed. Accordingly, by the same order, liberty was
given to the review petitioners to make a representation to the
competent authority within two months for extending the benefit of
pension to them and counting of their past services for computing the
pensionary dues and also for grant of medical benefit during the
period they are in service with the direction that competent authority
shall decide the same by a speaking order within 3 months from the
date of receipt of representation.
        The submission of the present petitioners is that their case be
also decided in terms of the above mentioned directions given vide
order dated 23.1.2017. To this prayer, the learned Senior Additional
Advocate General has readily agreed. We, accordingly, finally dispose
of the present petition with the following directions:-
                                                                page 2 of 3

     That the services of petitioners shall not be dispensed with
    (but for disciplinary action) by the State Government till they
    attain the age of superannuation and that they shall be paid
    wages of the regular pay scale from September, 2017
    onwards.    We    also   direct the   petitioners to   make     a
    representation within 2 months from today to the competent
    authority for extending the benefit of pension to them and
    counting of their past services for computing the pensionary
    dues and also for grant of medical benefit during the period
    they are in service and the competent authority shall decide
    the representation by a speaking order within 3 months from
    the date of its receipt.
           JUDGE                                 CHIEF JUSTICE
skd
                                                         page 3 of 3


