                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
 (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                     Writ Petition (C) No.4415/2010
Mr. Dulu Kumar Gogoi
S/O Sri Keshab Gogoi
R/O-Dhalbama, Mainak Horong
Gorchuk, Guwahati-35
Dist Kamrup, Assam
                                               …….Petitioner
                 -Versus-
1.The State of Assam
Represented by the Chief Secretary
Govt. of Assam, Dispur
Guwahati-6
2.Chairman
Assam Mineral Development Corporation Ltd.
Ganeshguri, Near Sahjahan Market
Guwahati-6
3. The Managing Director,
Assam Mineral Development Corporation Ltd.
Ganeshguri, Near Sahjahan Market
Guwahati-6
4. The Principal Secretary
Mines and Mineral Department
                                                     ……. Respondents
                                 BEFORE
                THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Petitioner                      : Mr. SK Barkataky, Advocate.
For the Respondents                     : Mr. M Choudhury, Advocate
                                                          Page 1 of 13

Date of Hearing                               : 09.06.2017
Date of Judgment                              : 16.06.2017
                         JUDGMENT AND ORDER( CAV)
1.                Heard Mr. SK Barkataki, learned counsel for the petitioner and
Mr. M Choudhury, learned counsel for the respondents.
2.                The case of the writ petitioner in brief is that he was serving as
Senior Field Assistant under the Assam Mineral Development Corporation and
after rendering about 23 years of service, he was dismissed from service on
12.3.2010 after departmental proceeding was drawn against him.
3.                The facts leading to his termination is that a show cause notice
vide Memo No. AMDC/ET/93/2267 dated 24.1.2008 was issued to the petitioner
and thereafter another show cause notice vide Memo No.AMDC/ET/93/949 dated
10.7.2008 (Annexure-1) was issued to him under Rule 9 of the Assam Services
(Disciplines and Appeals) Rules 1964 read with Section 311 of the Constitution of
India asking him to show cause as to why the penalty prescribed in Rule 7 of the
aforesaid Rules should not be inflicted upon him on the following charges-
                         “ That on 12th June, 2008 you entered into the office
               chamber of the Managing Director, Assam Mineral Development
               Corporation at about 11 a.m. without permission and charged MD
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                   Page 2 of 13

               why your application for CPF advance had not been forwarded to
               the office of the RCPF till date and misbehaved the MD in
               presence of the Office Superintendent and a Senior Assistant who
               were present in the MD’s chamber for a discussion on certain
               official matters during that time. You also threatened the MD that
               in case the application is not forwarded within that day the MD will
               have to face serious consequence.
                  While going out from the MD’s chamber you involved in
               altercation with some other employees of the corporation and left
               the office premises. Then after few minutes you again entered
               into the office campus with an iron rod in you hand and created a
               panicky situation in the office premises. However, one of the
               Security personnel of the office along with one other senior
               employee of the Corporation snatched away the iron rod from
               your hands.
                  Thos acts of yours amounts to major misconduct, indiscipline,
               and lack of integrity on your part.
                  You are, therefore, charged with misconduct, indiscipline and
               lack of integrity. “
                  The petitioner was thus asked to submit his written statement
in defence within 10 days from the date of receipt of the communication.
       WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                  Page 3 of 13

4.                Against the show cause notice dated 10.7.2008, petitioner filed
his reply on 25.7.2008 explaining and justifying the charge made against him.
The respondent authorities having not accepted his reply constituted an Enquiry
Committee vide office order dated 27.1.2009 (Annexure-IV) comprising of two
members to conduct enquiry on the allegations made out against the writ
petitioner.
5.                Consequently, the enquiry committee upon concluding the
enquiry submitted their report and the petitioner was given a copy of the report
vide communication dated 4.2.2010 (Annexure-V) asking him to submit his
representation against the enquiry report within a period of 10 days from the
date of receipt of the same. The petitioner upon receipt of the same on 8.2.2010
requested respondent No. 3 to furnish him the statements of the 13 witnesses
who were examined during the enquiry proceeding and accordingly on 9.2.2010
(Annexure-VI), the petitioner was furnished with the same.
6.                The petitioner then submitted his reply against the enquiry
report on 15.2.2010 (Annexure-VII) to the respondent No.3 stating that the
charge against the first show cause notice that he did not join the Garampani
Coal Extraction Project despite being directed was already clarified by him before
the enquiry Committee who admitted the same to be true at paragraph No.2 of
page 3 of the enquiry report and therefore he had nothing to say any further. As
for the charges made out against him in the second show cause notice, the
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                Page 4 of 13

petitioner stated that he was compelled to take such action in the given situation
and therefore begged that he be excused and requested that he be allowed to
continue with his service.
7.                 However, respondent No. 3 not being satisfied with his reply
served the petitioner a notice on 02.03.2010 (Annexure-IX) under Rule 10(i) (b)
of the Assam Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1964, asking him to make a
representation within 7 days on the proposed penalty of termination from service
to which he submitted his representation on 9.3.2010. However, vide order dated
12.3.2010 (Annexure-X), the petitioner was dismissed from service with
immediate effect.
8.                Against his dismissal, the petitioner preferred an appeal before
the Principal Secretary, Mines and Mineral Department, Government of Assam as
well as respondent No.2. On 6.4.2010 (Annexure-XI). But, however, his appeal
not being considered, the petitioner has filed the instant writ petition.
9.                Appearing for the writ petitioner, Mr. SK Barkataki, learned
counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner has rendered more than 23
years of service under the respondent authorities and considering the charges
levelled against him and said to have been proved, penalty of dismissal from
service imposed upon him is highly excessive and disproportionate. He submits
that the petitioner was in urgent need of money for the treatment of his ailing
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                  Page 5 of 13

wife at the relevant time and for which he submitted an application on 13.5.2008
asking for advance from his own Contributory Provident Fund (CPF) from the
respondent No.3. However, upon approaching the respondent No. 3 on
12.6.2008, he came to learn that his application for CPF advance was not yet
processed and therefore the petitioner was deeply annoyed coupled with the fact
that staffs of the respondent No.3 harassed him as well, he rebuked the
respondent No.3 as well as the staffs present. He submits that even if the action
of the petitioner was not found to be justified, dismissing him from service is too
harsh a punishment and not commensurate to the charge.
10.               Mr. SK Barkataki submits that since an FIR was lodged due to
the incident, charge was framed against him by the criminal court under Section
448/353/290/506 IPC and after trial, the Court came to the conclusion that he
was liable to be convicted only under Section 290 of the IPC while acquitting him
from the charge under Section 448/353/506 IPC. Considering his non-
involvement in any previous crime, a lenient view was taken and he was released
after admonition under the Probation of the Offenders Act, 1958. He therefore
submits when the criminal court had shown him leniency, the respondent
authorities also ought not to have imposed upon him the ultimate punishment of
dismissal from service for the same charge. He submits that in fact all the
prosecution witnesses in the criminal trial were the staffs of the respondent No.3
and therefore , the trial itself cannot be said to have been conducted in a free
and fair manner. He however admits that no appeal has been preferred against
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                  Page 6 of 13

the order of the criminal court. Mr. SK Barkataki under such circumstances,
submits that the petitioner should have been given another chance instead of
dismissing him from service.
11.                Mr. SK Barkataki in support of his submissions relies upon the
decision of this Court rendered in the case of the Dilip Shah –vs- Union of India &
Ors and 2 Ors which is registered as WP ( C) No. 5891 of 2016. He submits that
by the said decision, this Court had remanded the case back to the respondent
authorities for imposing a penalty other than dismissal or removal from service
upon the petitioner therein who was removed from service on the charge of
committing bigamy.
12.                Mr. SK Barkataki further relies upon the case of Sukvinder
Singh –vs- Union of India & Ors reported in 1999 (3) GLT 551 wherein this Court
had directed re-instatement of the petitioner therein considering the petitioner
had rendered about 11 years of service. The petitioner therein was dismissed
from service for disorderly conduct and for being in an inebriated state. 50% of
backwages was also given to him by the Court. The learned counsel therefore
submits that considering the nature of the case, made out against the instant
writ petitioner, he deserves to be considered for re-instatement while being given
a lesser punishment.
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                 Page 7 of 13

13.               The learned counsel Mr. M Choudhury appearing for the
respondents submits that the petitioner although appointed as Field Assistant
under the respondent corporation has hardly served in field areas since his
appointment. The petitioner for one pretext or the other had always avoided his
transfer. The petitioner was transferred and released from the Head Office of the
Corporation at Guwahati Vide Office order dated 15.9.2007 to Garampani Coal
Extraction Project with its Headquarter at North Cachar Hills District . However,
the petitioner did not join and submitted application on 27.9.2007 praying for
Earned Leave w.e.f. 16.9.2007 to 16.11.2007 on personal ground without
indicating any specific reason. Although the petitioner was informed that he
could not be granted leave, he again submitted an application on 29.9.2007
praying for two months leave due to the ongoing half yearly examination of his
children and for the treatment of his wife. The petitioner was then informed vide
communication dated 11.9.2007 that leave could not be granted to him and the
same may however be considered once he joined the new place of posting. The
petitioner having failed to join his posting place w.e.f. 16.9.2007, the respondent
authorities decided to issue a show cause notice to him on 24.1.2008. Before the
proceedings could be completed, another show cause notice was issued to him
on 10.7.2008 due to his mis-conduct and mis- behaviour against the respondent
No.3 and his staffs on 12.6.2008. The petitioner not only threatened and abused
the respondent No.3 but also created a panicky situation by holding a piece of
iron rod in the office premises of the respondent No.3 while shouting and
abusing his staffs. The respondent authorities therefore decided to appoint a two
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                  Page 8 of 13

member enquiry committee to look into the separate charges against the writ
petitioner and after following due process, it was found that the petitioner was
guilty of the charge, and the petitioner was therefore dismissed from service. He
thus submits that the conduct of the petitioner coupled with the fact that the
charges were proved, warranted his dismissal from service and the same cannot
be termed to be disproportionate or excessive considering the misconduct and
charge.
14.               Mr. Choudhury in support of his submissions relies upon the
decision of the Apex Court rendered in the case of Haryana Financial Corporation
& anr. –vs- Kailash Chandra Ahuja reported in (2008) 9 SCC 31 wherein it was
held that in the absence of any prejudice caused to the delinquent employee,
Court would not interfere in the quantum of punishment imposed upon such
employee. He further relies upon the decision of the Apex Court in the case of
State Bank of Patiala & Ors –vs- S.K. Sharma reported in (1996) 3 SCC 364
whereby it was held that when there are no expressed provision in the rules
governing the employee, there is no question of giving an opportunity to the
employee. Mr. M Choudhury further relies upon the decision of this Court in a
case of Md. Rustom Ali –vs- State of Assam & Ors reported in 2004 ( 1 ) GLR
296 to contend that when no prejudice is even remotely pleaded, the question of
violation of the principle of natural justice will not arise. He further submits that
in the case of Deputy Commissioner Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan & Ors. –vs- J
Hussain reported in (2013) 10 SCC 106 to contend that court would not interfere
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                   Page 9 of 13

with the quantum of punishment imposed upon the employee unless such
penalty shocks the judicial conscience of the Court and that even if it is found to
be highly excessive, Court would refrain from passing any penalty of
modification. He suggested that even if the Court found that the penalty imposed
upon the employee is highly excessive, the same should be left to the authority
concerned to consider as to what penalty should be imposed upon the delinquent
employee. He therefore submits that considering the facts at hand, the
interference of this Court is not called for. The learned counsel further relies
upon the case of Ajit Singh Nag –vs- General Manager (PJ) , Indian Oil Corpn.
Ltd. Haldia & Ors. reported in (2005) 7 SCC 764 that acquittal of a criminal Court
would not debar the employee from exercising its power departmentally in
accordance with the rules and regulation in force. The criminal trial and
departmental proceedings are two distinct proceedings wherein the Rule for
appreciation of evidence are not similar. In a criminal proceeding, the accused
has to be proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt whereas in a departmental
proceeding a preponderance of probability would suffice to penalise the
delinquent employee. The learned counsel by relying upon the case of State
Bank of India –vs- Ram lal Bhaskar reported in (2011) 10 SCC 249 submits that
so long as there are some evidence to arrive at a conclusion that the delinquent
employee is guilty , the High Court in exercise of its powers under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India would not interfere with the conclusion of the
disciplinary authority. He submits that likewise the same ratio was laid down by
the Apex Court in the case of State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur –vs- Nemi Chand
         WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                               Page 10 of 13

Nalwaya reported in 2011 (4) SCC 584. Mr. M Choudury thus submits that by
applying the ratio laid down by the above judicial pronouncements, the
interference of this Hon’ble Court in the given facts and circumstances is not
called for.
15.                I have considered the rival submissions made by the counsels
for the rival parties and I have perused the materials available on record. It may
be noticed that although this Court had asked for production of departmental
records, the learned counsel Mr. M Choudhury has filed an affidavit stating that
the departments records cannot be traced out and has been misplaced. The
respondent authorities for this reason have also lodged an FIR. The learned
counsel for the petitioner has strenuously argued to present a picture that the
departmental proceeding was conducted arbitrarily and was biased coupled with
the fact that no reasonable opportunity was given to him to defend his case.
However, from the materials available on record, I find that the petitioner was in
fact afforded reasonable opportunity as well be clarified in the subsequent
paragraph. There is no dispute with regard to the unauthorised absence of the
petitioner when he was released for joining his new place of posting at Garam
Pani on 15.9.2007. He in fact, remained unauthorizedly absent since 16.9.2007
and for which, a show cause notice was issued to him on 24.1.2008. Besides
taking the stand that he had availed for earned leave which was otherwise not
permitted, the petitioner has no explanation to offer. Likewise against the second
show cause notice dated 10.2.2008 for the incident that occurred on 12.6.2008,
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                 Page 11 of 13

the petitioner does not have any convincing explanation besides contending that
the criminal court took a lenient view of the matter and that he was acquitted
from the charge under Section 448/353/506 of the IPC besides only convicting
him under Section 290 of the IPC.
16.                 It is a well settled principle of law laid down by the Apex Court
in the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent that Court
is restricted to the role of examining the decision making process and not the
decision itself. It would therefore be necessary to examine as to whether there
are substantive grounds to vitiate the conclusion that the petitioner’s dismissal
from service is not justified. It is seen that the petitioner was given ample
opportunity to participate in the enquiry proceeding as hearing was conducted on
7th , 14th and 20th October and 4th November, 2009. Upon conclusion of the
enquiry proceeding, petitioner was furnished with the enquiry report along with
the statements of the witnesses examined to enable him to submit his reply
against the enquiry report. He was further given opportunity to submit a
representation against the proposed penalty. In such circumstances, the
petitioner apparently was given all due opportunity to present his case
throughout the proceedings. In such circumstances, the question of denying
reasonable and adequate opportunity to the petitioner does not arise.
17.                 However, considering the fact that the petitioner had submitted
an appeal before the appellate authority on 6.4.2010 which admittedly has not
        WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                    Page 12 of 13

been disposed of till date, the same in my considered opinion should be
considered by the said authority in so far as the quantum of penalty imposed
upon the petitioner is concerned. With regard to the charge being proved against
the petitioner, I do not find any illegality, arbitrariness or otherwise for interfering
with the same. However, the appellate authority can definitely consider and take
a decision as to whether any other form of penalty can be imposed upon the
petitioner besides dismissal or removal from service.
18.                In that view of the matter, this writ petitioner is disposed of
with a direction to the respondent authorities and appellate authority to consider
and disposed of the appeal in so far as the quantum of penalty is concerned in
the light of the observation made above within a period of 3 months from the
date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
19.                With the observation and directions, this writ petition stands
disposed of. No cost.
                                                                 JUDGE
Nivedita
         WP (C) No. 4415 of 2010                                    Page 13 of 13


