                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.4392 of 2016
                                     Puthimari Gaon Panchayat Samabay Samity
                                     Ltd and three others
                                                                ............   Petitioners
                                             - Versus –
                                      The State of Assam and others
                                                                     ........ Respondents
                                             BEFORE
                       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioners:     Mr. D. Choudhury, Adv
                       For the respondents:      Dr. B. Ahmed, SC Co-operation
                                                 Ms. B.A. Talukdar, Adv
                       Date of Hearing :        28.07.2017.
                      Date of Judgment:        28.07.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. D. Choudhury, learned counsel for the petitioners, Dr. B.
      Ahmed, learned Standing counsel for the Co-operation Department and Ms.
      B.A. Talukdar, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No.4.
      2.      The respondent No.4 Chapar Samabay Samity Limited is a Co-
      operative Society registered in the year 1973 under the Assam Co-operative
      Societies Act, 1949 (in short Act of 1949) comprising of shareholders from
      four Gaon Panchayats namely Kazipara Gaon Panchayt, Puthimari Gaon
      Panchayat, Barunitara Batardal Gaon Panchayat and Dhirerchar-Tarangapur
      Gaon Panchayat. Subsequently, the Kazipara Gaon Panchayat was upgraded
      to Chapar Town in the year 1989. It is stated that in exercise of the powers
WP(C) No.4392 of 2016                                                              Page 1 of 3

      conferred u/s 13 of the Assam Co-operative Societies Act, 2007, there was a
      policy decision of the Government of Assam to divide the existing Co-
      operative societies into smaller Co-operative Societies having their territorial
      jurisdiction coterminous with the territorial jurisdiction of concerned Gaon
      Panchayat.
      3.      Pursuant to such policy decision, the erstwhile Chapar Samabay
      Samity Limited was divided into four Samabay Samity Limited namely Chapar
      Nagar Bahumukhi Samabay Samity Limited, Puthimari Gaon Panchayat Level
      Samabay Samity Limited, Barunitara Batardal Gaon Panchayat Samabay
      Samity Limited and Dhirerchar Tarangapur Gaon Panchayat Level Samabay
      Samity Limited.
      4.      Accordingly, the erstwhile Chapar Samabay Samity Limited in their
      meeting held on 28.02.2010, the original of which had been produced by Dr.
      B. Ahmed, learned Standing Counsel Co-operation Department, had taken a
      resolution to divide the existing Chapar Samabay Samity Limited into four
      different Samabay Samity Limited.
      5.        In the aforesaid background, this writ petition had been preferred by
      the four newly created Co-operative Societies, namely, Chapar Nagar
      Bahumukhi Samabay Samity Limited, Puthimari Gaon Panchayat Level
      Samabay Samity Limited, Barunitara Batardal Gaon Panchayat Samabay
      Samity Limited and Dhirerchar Tarangapur Gaon Panchayat Level Samabay
      Samity Limited, which were created out of the aforesaid division.
      6.      This writ petition has been preferred for a direction to the respondent
      authorities to cancel the registration of Chapar Samabay Samity Limited. The
      petitioners are also aggrieved by a notice dated 13.07.2016 of the Chapar
      Samabay Samity Limited informing all the shareholders that the General
      Meeting/Election for the year 2016-17 of the Chapar Samabay Samity Limited
      will be held at Dhirghat Middle English School Campus on 28.07.2016.
      7.      As noticed above, the same Chapar Samabay Samity Limited had
      adopted a resolution on 24.02.2010, whereby the original Society had been
      divided into four different societies namely, Chapar Nagar Bahumukhi
      Samabay Samity Limited, Puthimari Gaon Panchayat Level Samabay Samity
      Limited, Barunitara Batardal Gaon Panchayat Samabay Samity Limited and
WP(C) No.4392 of 2016                                                          Page 2 of 3

      Dhirerchar Tarangapur Gaon Panchayat Level Samabay Samity Limited. It is
      also stated by Dr. B. Ahmed, learned Standing Counsel for Co-operation
      Department that the said resolution had been duly approved by the concerned
      authorities in the Co-operation Department.
      8.      Therefore, this Court is of the view that in the circumstances where
      the original Chapar Samabay Samity Limited had been divided into four
      different Samabay Samity Limited and the resolution for dividing had been
      duly approved by the concerned authorities, the Chapar Samabay Samity
      Limited no further continues to exist in the eye of law.
      9.       In such view of the matter, the notice dated 13.07.2016 of the
      Chapar Samabay Samity Limited for holding its Annual General Meeting for
      the year 2016-17 to be held on 28.07.2016 is found to be without any valid
      sanction of law.
      10.      It is provided that if the Chapar Nagar Bahumukhi Samabay Samity
      Limited, which is a creation after the division of the original Chapar Samabay
      Samity Limited, intends to hold its Annual General Meeting and Election, the
      said society will be at liberty to proceed for the purpose as provided under the
      law, but in its own name and also within the territorial jurisdiction allotted to
      it.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                             JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.4392 of 2016                                                           Page 3 of 3


