                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
            (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                       WP(C) No.4993 of 2008
                                      Sri Binod Bihari Roy
                                                                     ............ Petitioner
                                               - Versus –
                                       The State of Assam and others
                                                                      ........ Respondents
                                              BEFORE
                         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                        For the petitioner:        Mr. I. Hussain, Adv
                        For the respondents:       Mr. A. Chakraborty, State Counsel.
                        Date of Hearing :         11.07.2017.
                        Date of Judgment:        11.07.2017.
                           JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
               Heard Mr. I. Hussain, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. A.
      Chakraborty, learned Junior Government Advocate appearing for the State
      respondents.
      2.       The petitioner, who had passed his HSLC examination in the year 1988
      was initially appointed as a Process Server as per order dated 28.05.1982
      under the establishment of the Deputy Commissioner, Bongaigaon and was
      posted in the Srijangram Tehsil. Subsequently, by the order dated
      13.09.1990, the petitioner was promoted as L.D Assistant cum Typist and was
      posted at Baitamari Tehsil, which is also under the establishment of the
      Deputy Commissioner, Bongaigaon.
      3.        In the present writ petition, the petitioner is aggrieved by a gradation
      list dated 07.05.2008, wherein in respect of the cadre of Junior Assistant, the
      petitioner was placed at serial No.26. It is the case of the petitioner that the
WP(C) No.4993 of 2008                                                              Page 1 of 3

      petitioner was promoted as L.D Assistant cum Typist under the Assam
      Ministerial District Establishment Rules, 1967 and under the said rules, the
      qualifying service for being promoted to the cadre of Junior Assistant/LDA
      cum Typist is seven years. Therefore, in the view of the petitioner, the
      petitioner ought to have been promoted as Junior Assistant in the year 1989
      itself.
      4.      In the gradation list of Junior Assistant, the date of appointment of the
      petitioner in the post of Junior Assistant was shown as 13.09.1990, which is in
      fact the date on which he was promoted as L.D Assistant cum Typist as per
      the Annexure-4 to the writ petition. The petitioner in paragraph-8 of the writ
      petition also seeks to make out a case that as per paragraph 20(3) of the
      Notification dated 04.12.1999, a member who is appointed by promotion in a
      given year, shall be senior to a member appointed by direct recruitment of
      that year. Accordingly, the petitioner is aggrieved that in the gradation list,
      the respondent No.6 Mobarak Ali was placed above the petitioner and as
      such, the same requires some reconsideration.
      5.      On a perusal of the writ petition, it is seen that the writ petitioner had
      not produced any material to indicate that the said respondent No.6 Mobarak
      Ali was appointed through direct recruitment to the post of Junior Assistant
      and neither the gradation list gives any such indication. In such view of the
      matter, it is difficult for this Court to accept the plea of the petitioner that the
      petitioner being a promotee to the cadre of Junior Assistant would be senior
      to the aforesaid Mobarak Ali, who is alleged to be appointed through direct
      recruitment.
      6.      Be that as it may, the respondent authorities have filed an affidavit in
      opposition through the Deputy Commissioner, Bongaigaon, wherein in
      paragraph-8, it had been stated that the petitioner was promoted to the post
      of Junior Assistant as per the provisions of the Assam Ministerial District
      Establishment Service Rules, 1967, whereas the said provisions referred in
      paragraph-8 is a provision of the Assam Drivers and Handyman Service Rules,
      1999. A stand has been taken by the Deputy Commissioner that both the
      rules cannot be compared with each other and once the petitioner having
      been promoted as Junior Assistant under the Assam Ministerial District
      Establishment and Service Rules, 1967, his service condition shall be
WP(C) No.4993 of 2008                                                               Page 2 of 3

      governed by the said rule and the petitioner cannot incorporate the provision
      of another rule to make a claim that he is senior to the respondent No.6.
      7.      No infirmity is noticed by this Court in the said contention of the
      respondent Deputy Commissioner and further the petitioner has also not filed
      any reply affidavit indicating that the said contention is incorrect. As regards
      the other contention of the petitioner that his date of promotion/appointment
      as Junior Assistant should be construed from the year 1989 as he had
      attained the minimum qualifying service of seven years in the said year, the
      same also cannot be accepted to be a basis to interfere with the gradation list
      of the year 2007. Accepting the said contention of the petitioner would
      amount to give a finding that the promotion of the petitioner as Junior
      Assistant ought to be construed to have been made in the year 1989 and not
      in the year 1990. As the petitioner had not filed any representation or appeal
      against his promotion in the year 1990, such plea cannot now be accepted at
      a belated stage at a time when a gradation list of 2007 is being assailed.
      8.      In view of both the aforesaid views, this Court is of the view that this
      writ petition is devoid of any merit and the same is to be dismissed. But,
      however, the dismissal of this writ petition cannot be construed by the
      respondent authorities to deprive the petitioner of any further promotional
      benefit, if such benefit had been accrued to the petitioner in the meantime.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands closed.
                                                                             JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.4993 of 2008                                                           Page 3 of 3


