                 THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT AT GUWAHATI
      (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                               PRINCIPAL SEAT AT GUWAHATI
                                 Writ Petition (C) No.4567/2011
1. SRI SUKH SAGAR NAYAK,
SON OF LATE MADHAB NAYAK,
RESIDENT OF VILLAGE LAKHIJAN T.E. (BORCHAPORI DIVISION),
P.O. LAKHIJAN TINI ALI, DISTRICT – GOLAGHAT, ASSAM.
                                                                                …… PETITIONER.
                                     -Versus-
1. THE LABOUR COURT AT DIBRUGARH.
2. THE MANAGEMENT OF THE BORCHAPORI TEA ESTATE,
REPRESENTED BY THE MANAGER, BORCHAPORI TEA ESTATE,
GOLAGHAT, PIN-785621.
                                                                             …… RESPONDENTS.
Advocates for the Petitioner:                 Ms. P. Bhattacharya,
                                              Mr. P.P. Dutta &
                                              Ms. D. Dutta.
Advocate for the Respondent No.2:             Mr. G.N. Sahewalla, Sr. Advocate.
                                               BEFORE
                           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE HRISHIKESH ROY
Date of hearing & judgment:                   08-06-2017.
                                JUDGEMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
           Heard Ms. P. Bhattacharya, the learned counsel for the petitioner (workman).
The Management of the Borchapori T.E. (respondent No.2) is represented by Mr.
G.N. Sahewalla, the learned senior counsel.
2.         The petitioner was a workman in the Borchapori TE in Sivasagar District. For
the misconduct committed by him, after due inquiry, the workman was dismissed
from service on 4.7.1996. The resultant industrial dispute, was referred under
Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the ID
Act’) and the Labour Court was required to answer the following issues:-
           “1) Whether the management of Borsapari Tea Estate, P.O. Numaligarh, Dist. -
           Golaghat is justified in dismissing the services of Sri Sukh Sagar Nayak, workman
           w.e.f. 4.7.1996?
Writ Petition (C) No.4567/2011                                                            1 of 4

           2) If not, is the said workman entitled to reinstatement with full back wages or any
           other relief in lieu thereof?”
3.          The learned Labour Court, Dibrugarh, after evaluating the evidence adduced
by the parties opined that the inquiry was conducted with due opportunities to the
workman, who cross-examined the Management witnesses. The Court noted that the
workman did not suffer any prejudice for not having a co-worker in the domestic
inquiry and accordingly concluded that the workman was rightly found guilty of
dishonesty and committing fraud in respect of the T.E. property and causing loss to
the company. As the misconduct was found to be grave and serious, the dismissal of
the workman was found to be justified, under the impugned award dated 31.12.2010
(page-21).
4.1.       Assailing the legality of the award in favour of the Management, Ms. P.
Bhattacharya, the learned counsel submits that as the workman was involved with
trade union activities, he was victimized by the Management for raising the concern
of the workmen in the T.E.
4.2.       The counsel refers to the written statement of the delinquent to project that
the cutting of the trees and loading the timber on the truck to take out the loaded
truck from the T.E., was informed by the workman to the Management and
accordingly it is argued by Ms. Bhattacharya that evidence is lacking on the
involvement of the workman, with the charge of dishonest conduct.
4.3.       The learned counsel makes an alternate submission on harsh punishment of
dismissal by describing the misconduct as one capable of being exonerated or being
punished with lesser penalty.
5.1.       On the other hand, Mr. G.N. Sahewalla, the learned senior counsel submits
that when the charges were established through a due process and a fair opportunity
was provided to the workman to cross-examine the Management witnesses and to
bring forth his own defence evidence, the finding given by the learned Labour Court,
in Management’s favour, should not be disturbed by the Writ Court.
5.2.       The Management contends that when the charges were proved in the inquiry
on the basis of cogent evidence, the conclusion drawn by the Inquiry Officer, cannot
be a subject matter of scrutiny by the Writ Court, particularly when, the competent
Labour Court has answered the Reference, in favour of the Management.
5.3.       Referring to the evidence adduced by the Management, in the domestic
enquiry, the learned senior counsel submits that notwithstanding the plea taken in
the written statement, the workman even in his own testimony, failed to state that
Writ Petition (C) No.4567/2011                                                             2 of 4

he informed the Management, about the cutting of trees and theft of the timber and
therefore it is argued that an improbable plea of innocence is raised in the
workman’s written statement and in the argument of his lawyers.
6.         The records from the Labour Court in the Reference Case No.11/2007,          is
available and the petitioner’s lawyer has read out the vernacular testimony of the
workman. In his defence evidence, the workman raise the plea of victimization but
he does not substantiate the plea. More importantly, the testimony of the workman
Sukh Sagar Nayak (WW.1) nowhere mentions that it was he who informed the
Management about the attempted theft of the timber and cutting of the T.E. trees.
7.         On the other hand, the evidence of the Management’s witness Debraj Nahak
(MW—2), is very significant. In his testimony, this witness speaks about his own
engagement as a Mohrar in the timber business of the delinquent workman and how
he was receiving weekly wages for cutting and transporting timber, in the side
business of the T.E. workman. The witness spoke of the specific instruction of the
workman to cut down two T.E. trees and also the hiring of the truck by the
delinquent himself to transport the cut timbers out of the T.E. The MW—2 was
subjected to cross-examination by the workman but his evidence could not be
shaken.
8.         Therefore, it is apparent that the finding was recorded in the domestic
enquiry, on the basis of cogent evidence and it is not a case of perverse finding.
Moreover there is no evidence to support the plea of victimization, raised by the
workman. Therefore the submission made by the workman’s counsel on this aspect
are not acceptable to the Court.
9.         The testimony of the witnesses in the domestic enquiry clearly establishes the
active participation of the workman and his cross-examination of the Management’s
witnesses. Therefore I find no infirmity in the conclusion, arrived at by the learned
Labour Court, about the fairness of the proceeding and prejudice not being caused to
the workman, by any suggested infringement.
10.        The     next    issue to be considered   is  whether    the   punishment     is
disproportionate and whether a re-look at the penalty is warranted in the present
case.
11.        The charge against the workman was that on 15.12.1995, one Debraj Nahak,
the son of another accused Madan Nahak was apprehended while he was trying to
steal timber, belonging to the T.E. When the offender was apprehended at the spot,
he stated that he was instructed by the delinquent to cut the T.E. trees and to load
Writ Petition (C) No.4567/2011                                                       3 of 4

them on the truck, arranged by the delinquent. Thus it was a case of theft of T.E.
property by felling of two trees and arranging for transportation of the cut timbers.
Such conduct of an employee would certainly result in loss of faith of the
Management. The workman was doing timber business on the side and had engaged
others on salary basis, to cut trees and transport timbers for his own business. Hence
he was prompted by greed and cared little of his own responsibility as an employee
of the company and had ordered for cutting of the T.E. trees to cause loss for the
employer.
12.        It is difficult for any Management to continue to have faith on such errant
employee, who takes salary from the Management in one hand and arrange for theft
of Management’s property with the other hand. Therefore on consideration of all
relevant factors, any lesser punishment for the serious misconduct, in my perception,
would not be justified. The penalty imposed was as deserved for the errant
employee.
13.        Following the above discussion, this case is found devoid of merit and the
same is accordingly is dismissed. No cost.
14.        The Registry should return the LCR of the Labour Court, Dibrugarh, along
with a copy of this order.
                                                                             JUDGE
Barman
Writ Petition (C) No.4567/2011                                                    4 of 4


