                                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
               (HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                         WP(C) No.4729/2011
                    SIDDHARTHA SANKAR DEY
                    S/O- LT. SUBINAY KUMAR DEY,
                    R/O- R.K. MISSION ROAD, KARIMGANJ,
                    DIST.- KARIMGANJ, ASSAM.                    ……PETITIONER.
                             VERSUS
             1.     THE INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY
                    REPRESENTED BY ITS CHAIRMAN,
                    ASSAM STATE COMMITTEE, GHY- 3.
             2.     THE CHAIRMAN
                    INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY,
                    KARIMGANJ DIST. BRANCH,
                    DIST.- KARIMGANJ, PIN-788710.
             3.     THE HONY. SECY.
                    INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY,
                    KARIMGANJ DIST. BRANCH,
                    DIST.- KARIMGANJ,
                    PIN- 788710.
             4.     THE DY. COMMISSIONER
                    INDIAN RED CROSS SOCIETY,
                    KARIMGANJ DIST. BRANCH,
                    DIST.- KARIMGANJ, PIN-788710.                      …….RESPONDENTS.
             For the petitioner            : Ms. N Saikia
                                             Ms. P Mahanta
                                             Mr. A Saikia
                                             Ms. L Borgohain
                                             Mr. P Goswami             …. Advocates
             For the respondents           : Mr. S P Choudhury
                                             Mr. S K Ghosh.            …Advocates.
             Date of hearing & judgment : 08.06.2017
                                                 BEFORE
                             THE HON’BLE MR JUSTICE HRISHIKESH ROY
                                   JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
                    Heard Ms N Saikia, the learned Counsel for the petitioner. The Indian Red
             Cross Society (hereinafter referred to as “the IRCS”) and their functionaries are
             represented by Mr. S P Choudhury, the learned Counsel.
WP(c) No.4729/2011
                                                                                   Page 1 of 5

                                                             2
                  2.       The challenge here is to the order dated 16.6.2011 (Annexure-9),
                  whereby, the service of the petitioner was terminated by the Honorary Secretary
                  of the IRCS, Karimganj District Branch. The petitioner was appointed as an Office
                  Assistant on 10.1.1995 (Annexure-1) and till he was removed he was employed
                  with the IRCS for around 16 years.
                  3.       The disciplinary action against the Office Assistant was initiated through
                  the show-cause-notice of 2.4.2011 (Annexure-5), where the employer alleged
                  that the petitioner is habitually late in arriving at office and that he did not sign
                  the attendance register on the dates mentioned in the notice. Unauthorized
                  absence for 4 days, was also alleged against the Office Assistant.
                  4.       In his response to the show-cause-notice, the delinquent mentioned
                  about his multifarious duties and stated that he is attending to his work in the
                  maternity hospital operated by the IRCS at Karimganj, with utmost devotion and
                  sincerity. The irregular maintenance of attendance register by the employer and
                  the shifting of the attendance register to the Secretary’s room on the concerned
                  dates, was cited as the reason for the failure to sign the attendance register, on
                  a few dates. The absence from 28.3.2011 – 31.3.2011 was stated to be on
                  account of sudden and unavoidable personal exigencies and the verbal intimation
                  given about the absence, to the Sr. Office Assistant on 27.3.2011 itself.
                  5.       The IRCS authorities then constituted a five Member Inquiry Committee
                  on 18.5.2011 (Annexure-7) but the delinquent opposed the constitution of the
                  Committee on the ground that none of the members are neutral as they are all
                  intrinsically connected with the IRCS and hence fair inquiry is not possible.
                  6.       Following the constitution of the Committee on 18.5.2011, a month later
                  on 16.6.2011, the impugned termination order was issued where it was stated
WP(c) No.4729/2011
                                                                                  Page 2 of 5

                                                            3
                  that the Managing Committee of the IRCS in their meeting on 13.6.2011 had
                  considered the charges and the inquiry report and have unanimously decided to
                  terminate the service of the Office Assistant. Thus the impugned order was
                  basically the intimation of the resolution adopted by the Managing Committee, on
                  13.6.2011.
                  7.1     Assailing the legality of the termination order, Ms. N Saikia, the learned
                  Counsel submits that neither any formal charge were formulated nor any
                  domestic enquiry was conducted with the participation of the delinquent and
                  therefore, the legality of the decision taken by the IRCS is questioned by the
                  petitioner. Ms. Saikia submits that a fair inquiry should have been conducted to
                  determine the veracity of the charges. But in the instant case, the Disciplinary
                  Authority while referring to the Inquiry Report, has failed to furnish or produce
                  any such Inquiry Report, even before the Court.
                  7.2     The petitioner questions the merit of the allegation levelled in the show-
                  cause-notice dated 2.4.2011 and submits that adequate explanation for the
                  condonable and minor lapses were given in the delinquent’s reply furnished on
                  22.4.2011 (Annexure-6) and accordingly the petitioner argues that the matter
                  should have been closed at that stage and there is no justification for terminating
                  the service on the alleged ground of negligence of duty and defiance of the
                  authorities.
                  7.3     The alternate submission is also made by the learned advocate by
                  questioning the proportionality of the penalty by referring to the minor breaches
                  and the major consequence of service termination, for the delinquent.
                  8.1     On the other hand, the learned Counsel Mr. S P Choudhury for the
                  respondents refers to the appointment order dated 10.1.1995 (Annexure-1) to
                  contend that the appointment was temporary and his service may be terminated
                  at any time by the authorities and accordingly it is argued that when the
                  petitioner is found to be irregular and is a habitual latecomer, the employer is
                  within their right to terminate the service of such errant employee.
WP(c) No.4729/2011
                                                                                Page 3 of 5

                                                            4
                  8.2     On the issue of conducting of the domestic enquiry, Mr. Choudhury
                  submits that when the Inquiry Committee was constituted on 18.5.2011, the
                  delinquent questioned the impartiality of the Inquiry Committee Members and
                  therefore, it is submitted that the domestic inquiry could not be conducted
                  formally, due to want of cooperation from the delinquent’s side.
                  8.3     Mr. Choudhury submits that the IRCS is a charitable organization and it
                  operates the hospital at Karimganj on no profit and no loss basis and therefore
                  the employees are expected to serve with greater dedication and commitment.
                  9       The petitioner was appointed as an Office Assistant to work in the
                  maternity hospital run by the IRCS at Karimganj and the case records reflect that
                  the pressure of work was acute in the hospital and the Office Assistant had to
                  discharge multifarious responsibilities. Because of the very nature of the work in
                  the hospital, the employees had to serve extended hours but they were not paid
                  any overtime wages. Therefore, some flexibility on the duty hours of the staff in
                  the Red Cross Hospital was inevitable.
                  10.     Be that as it may, when it is alleged that the petitioner is habituated to
                  late arrival and it is alleged that the employee was absent for 4 days without
                  authorization, it was necessary for the employer to arrange for a domestic inquiry
                  to verify the veracity of the charges. This would have provided the delinquent
                  with an opportunity of put forward his defence. But although reference to a
                  purported inquiry report is made in the termination order, no such inquiry report
                  was ever furnished to the delinquent nor a copy thereof is produced before the
                  Court. In such circumstances, it can be logically inferred that the respondents did
                  not conduct any inquiry into the allegation and thus the delinquent was denied of
                  the opportunity to rebut the charges, in a formal proceeding.
                  11.     When termination of an employee becomes necessary for the misconduct
                  committed by him, the employer is duty bound in law to arrange for a
                  departmental inquiry in order to verify the allegation and also provide the
WP(c) No.4729/2011
                                                                                Page 4 of 5

                                                            5
                  delinquent an opportunity to rebut the charges. But this was not done and it
                  appears to the Court that the termination of the Office Assistant was ordered
                  without affording a fair opportunity to the affected employee.
                  12.     Because of the above conclusion, the impugned termination order
                  (Annexure-9) is declared to be unsustainable in law and the same is quashed.
                  The respondents are accordingly directed to reinstate the employee. However
                  considering the non-profit making character of the Red Cross Hospital and
                  service not received from the terminated employee, upon reinstatement 25%
                  back wages is ordered to be paid to the employee. It is ordered accordingly.
                  13.     With the above direction, the case stands allowed in the manner indicated
                  by leaving the parties to bear their respective cost.
                                                                                   JUDGE
                  Datta
WP(c) No.4729/2011
                                                                               Page 5 of 5


