                             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM : NAGALAND : MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                    WP(C) 4094/2014
                    Kishore Kumar Thakuria
                                                                     ……..Petitioner
                           - VER SUS -
                    State of Assam & Ors.
                                                                     ………Respondents
                                              BEFORE
                 HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
           Advocate for the petitioner     :- Mr. M. Dutta
           Advocate for the Respondent:- Mr. N. Sarma
           Date of Hearing & Judgment        : 06.06.2017
                                  JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
           Heard Mr. M. Dutta, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. N. Sarma, learned
 standing counsel for the Elementary Education Department.
 2.        The petitioner was appointed as an Asstt. Teacher on 25.01.1994 and his services was
 regularized w.e.f. 28.04.1995. On the other hand, the respondent No.5 was regularized w.e.f.
 24.04.1998 and the date of appointment of the said respondent No.5 is not reflected in the
 provision of gradation list. Again the respondent No.6 although had joined his services on
 09.05.92, he is yet to be regularized. Accordingly, in view of the aforesaid facts and
 circumstances, the petitioner claims that the petitioner is the senior most teacher in the school.
 3.        It is stated that in the meantime, the petitioner had been serving as the In-Charge
 Headmaster of the school from 01.12.2013. The petitioner in this writ petition is aggrieved by the
 seniority list of Asstt. Teacher for the M.V. School in the Guwahati Sub-Division of Kamrup
 district, wherein, the name of the respondent Nos. 5 and 6 are shown above the petitioner.
                                                                             Page 1 of 2

4.       In such view of the matter, the petitioner is aggrieved by the aforesaid gradation list
inasmuch as, by virtue of prior date of regularization, the petitioner claims to be the senior to the
respondent Nos. 5 and 6. It is also the case of the petitioner that although by letter dated
02.06.2014, objections were invited against the aforesaid provisional gradation list, but the said
letter was not duly circulated as such the petitioner could not submit his objection.
5.       Accordingly, this writ petition stands disposed of by providing that the petitioner shall file
objection to the said gradation list dated 26.05.2014 before the District Elementary Education
Officer, Kamrup(R). On the aforesaid objection being filed, the District Elementary Education
Officer, Kamrup(R) shall give due consideration to the same and if necessary shall give personal
hearing to the petitioner as well as to the respondent Nos. 5 and 6 and pass appropriate order.
Upon appropriate order being made by the District Elementary Education Officer, necessary
corrections be made in the gradation list.
         In view of the above , this petition stands disposed of.
         The aforesaid exercise shall be completed within a period of 2 (two) months from the
date of submission of the objection by the petitioner.
                                                                                    JUDGE
Anamika
                                                                            Page 2 of 2


