                      IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
       (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM; NAGALAND; MIZORAM &
                         ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                    WRIT PETITION(C) 5844/2015
The Union of India & Others       ---------                 Petitioners
                                   -versus-
Sri Shrihari Shekhar               ---------                Respondent
                                BEFORE
             HON’BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AJIT SINGH
                HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANOJIT BHUYAN
Advocate for Petitioners           ::        Mr. S.C. Keyal
Advocate for the Respondent        ::        Ms. U. Das
Date of Hearing                    ::        24.07.2017
Date of delivery of Judgment       ::        24.07.2017
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER
(M anojit Bhuyan, J)
        Heard Mr. S.C. Keyal, learned Assistant SGI for the petitioners
as well as Ms. U. Das, learned counsel for the respondent.
2.      At the outset we place on record that the merits of the case
are not gone into. What we find from the order of the Tribunal dated
04.07.2014 is that the respondent’s contention that he was eligible for
promotion from 09.11.1996 was found not acceptable by the Tribunal.
In respect of the Minutes of the Departmental Promotion Committee
(DPC) held on 15.05.1997, the Tribunal also recorded that there was
no occasion to order review of the DPC dated 15.05.1997. As regards
the respondent’s claim for fixation of pay in the scale of Rs. 7,500-
12,000/-, the Tribunal held that such claim did not have any legs to
stand on. No element of arbitrariness was also found in the pay of the
respondent being regulated under FR22(1)(a)(2). However, the
                                                                    Page 1 of 2

Original Application was decided by directing the petitioners herein to
“review the DPCs held for adhoc promotions wherever the adhoc
promotion is not justified as per rules in view of the above
observations.”
3.     In our effort to understand the directions so made by the
Tribunal, the learned counsels of either side were asked to throw light
on the issue. The explanations tendered by the counsels do not
satisfactorily answer the query of this Court.
4.     A difficulty is created to hear the case on merits, unless it can
be clearly comprehended as to which DPCs have been directed to be
reviewed and what is the basis for causing review of the said DPCs. In
this regard, we deem it proper to remand the matter for fresh
consideration by the Tribunal in the light of what is expressed above.
Counsels for either parties are also in agreement that the matter
requires to be remanded for fresh consideration on this issue.
5.     In view of the above, this writ petition stands disposed of by
interfering with the directions contained in paragraph 33 of the
judgment rendered by the Tribunal and by remanding the matter for
fresh consideration on the points indicated above. The Original
Application No. 63 of 2012 be accordingly restored to file. We hope
and trust that decision of the Tribunal is rendered at its earliest
convenience.
               JUDGE                             CHIEF JUSTICE
sds
                                                              Page 2 of 2


