                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM : NAGALAND : MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                  WP(C) 5587/2014
                  Mokibur Rahman
                                                          ……..Petitioner
                         - VER SUS -
                  State of Assam & Ors.
                                                                ………Respondents
                                             BEFORE
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
         Advocate for the petitioner      :-Mr. D.P. Chaliha
         Advocate for the Respondent Nos. 4 and 5:- Ms. S. Kanungo
         Advocate for the Respondent Nos. 1 to 3:- Ms. P.R. Mahanta
         Date of Hearing & Judgment         : 06.06.2017
                                JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
         Heard Mr. D.P. Chaliha, learned senior counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Ms. S.
 Kanungo, learned counsel for the respondent Nos. 4 and 5 and Ms. P.R. Mahanta, learned
 counsel for the respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
 2.      On the same date, both the petitioners were appointed as Grade-IV employee by the
 Hamidabad College by a Resolution No.2 dated 26.06.1998 of the Governing Body and
 accordingly, they joined their respective services on 27.06.1998. It is stated that their joining
 report were duly received by the Secretary of the Hamidabad College. Annexure-B1 is the
 appointment letter dated 26.06.1998 of the petitioner No.1, whereas, Annexure-B3 is the
 appointment letter dated 26.06.1998 in respect of petitioner No.2. Both the appointment letters
 were signed by the Secretary of the said College. Accordingly, by Annexure-B2, the petitioner
 No.1 submitted his joining report to the Principal of the Hamidabad College with a copy of the
                                                                         Page 1 of 4

same to the Secretary of the said College. It is the case of the petitioners that although the
petitioners were appointed by the Resolution dated 26.06.98, the College authorities denies their
appointment by taking a stand that the petitioners were never appointed by the College
authorities as per the said resolution of the Governing body. It is the case of the petitioners that
by the Resolution No.1 of the Governing body dated 26.06.1998 one Shonaullah Sheikh was
appointed as lecturer in the Department of Arabic and by Resolution No.3 two persons, namely,
Abdul Hamid Khandekar was appointed as Library Assistant and Nasir Uddin was appointed as
Peon and were upgraded as U.D. Asstt. and Library Assistant respectively. Accordingly, it is the
case of the petitioners that when the Resolution No.1 as well as Resolution o.3 is accepted and
acted upon, it cannot be a case of the College authorities that the Resolution No.2 did not
appoint the petitioners.
3.       In such view of the matter, the core decision before the respondent authorities would be
as to whether the petitioners were appointed by the said Resolution No.2 dated 26.06.98. For a
proper adjudication, it would be incumbent upon the respondent authorities to call for the
records from the College authorities of Hamidabad College and examine the original Resolution
No.1, 2 and 3 of the Governing Body of the College. In the absence of any such examination, it
cannot be ascertained that the petitioners were not appointed by the Resolution No.2 dated
26.06.98.
4.       Being aggrieved, the petitioners had preferred a writ petition being WP(C) No.3782/2013,
which was disposed of by the order dated 23.05.2014 by providing that the case of the
petitioners be placed before the District Scrutiny Committee for Higher Education in the Dhubri
district to scrutinize their claim. It was further provided that consequential steps shall also be
taken depending upon the outcome of the scrutiny of the District Scrutiny Committee. In this
writ petition, the concerned enquiry report of the District Level Scrutiny Committee under the
signature of Inspector of Schools, Dhurbi District Circle is being assailed.
5.       Mr. D.P. Chalia, learned senior counsel for the petitioners by referring to the report of the
District Level Scrutiny Committee has pointed out that the said report had been prepared without
                                                                             Page 2 of 4

even requiring the College authorities to be present before the committee and without inspecting
any records.
6.       On a perusal of the said enquiry report, which is undated, but finds reference in the letter
dated 09.09.2014 of the Inspector of Schools, it is seen that the petitioners had attended the
hearing on 22.07.2014 and had submitted the required documents of the Managing Committee of
the College held on 26.06.98. The enquiry report further states that although the principal and
president of the said College was duly notified and had been requested to attend the hearing on
22.07.2014 and 08.08.2014, but for reasons unknown, the aforesaid two authorities of the
College has chosen not to remain present. Accordingly, the District Scrutiny Committee examined
the appointment letter and joining report of the petitioners and arrived at a conclusion that the
joining report of the persons were not received by the Secretary himself. It was stated that the
petitioner had submitted the joining report to the Principal of the said College with a copy to the
Secretary. The scrutiny committee was of the view that as per the departmental procedure, the
letter/reports are to be received by the person to whom it is addressed and not by anybody else.
Based on the aforesaid reasons, the enquiry committee arrives at a conclusion that the claim of
the petitioners that they were appointed in the Hamidabad College as Grade-IV cannot be
accepted. The aforesaid reason of the enquiry committee in the considered view of this Court is
inadequate.
7.       As already alluded that if the enquiry committee is required to decide as to whether the
petitioners were appointed in the said College on and from the given date and whether they are
working or not, the same has to be determined on the basis of the records of the Managing
Committee of the College and not on the basis of some conjectures and surmises that the
appointment letters were received by the Secretary and not by the Principal of the college. The
question whether the petitioners have been appointed or not is a matter of a factual
determination and that depends on the facts as available on record and the same cannot be
determined on the basis of any interpretation by the scrutiny committee as regards acceptance
of the joining report.
                                                                           Page 3 of 4

8.       In such view of the matter, the report of the District Scrutiny Committee as referred in
the letter dated 09.09.2014 of the Inspect of Schools, Dhubri district is not sustainable.
         Accordingly, the matter be remanded back to the District Scrutiny Committee for
considering the claim of the petitioners afresh and in doing so, the District Scrutiny Committee
shall invariably call for the records of the Governing Body of the college more particularly the
Resolution No. 1, 2 and 3 dated 26.06.98 and arrive at a conclusion as to whether the petitioners
were appointed or not.
         With the above observation, this writ petition stands disposed of.
         The aforesaid exercise shall be completed within a period of 3 months from the date of
receipt of a certified copy of this order.
                                                                                    JUDGE
Anamika
                                                                            Page 4 of 4


