                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                       WP(C) No.5409 of 2012
                                      Miss Pratibha Goswami
                                                                   ............ Petitioner
                                              - Versus –
                                       The State of Assam and others
                                                                    ........ Respondents
                                              BEFORE
                         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                        For the petitioner:       None appears.
                        For the respondents:      Mr. N. Sarma, SC, Education Dept.
                        Date of Hearing :        07.06.2017.
                        Date of Judgment:       07.06.2017.
                           JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              None appears for the petitioner when the matter is called upon. This
      matter was earlier listed on 05.06.2017 and on the said date also none had
      appeared for the petitioner. Accordingly, an order dated 05.06.2017 was
      passed that in the event, none appears for the petitioner on the next date
      also, the Court would be constrained to proceed with the matter in the
      absence of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
      2.      It is stated that the petitioner had submitted an application before the
      respondent authorities for appointment to the post of Hindi Teacher and
      accordingly, on being selected by the District Level Selection Board, the
      petitioner was appointed in the post of Hindi Teacher in Gandhi Nagar Girls
      High School as per the order dated 18.01.1996 of the respondent No.4, being
      the Inspector of Schools, Kamrup district. It is stated that the said post of
WP(C) No.5409 of 2012                                                            Page 1 of 3

      Hindi Teacher was vacant due to retirement of one Ms. Labanya Dev Barman
      in the month of January, 1995. Accordingly, the petitioner joined the post on
      21.01.1996. The respondent No.4 by a subsequent order dated 29.03.1996
      has extended the term of the service of the petitioner by another three
      months and thereafter, the respondent No.4 by an order dated 27.03.2001
      had regularized the services of the petitioner with immediate effect. It is
      stated that since then, the petitioner has been discharging her duties regularly
      without any break. The case of the petitioner is that the petitioner was paid
      her salary and allowances regularly, but since the month of April, 1996, no
      salary and allowances had been paid to the petitioner.
      3.      Mr. N. Sarma, the learned Standing Counsel for the Education
      Department submits that although the services of the petitioner has been
      regularized by the respondent No.4 being the Inspector of Schools, but no
      such approval had been granted to such regularization. It is also stated by the
      learned Standing Counsel for the Education Department that the appointment
      letter of the petitioner indicates that the appointment had been made subject
      to selection by the District Level Selection Committee and as such, the
      appointment of the petitioner has not been made in a regular manner. It is
      also stated that the appointment of the petitioner had been made till such
      period a regular teacher is appointed in the school.
      4.      Be that as it may, in the event the petitioner had been appointed by
      an authority under the Education Department and she had rendered her
      service, she is entitled to her salary and allowances for the period, for which
      the petitioner had rendered service. In the event, the respondent authorities
      are of the view that the petitioner has no right to continue in the service,
      appropriate action may be taken against the petitioner by following the due
      procedure of law.
      5.      It is also submitted by the learned Standing Counsel for the Education
      Department that for the purpose of determining as to whether a teacher is
      entitled to payment of salary, the Government of Assam pursuant to the
      judgment and order of this Court in Sudhendu M ohan Talukdar –vs-
      State of Assam and others , reported in (2006) 2 GLT 216 had
      constituted a committee to examine such matter.
WP(C) No.5409 of 2012                                                          Page 2 of 3

      6.      In such view of the matter, this Court deems it appropriate that the
      ends of justice would be met if a direction is issued to place the case of the
      petitioner for payment of salary before the aforesaid committee constituted
      pursuant to the judgment of this Court in the case of Sudhendu M ohan
      Talukdar (Supra) .
      7.      Upon the matter being placed before the said committee, the
      committee would give a due consideration to the claim of the petitioner and
      also examine as to whether the petitioner had actually worked for the given
      period or not.
      8.      The aforesaid exercise be carried out within a period of four months
      from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this judgment and order. A copy
      of this judgment and order be furnished to Mr. N. Sarma, learned Standing
      Counsel for the Education Department for onward transmission of the same to
      the authorities for doing the needful pursuant to the direction of this Court in
      this judgment and order.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                            JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.5409 of 2012                                                          Page 3 of 3


