                                                                   WP(C) 5108/2008
          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
          Case No:            WP(C) 5108/2008
      1. Shri Ramen Kalita
          Son of Shri Ratneswar Kalita
          Resident of village: Milanpur Saikia
          Suburi, P.O: Dekagaon
          District Sonitpur, Assam.
      2. Shri Ghanakanta Gogoi
          Son of Late Bagaram Gogoi
          Resident of Village: Pub-Dubia
          P.O: Santipur
          Dist: Sonitpur, Assam.
      3. Smt Nirmla Saikia
          Daughter of Shri Tankeswar Saikia
          Resident of Village: Kharanijan
          P.O: Simaluguri (Kokila Chariali)
          Dist: Sonitpur, Assam.
                                                        ………..…… Petitioners.
                             -Versus-
      1. The State of Assam, represented by the Chief Secretary to the
          Government of Assam, Dispur, Guwahati-6.
      2. The Commissioner, North Assam Division, Tezpur, Assam.
      3. The Deputy Commissioner, Sonitpur, Tezpur, Assam.
      4. The Treasury Officer, Sonitpur, Tezpur, Assam.
      5. The Treasury Officer, Gohpur Sub-Treasury Office, Gohpur.
                                                      …........ Respondents.
                                                                        Page 1 of 6

                                                                         WP(C) 5108/2008
                           BEFORE ::
           HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Writ Petitioners      :       Mr. N. Barah,   Advocate
For the Respondents           :       Mr. M.R. Adhikary …     For respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
                                      Mr. P. Naik        …..   For respondent Nos. 4 & 5.
Date of Hearing               :       02.08.2017
Date of delivery of
Judgment & Order              :       02.08.2017
                JUDGMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
        Heard Mr. N. Barah, the learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioners
and Mr. M.R. Adhikary, the learned Government Advocate appearing for the
respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3. Mr. P. Naik, the learned counsel appears for the
respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
2.      The case of the writ petitioners is that they were appointed to the Grade-
IV under the Establishment of the Deputy Commissioner, Sonitpur vide office
order dated 17.09.2007 (Annexure-H). Thereafter, their appointments was
approved by the Finance (SIU) Department vide endorsement No. FSI824/06
dated 19.12.06 and FSI 205/2007 dated 14.06.2007 respectively. The said
approval was communicated to the Treasury Officer, Sonitpur/Gohpur by the
Deputy Secretary to the Government Assam, Finance (Budget Department) vide
letter dated 28.11.2007 (Annexure-I).
3.      While the petitioners were working as such, their services were
terminated vide order dated 01.12.2008 (Annexure-J). In the termination order,
it was provided that the services of the petitioners were terminated with
                                                                               Page 2 of 6

                                                                    WP(C) 5108/2008
immediate effect as their appointment was held to be irregular and illegal in
accordance with the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court rendered in the
case of Secretary, State of Karnataka –vs- Uma Devi & Others reported in
(2006) 4 SCC 1.
4.      Mr. N. Barah, the learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioners
submits that prior to the termination of the writ petitioners the mandatory
process as may be required under law was not followed and thereby violating the
Principle of Natural Justice. The petitioners were in fact not given any notice and
afforded opportunities prior to their termination. In this connection, he relies
upon the two decision of Apex Court Shri Dhar –vs- Nagar Palika, Jaunpur
and Others reported in 1990 (Supp) SCC 157 as well as the case of
Rajendra –vs- State of Maharastra and Others reported in (2008) 11 SCC
90. Mr. N. Barah submits that the two decisions of the Apex Court held that it is
an elementary principle of natural justice that no person should be condemned
without hearing. The order of appointments confers a vested right on the
appointee to hold the post and that right cannot be taken away without giving an
opportunity of hearing to him. Therefore, any order passed in violation of the
principles of natural justice would be rendered void. Therefore, Mr. N. Barah
submits that in the instant case as well since the respondent authorities prior to
issuance of the order of termination did not afford any opportunity to the
petitioners, the impugned order of termination dated 01.12.2008 cannot be
sustained and the same should be set aside by this Court.
5.      Mr. M.R. Adhikary, the learned Government Advocate by referring to the
affidavit-in-opposition filed by the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 submits that the
selection and appointment of the petitioners was irregular and therefore when
the same was brought to the notice of the competent authority, the
Commissioner of North Assam Division was directed to enquire into the matter
and who upon such enquiry submitted his report on 12.01.2008. From the
enquiry report, it can be seen that various irregularities were committed in the
selection process such as sponsoring names of the candidates after the last date
of submissions of the applications were over, violation of rooster point and the
                                                                         Page 3 of 6

                                                                     WP(C) 5108/2008
Reservation Rule etc. He, therefore, submits that due to the finding of such
irregularities in the enquiry, the appointment of the petitioners had to be
terminated. In doing so, the respondent authorities have not committed any
illegality. He thus submits that the writ petition is devoid of any merit and should
be dismissed.
6.       Mr. P. Naik, the learned counsel appearing for the Finance Department
submits that although the Finance Department has not been made a formal party
in the writ proceeding but however as per the direction of this Court, the Finance
Department filed an affidavit wherein, the Department has explained the norms
and procedures and the modalities in making appointment to any post. He
contends that the appointing authorities are not only required to advertise the
vacancies but also are required to make appointments on the basis of
recommendations of the duly constituted Selection Committees in addition to
sponsoring of names by the Employment Exchange concerned. He submits that
the procedure with regard to such selection and appointment has clearly been
prescribed in the Assam Fiscal Responsibility Budget Management Act, 2005
(AFRBM Act, 2005). He therefore submits that any deviation from the norms and
procedures prescribed in the AFRBM Act, 2005 would vitiate not only the
appointment but the selection process itself.
7.       In response to the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing
for the respondents, Mr. N. Barah submits that the enquiry that was conducted
was clearly behind the back of the petitioners and they had knowledge of the
same. Even otherwise, as can be seen from the enquiry report annexed by the
respondents in their affidavit-in-opposition it can be seen that the so called
irregularities have been mainly on the appointment of the Junior Assistant and so
far as the Grade-IV posts are concerned, there are no details available except
the finding that there was no advertisement made prior to such appointment. He
submits the relevant provision for appointment of Grade-IV staff, is the Assam
Public Services (Direct Recruitment Class-III and Class IV) Rules, 1997. He
submits that a perusal of the said Rules nowhere provide that it is compulsory on
the part of the appointing authority to advertise by publication of the vacancies
                                                                           Page 4 of 6

                                                                     WP(C) 5108/2008
in the newspapers. All that is required is that the vacancies and the details have
to be displayed in the office Board of the appointing authority. He therefore
submits that the appointment of the petitioners with the approval of the Finance
(SIU) Department does not suffer from any irregularity and therefore, the writ
petition should be allowed.
8.       I have considered the submissions advanced by the learned counsels for
the rival parties and perused the materials available on record including the
decisions referred to by the learned counsel for the petitioners. It is seen that
prior to the termination of the writ petitioners, there was an enquiry conducted
wherein the findings that was arrived at was that there was an irregularity
committed in appointing Grade-IV as well as Grade-III Staff under the
Establishment of the Deputy Commissioner of Sonitpur. However, admittedly
prior to the termination of the petitioners, the petitioners were not only given an
opportunity to be heard but also they were unaware of the enquiry proceeding
and the findings arrived at.
9.      Considering, the ratio laid down by the Apex Court in the case of Shri
Dhar (Supra) as well as Rajendra (Supra), the stand taken by the respondents
is that irregularities were committed during the selection process and therefore,
the termination order was sustainable cannot be accepted. Although the
respondents claim that due process was not followed in appointing the
petitioners, approval of the Finance (SIU) Department was otherwise obtained.
Therefore, they could not have terminated the services of the petitioners without
following due process themselves. I therefore find the order of termination dated
on 12.01.2008 not to be sustainable and accordingly, the same is set aside.
10.      Mr. N. Barah submits that after issuance of the termination order, the
petitioners were given protection by this Court by staying the impugned
termination order and therefore, the petitioners’ are continuing service as on
date. The interim order passed earlier is therefore made absolute. The
respondent      authorities would be however not precluded from proceeding
against the writ petitioners which shall have to be strictly in accordance with the
                                                                          Page 5 of 6

                                                                  WP(C) 5108/2008
relevant provisions of law in this regard and with due observance of the principle
of natural justice.
11.     With the above observation and direction, the writ petition stands
disposed of. No cost.
                                                                  JUDGE
B. DEY
                                                                       Page 6 of 6


