                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM : NAGALAND : MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                WP(C) 5863/2010
                M/s Jericho Detergent Pvt. Ltd & Ors.,
                                                                   ……..Petitioner
                        - VER SUS -
                Union of India & 7 Ors.
                                                                   ………Respondents
                                         BEFORE
              HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
         Advocate for the petitioner  :-Mr. K. Goswami
         Advocate for the respondent No.5:- Mr. B. Talukdar
         Advocate for the state respondent:- Mr. S.S. Roy
         Advocate for the Union of India:- Mr. G. Pegu
         Date of Hearing & Judgment     : 03.08.2017
                             JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
         Heard Mr. K. Goswami, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. B.
 Talukdar, learned counsel for the respondent No.5 as well as Mr. S.S. Roy, learned state
 counsel for the state respondents and Mr. G. Pegu, learned counsel for the Union of
 India.
 2.      The respondent authorities had earlier taken a policy decision through the
 Planning and Development Department of the Govt. of India for promotion of industries
 in the North East Region during the currency of the 9th plan. As per the said decision, a
 package of incentives were provided for creating entrepreneurial environment and
 accordingly, a scheme by the nomenclature SPINE was launched by the Ministry of
                                                                   Page 1 of 3

Development of North East Region, (for short DONER). As per the scheme, the North
East Council was to provide incentives to the extent of 25% of the project cost or
Rs.50,00,000/-, whichever is less to the industries which were newly set up in the
region. The petitioners accordingly, undertook to set up an industrial unit at village
Koirabari, Silasundarighoupa, Numalijulah, National Highway-31.
3.      It is stated that the petitioner had incurred a cost of an amount of Rs.
8,06,02,960/- for setting up the industrial unit. According to the petitioners, under the
aforesaid scheme of SPINE, they were entitled to atleast 25% of the cost of setting up
of the industrial concern or Rs.50,00,000/-, whichever is less. Accordingly, the petitioner
had filed an application dated 18.01.2007, whereby, a claim was made for the
investment incentives as provided under the scheme SPINE. Although the application of
the petitioner was made on 18.01.2007, but the concerned scheme of SPINE was closed
on and from 23.02.2007. Certain similar industrial concerns who also claimed the
incentives under the scheme SPINE had approached this Court sometime in the year
2008, seeking for a direction that the investment incentives be paid to them although
the scheme had been subsequently closed.
4.      It is stated although the writ petitions were entertained by this Court and
directions were issued to the respondent authorities therein for considering the payment
of the investment incentives, but the petitioners could not approach this Court during
that time and had infact preferred this writ petition on 31.08.2010. In the meantime, in
and around the year 2010, several other similar writ petitions were preferred by the
other industrial concerns. But similar benefits as granted by this Court to the industrial
concerns who had approached this Court in the year 2008 were not granted and such
writ petitions were initially dismissed by the learned Single Judge. Subsequently the
Division Bench had reversed the finding of the learned Single Judge and against the
same, the state respondents had preferred an appeal before the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
                                                                    Page 2 of 3

One such appeal had been decided by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in its judgment and
order dated 08.05.2015 in Civil Appeal No.3962/2011, Union of India & Ors –Vs- Sri
Hanum an Industries & Anr. One of the issues for determination before the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the aforesaid appeal was as to whether the industrial concern who
had approached the Court at the later stage claiming their incentives would still be
entitled to receive such incentives.
5.       The Hon’ble Supreme Court in paragaraph-18 of the aforesaid judgment and
order had arrived at a conclusion that such industrial concern in view of their deliberate
laches and negligence and inaction have disentitled themselves to the benefit of
adjudication as was done in the earlier lis. It was held that it would be iniquitous to the
public exchequer to entertain such belated claim of the industrial concern. The issues
raised in this writ petition is squarely covered by the aforesaid judgment and order
dated 08.05.2015 of the Hon’ble Supreme Court inasmuch as the facts and circumstance
of this writ petition is same as the facts and circumstance of the matter before the
Hon’ble Supreme Court, to the effect that the writ petitions were filed in the year 2010,
whereas the scheme was closed in the year 2007 itself.
         In such view of the matter, this Court is not inclined to accept the prayer sought
for in this writ petition.
         Writ petition is accordingly closed.
                                                                                    JUDGE
Anamika
                                                                      Page 3 of 3


