                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                      WP(C) No.5495 of 2012
                                     Kahibari Girls M.E School & Ors
                                                                ............   Petitioners
                                             - Versus –
                                      The State of Assam and others
                                                                     ........ Respondents
                                             BEFORE
                       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                       For the petitioners:     Mr. A.R. Sikdar, Adv
                       For the respondents:      Mr. N. Sarma, SC, Education Dept.
                      Date of Hearing :         07.06.2017.
                      Date of Judgment:        07.06.2017.
                          JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. A.R Sikdar, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. N.
      Sarma, learned Standing Counsel for the Elementary Education Department,
      Assam.
      2.      The petitioners before this Court are 10(ten) different Middle Schools
      of Barpeta district, which were established in remote villages during the
      period of 1990-1998. The petitioner schools were established after obtaining
      the required permission and on fulfilling the necessary requirement for
      consideration of provincialisation as provided under Rule-5 of the Assam
      Elementary Education (Provincialisation) Rules, 1977. It is stated that the
      petitioner schools satisfied the requirement of having a minimum distance of
      3 Kilometers from any other existing regular Middle School and also has the
      minimum required enrollment of students as well as the 2(two) Bighas of
WP(C) No.5495 of 2012                                                              Page 1 of 3

      land, school building and qualified teachers required for the purpose of
      running a school. It is also stated that the inspection report of the petitioner
      schools were forwarded to the higher authority for the purpose of granting
      recognition, financial assistance etc.
      3.      In the aforesaid circumstance, it is the case of the petitioners that the
      petitioners have not been provided with the required financial assistance and
      other benefits that are due to them under the various schemes adopted by
      the respondent authorities. Accordingly, the petitioners pray for a direction to
      grant recognition to the petitioner schools, to grant financial assistance and all
      other benefits like free books, uniform, mid-day meal etc and also to consider
      their cases for provincialisation as per the Assam Venture Educational
      Institution (Provincialisation of Services) Act, 2011 .
      4.      As regards the first prayer for grant of recognition to the petitioner
      schools, the learned Standing Counsel for the Education Department had
      produced a letter dated 25.07.2008 of the Commissioner and Secretary to the
      Government of Assam, wherein the Director of Elementary Education, Assam
      had been requested not to recognize any L.P/M.E school till further
      communication is received from the Government. It is stated that the said
      letter still holds the field and there is no further communication requiring the
      Director to pass any orders of recognition. It is stated that after the said
      notification of 25.07.2008, there are two further notifications reiterating the
      same position that recognition is not to be granted.
      5.      As regards the third prayer for provincialisation as per the Assam
      Venture Educational Institution (Provincialisation of Services) Act,
      2011, this Court by a judgment and order dated 23.09.2016 in WP(C)
      No.3190/2012 had declared the said Act to be ultra-virus. Accordingly, as the
      Act itself has been declared ultra-virus, no further direction can be issued for
      provincialisation under the said Act.
      6.      As regards the second prayer for grant of financial assistance and
      other benefits like free books, uniform, mid-day meal, the learned Standing
      Counsel for the Education Department submits that at present there is no
      such scheme of the respondent authorities for grant of financial assistance. It
      is stated that as regards the financial assistance, there is an interim order of
      this Court dated 16.03.2016 passed in WP(C) No.575/2015, wherein it had
WP(C) No.5495 of 2012                                                            Page 2 of 3

      been provided that the respondents in the Elementary, Secondary and Higher
      Education Department shall not disburse any financial assistance/financial
      incentives    to   any   Non-Government       Educational/Venture    Educational
      Institution of the State. Accordingly, it is stated that for the present, the
      financial assistance also cannot be granted to the petitioners.
      7.      However, as regards the grand of other benefits like free books,
      uniform and mid-day meal, the State respondent authorities shall examine the
      case of the petitioner schools and provide the required benefits as per the
      existing schemes of the State respondents. In the event, the existing schemes
      provide for free books, uniform, mid-day meal; the respondent authorities
      shall take appropriate steps for providing the same to the petitioner schools.
      8.      As regards other benefits of recognition, financial assistance and
      provincialisation, the petitioners would be at liberty to approach this Court on
      any subsequent occasion in the event such benefits are made available by the
      State respondent authorities and the same are not granted to the petitioner
      schools.
              In terms of the above, the writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                             JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.5495 of 2012                                                           Page 3 of 3


