                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
    (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM AND
                           ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                            WP(C)No.5117/2012
       Smti. Sashi Talukdar (Devi)
                                                                   …Petitioner
                                    -Versus-
       The State of Assam & 3 Others
                                                               … Respondents
                                 BEFORE
    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
       Advocates for the Petitioner           :     Mr. P Upadhyay
                                                    Mr. GK Medhi
       Advocates for the Respondents          :     Mr. SS Roy
                                                    Govt. Advocate
                                                    Assam
       Date of hearing & Judgment              :    17.07.2017
                     JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
      Heard Ms. K Jain, learned counsel appearing on behalf of Mr. P
Upadhyay, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. SS Roy, learned
State counsel for the respondents.
2.    The petitioner is in occupation of the land measuring 3 kathas 14 lechas
under dag No.114 of Patta No.F.S. Grant-1 of village Baruabari, Mouza
Panbari in the district of Kamrup(M).

                                         2
3.     It is stated that the petitioner had constructed her dwelling house over
the said plot of land and for the last 37 years, there is no dispute with any
person or any authority as regards the aforesaid occupation.
4.     Annexure-1, is the copy of the Chitha, which indicates that the
petitioner is in occupation of 3 kathas 15 lechas under dag No.114 of Patta
No.F.S. Grant No.1 of village Baruabari, Mouza Panbari under the Sonapur
Revenue Circle, out of the total land measuring 17 bighas 4 kathas 10 lechas
under the said dag. Annexures 2 to 6 indicates that the petitioner has been
paying the required land revenue in respect of her aforesaid land.
5.     In the circumstances, the petitioner is aggrieved by the notice undated
under the signature of the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Kamrup (M)
under Section 18(2), 165(i), 165(ii), 165(iii) of the Assam Land and Revenue
Regulation, 1886 issued against her name. The Eviction Case No.74/2012 has
been registered and the name of the purported illegal occupant is shown to
be the present petitioner Smti Sashi Talukdar (Devi) being the wife of Sri
Baneswar Talukdar. The notice states that the petitioner is illegally occupying
the land and, therefore, it is ordered that the petitioner either vacate the land
or else she would be evicted.
6.     But what is noticeable is that the schedule of the land included in the
said notice is stated to be Dag no.308 of village Baruabari under Mouza
Panbari, in the district of Kamrup(Metro) and the area of land is stated to be 1
katha 10 lechas of land.
7.     As noticed earlier that the petitioner is in occupation of 3 kathas 14
lechas under dag No.114 of Patta No.F.S. Grant-1 of village Baruabari, Mouza
Panbari in the district of Kamrup(M), whereas the notice of eviction served
upon her is in respect of Dag no.308 of village Baruabari under Mouza
Panbari, in the district of Kamrup(Metro).
8.     In such view of the matter, this writ petition is disposed of with the
observation that the petitioner shall not be evicted from the occupation of her

                                         3
land of 3 kathas 14 lechas under dag No.114 of Patta No.F.S. Grant-1 of
village Baruabari, Mouza Panbari in the district of Kamrup(M), pursuant to the
said notice, which is annexed as Annexure-7 to the writ petition.
9.     In the event, the respondent authorities feel that the petitioner is liable
to be evicted, such process should be initiated only upon serving appropriate
notice in respect of Dag No.114 and not in respect of some other Dag
Number.
10.    In terms of the above, this writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                        JUDGE
Shivani


