                                     IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
               (HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                          WP(C) No.5400/2010
                    Smti N. Bijoya Devi,
                    Vill. Gaura Nagar,
                    P.O. Padampukhuri, P.S. Hojai,
                    District-Nagaon, Assam.
                                                                       ……PETITIONER.
                             VERSUS
             1.     The state of Assam
                    Rep. by its Secretary to the Govt. of Assam,
                    In charge of Secondary education, Dispur, Ghy-6
             2.     The commissioner and Secretary to the Govt. of Assam,
                    Education (Secondary) deptt, Dispur, Ghy-6
             3.      The Director OF Secondary Education
                    Assam, Kahilipara, Ghy-19
             4.      The Inspector of Schools,
                    Nagaon Dist Circle, Nagaon
             5.     The Headmaster,
                    Dakhin Hojai High School, Hojai, P.O. & P.S. Hojai
                    in the District of Nagaon, Assam
             6.      Smti Munmi Bora,
                    W/o Sri Dijen Kalita, At Hojai Natun Bazar,
                    P.O. & P.S. Hojai, Dist Nagaon, Assam.
             7.     The Deputy Commissioner,
                    Nagaon district, Nagaon, Assam.                    …….RESPONDENTS.
                                                  BEFORE
                             THE HON’BLE MR JUSTICE HRISHIKESH ROY
             For the petitioner            : Mr. G.C. Phukan,
                                             Mr. S.K. Singh.           …. Advocates
             For the respondent Nos.1 – 4 : Mr. A. Deka.               ….. SC,
                                                                       Secondary Education
             For the respondent No.6       : Mr. B.D. Das.             … Sr. Advocate
                                             Mr. D. Nath.              … Advocate.
             For the respondent No.7       : Mr. CKS Barua.            … GA, Assam
             Dates of hearing & Judgement :        25.7.2017
WP(c) No.5400/2010
                                                                                 Page 1 of 4

                                                              2
                                          JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
                                  Heard Mr. G.C. Phukan, the learned Counsel appearing for the
                  petitioner. Mr. A. Deka, the learned Standing Counsel, Secondary Education
                  Department appears for the respondent Nos.1 – 4. The learned Government
                  Advocate Mr. CKS Barua represents the DC, Nagaon (respondent No.7). The rival
                  litigant Munmi Bora (respondent No.6), is represented by Mr. B.D. Das, the
                  learned Senior Counsel.
                  2.               The matter pertains to appointment of contractual teacher in the
                  core subject English, in the Dakshin Hojai School, under the Scheme to
                  strengthen and improve the quality of secondary education in the State of
                  Assam, as per the Government Notification dated 10.6.2010 (Annexure-A). Under
                  the Government Scheme, additional teachers are to be appointed on contractual
                  basis, to teach the core subjects of English, Social Science, Mathematics and
                  General Science. The selection of teachers is to be made through a Committee
                  headed by the Deputy Commissioner and the minimum entry qualification is
                  specified in Clause 10 of the Notification of 10.6.2010. The vacancy in the School
                  was advertised on 29.6.2010 (Annexure-C) and the petitioner offered her
                  candidature. However, the Selection Committee placed the petitioner in the 2nd
                  position and accordingly the rival candidate Munmi Bora (Respondent No.6), with
                  a highest aggregate score of 260.71, was appointed as the contractual English
                  Teacher.
                  3.              Assailing the legality of the selection process, Mr. G.C. Phukan, the
                  learned Counsel submits that in the viva-voce segment, low marks were awarded
                  to the petitioner and that is how he argues that the selection of a lesser merited
                  candidate was ensured. The petitioner also contends that preference for her
                  candidature should have been considered on account of her B.Ed degree but this
                  was not done. It is further submitted that the husband of the selected candidate
                  was a Member of School Management Committee (SMC) and this has influenced
                  the selection process, of the appointed person.
WP(c) No.5400/2010
                                                                                  Page 2 of 4

                                                           3
                  4.             Under Clause 7 of the Notification dated 10.6.2010 (Annexure-A),
                  the Selection Committee is to be constituted by the DC, the President of the
                  SMC, the School Head and the Subject Expert – to             be nominated by the
                  Inspector of Schools. No other person including a Member of the SMC, is
                  involved with the selection process. Therefore, it cannot be said that the husband
                  of the selected person as a Member of the         SMC, could have influenced the
                  selection, since he had no role in the process and selection was based on
                  aggregate score of the candidates after due evaluation.
                  5.             In so far as the B.Ed qualification of the writ petitioner, the score-
                  sheet (Annexure-I) prepared by the Selection Committee reflects that 30 marks
                  were awarded to the writ petitioner for her B.Ed degree whereas zero score was
                  given for the respondent No.6, in this segment of the evaluation. Therefore, due
                  credit to the writ petitioner was given for her B.Ed qualification and she was not
                  prejudiced in the evaluation process.
                  6.             The Dakshin Hojai School where the teacher was to be appointed,
                  is an Assamese Medium School where the students are from vernacular
                  background. Considering the profile of the students, the school Headmaster as a
                  Member of the Selection Board, made the pertinent observation that the
                  petitioner cannot speak Assamese whereas, the school is an Assamese Medium
                  School. On that basis, 30 out of 70 marks was awarded to the writ petitioner in
                  the viva-voce segment. On the other hand, answers of the selected candidate
                  were found to be brilliant and the respondent No.6 was found to be a smart
                  candidate with good communication skill. Thus, on the basis of comparative
                  evaluation, higher marks in the viva-voce segment, was awarded to the
                  respondent No.6.
                  7.             The petitioner’s mother tongue is admittedly Meitei and she
                  cannot speak the Assamese language. The Selection Committee considered this
                  to be a negative quality of the candidate for the Assamese Medium School. When
WP(c) No.5400/2010
                                                                                 Page 3 of 4

                                                            4
                  most students are of vernacular medium, it will be advantageous in my
                  perception, if the English Subject Teacher can also communicate in vernacular.
                  Therefore, awarding of lesser marks for the candidate, who is unable to converse
                  in Assamese, in the context of the requirement of the students, cannot be said to
                  be unreasonable.
                  8.              The selection records are annexed and those reflects that
                  appropriate marks for the educational qualification for each segment were
                  awarded to the candidates. Even with the 30 extra marks awarded to the
                  petitioner for her B.Ed qualification, her total aggregate score was less than the
                  respondent No.6. That is how, the candidate with the highest aggregate score as
                  per the evaluation made by the Selection Committee, was appointed in the
                  school.
                  9.              The evaluation made by the Selection Committee is found to be
                  based on objective criterion where attempt was to select the best merited and
                  most suitable person. Hence, I see no infirmity with the process. The writ
                  petition is thus found devoid of merit and the same is accordingly dismissed.
                  10.             With the above order, the case stands disposed of. No cost.
                                                                                      JUDGE
                  Datta
WP(c) No.5400/2010
                                                                                Page 4 of 4


