                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM : NAGALAND : MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                   WP(C) 5706/2012
                  Bani Kanta Talukdar
                                                                           ……..Petitioner
                          - VER SUS -
                  State of Assam & Ors.
                                                                           ………Respondents
                                               BEFORE
               HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
         Advocate for the petitioner       :-Mr. S. Hoque
         Advocate for the respondent Nos.1 to 3:- Dr. B. Ahmed
         Advocate for the respondent No.4:- Mr. R. Talukdar
         Advocate for the respondent No.5:- Mr. R. Borpujari
         Advocate for the Pension Department:- Mr. A. Chetry
         Date of Hearing & Judgment           : 10.07.2017
                                 JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
         Heard Mr. S. Hoque, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Dr. B. Ahmed, learned
 counsel appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 and Mr. R.K. Talukdar, learned
 counsel for the respondent No.4 and Mr. R. Borpujari, learned counsel appearing for the
 respondent No.5 as well as Mr. A. Chetry appearing for the Pension Department.
 2.      The petitioner was appointed as a Muster Roll Khalasi on 07.11.1988 in the Office of the
 Executive Engineer, Pahumara Rupahi Division (Irrigation) Sarupeta and since then, he continued
 to serve in the said capacity. Subsequently, by the notification dated 22.07.2005 of the Irrigation
 Department, the service of the petitioner was regularized along with other similarly situated
 persons. After being regularized, the petitioner superannuated from service on 28.02.2011.
                                                                           Page 1 of 4

3.        In this writ petition, the petitioner claims for a direction that in the aforesaid factual
background, the respondent authorities be directed to pay the pension to the petitioner on and
from 01.03.2011 along with interest of 18% per annum.
4.       Mr. A. Chetry, learned counsel for the respondent No.6 submits that the writ petitioner
being a Muster Roll worker, the minimum qualifying service for being entitled for pension is 20
years.
5.       It is also stated that for computing the period of 20 years, 6 years of service as Muster
Roll worker has to be deducted from the calculation. The petitioner served as a Muster Roll
employee from 07.11.1988 to 22.07.2005 i.e. for a period approximately 16 years and 8 months.
Accordingly, if 6 years is taken out from the service rendered by the petitioner as a Muster Roll
worker, the service rendered by him as a Muster Roll worker would be 16 years 8 months minus
6 years that would be equal to about 10 years 8 months.
6.       Accordingly, if 6 years is taken out from the total period of service rendered by the
petitioner from 07.11.1988 to 28.02.2011, which otherwise comes to about 22 years 3 months,
the total service rendered by the petitioner would again be approximately 16 years and 3
months.
7.       Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a judgment and order of this Court
rendered by Biren Chandra Das –Vs- State of Assam & Ors., in WP(C) No.6225/2016 which
was decided on 25.04.2017.
8.       In the said writ petition although the petitioner therein had served as a Muster Roll
worker and subsequently regularized, but the issue therein was that the petitioner fell short of
the 20 years qualifying service by about 6 months.
9.       Accordingly, this Court by taking recourse to Rule 67 of the Assam Services (Pension)
Rules 1969 (in short Rule of 1969) had directed the respondent authorities to give consideration
as to whether the eligibility of pension for the said writ petitioner can be condoned. But the facts
and circumstance of the present case, as already noticed is that, the petitioner fell short of the
qualifying period by almost 3 years and 4 months and in such view of the matter, a similar
                                                                            Page 2 of 4

direction for consideration under Rule 67 cannot be issued, inasmuch as under Rule 67, the
Governor may condone a deficiency not exceeding twelve months in the qualifying service of an
officer.
10.      In the circumstance, the petitioner makes an alternative submission that his case for
condoning the qualifying period of service may be considered under Rule 31 of the Rules of 1969.
         Rule 31 of the Rules of 1969 reads as follows:-
         “31.      The service of an officer does not qualify for pension unless it conforms to the
following three conditions:-
         Firstly, the service must be under Government;
         Secondly, the employment must be substantive and permanent;
         Thirdly, the service must be paid by the Government:
         Provided that the Governor may, even though either or both of conditions (1) and (2)
above are not fulfilled:-
         (i)       Declare that any specified kind of service rendered in a non-gazetted capacity
                   shall qualify for pension, and
         (ii)      In individual cases and subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose in
                   each case allow service rendered by an officer to count for pension.”
11.      Learned counsel for the parties relies upon the proviso to the said Rule, which provides
that the Governor may even though either of conditions (1) and (2) are not fulfilled, may still
declare any specified kind of service rendered in a non-gazatted capacity to be qualified for
pension or further in individual cases, and subject to such conditions as he may think fit to
impose in each case allow service rendered by an officer to be counted for pension.
12.      Accordingly, it is submission of the learned counsel for the parties that ends of justice
would be met, if a direction is issued to the respondent authorities to give a consideration to the
case of the petitioner as to whether the deficiency in his qualifying period of service can be
condoned under the Proviso of Rule 31 of the Rules of 1969.
13.      It is pointed out that the aforesaid process for condoning the delay would be required to
be initiated by the administrative department which in the present case is the Irrigation
Department.      The Irrigation Department is accordingly directed to give a consideration as to
                                                                             Page 3 of 4

whether the qualifying period of service for the purpose of being entitled to pension, can be
condoned under the Proviso to Rule 31 of Rule of 1969.
14.      It is made clear that this direction to give a consideration should be construed to be a
direction to condone and it is to be ensured that the direction is to be construed only to be a
direction to give consideration to the same and exercise their discretionary power under the
proviso.
         The aforesaid exercise to consider as to whether the qualifying period of service of the
petitioner can be condoned be carried out within a period of three months from today.
         Upon consideration, the authorities shall pass a speaking order by giving justifying
reasons either agreeing or not agreeing to condone the qualifying period of service.
         With the above observation, this petition stands disposed of.
                                                                                  JUDGE
Anamika
                                                                          Page 4 of 4


