                                      IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
               (HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                           WP(C) No.5287/2010
                   Kamaleswar Roy
                   Research Officer,
                   Office of the Director of Elementary Education,
                   Assam, Kahilipara, Guwahati-19.
                                                                         ……PETITIONER.
                             VERSUS
             1     The State of Assam
                   Rep. by the Additional Chief Secretary to the Govt. of Assam
                   Education Department, Dispur, Guwahati-6.
              2    The Commissioner & Secretary to the Govt. of Assam,
                   Education (Secondary) Department, Dispur, Guwahati-6.
              3    The Secretary to the Govt. of Assam,
                   Education (Secondary) Department, Dispur, Guwahati-6.
              4    The Additional Secretary to the Govt. of Assam,
                   Education Department, Dispur, Guwahati-6.
              5    The Director of Secondary Education,
                   Assam, Guwahati-19.
              6    The Director of Elementary Education,
                   Assam, Kahilipara, Guwahati-19.
              7    Shri Satish Ch. Sarma,
                   Retired In-Charge Director of Elementary Education, Assam.
                   C/o The Director of Elementary Education, Assam,
                   Kahilipara, Guwahati-19.
              8    Shri Munindra Bharali
                   Assistant Research Officer,
                   Directorate of Secondary Education, Assam,
                   Kahilipara, Guwahati-19.                              …….RESPONDENTS.
             For the petitioner             : Mr. K. Agarwal.            …. Sr. Advocate.
                                               Ms. P. Neog,
                                               Mrs. P. Dutta             …. Advocates
             For the respondent No.1 – 7 : Mr. N. Sarma.                 ….. SC, Edu. Deptt.
             For the respondent No.8        : None appears
             Dates of hearing & Judgement :         18.7.2017
                                                   BEFORE
                              THE HON’BLE MR JUSTICE HRISHIKESH ROY
                                     JUDGMENT AND ORDER (ORAL)
                             Heard Ms. K. Agarwal, the learned Senior Counsel appearing for
             the petitioner. The State respondents are represented by Mr. N. Sarma, the
WP(c) No.5287/2010
                                                                                    Page 1 of 4

                                                             2
                  learned Standing Counsel, for the Education Department. However there is none
                  to represent the respondent No.8
                  2.               The matter arise out of an incident on 21.2.2009 at about 6 P.M.
                  involving the petitioner and the respondent No.8 in the office room of the
                  Director of Elementary Education (DEE), Assam. In his report dated 23.2.2009
                  (Annexure-A), the DEE reported that there was verbal exchange of words
                  between the Research Officer (R.O.) and the Assistant Research Officer (A.R.O)
                  and in fact the junior officer physically attacked his senior but were separated by
                  the Director with the assistance of other staff, in his office.
                  3.               Following the above incident and the report, a show-cause-notice
                  dated 5.5.2009 (Annexure-I) was issued against Munindra Bharali (respondent
                  No.8), under Rule 9 of the Assam Services Discipline & Appeal Rules, 1964
                  (hereinafter referred to as “the Discipline Rules”) with the following statement of
                  allegation :-
                                   “While Shri Munindra Bharali was serving as Assistant Research Officer
                          in the Directorate of Elementary Education, Assam an incident of physically
                          assaulting Sri Kamaleswar Roy, Research Officer of Directorate of Elementary
                          Education and Nodal Officer of the Honourable Education Minister in the office
                          chamber of the Director of Elementary Education on 21.02.2009 at about 6-00
                          pm was reported. Such act by a Government servant is unbecoming therefore,
                          Munindra Bharali, Assistant Research Officer is liable for disciplinary action.”
                  4.               In his reply dated 12.5.2009 (Annexure-J) to the show-cause-
                  notice, the respondent No.8 denied the allegation of physical assault but
                  admitted that there were altercation between him and the petitioner and also
                  some physical contact but both were separated by the Director. According to the
                  A.R.O, the allegations were exaggerated and should not lead to disciplinary
                  proceeding. But for the lapses on his part, the A.R.O sought pardon and
                  requested for exoneration.
                  5.               The reply of the delinquent to the Charge Memo was considered
WP(c) No.5287/2010
                                                                                     Page 2 of 4

                                                            3
                  and after due application of mind, the disciplinary authority decided to exonerate
                  the delinquent with a stern warning to maintain a balanced temperament in
                  future. With this order, the disciplinary proceeding was disposed of by the
                  impugned order dated 29.5.2009 (Annexure-K).
                  6.1             The petitioner assails the legality of the impugned order by
                  contending that when DP was started with the notice under Rule 9 of the
                  Discipline Rules, the charges should have been enquired and only then the DP
                  could have been concluded, either way. But exoneration of the delinquent
                  without a formal enquiry, is contended to be legally impermissible.
                  6.2             Referring to the procedure laid down in Rule 9 for disciplinary
                  action, Mr. K. Agarwal, the learned Senior Counsel submits that when DP was
                  initiated under Rule 9, the matter should have been processed as per the
                  procedure specified in the Discipline Rules and it is therefore argued that the
                  exoneration of the delinquent could not have been ordered, without a formal
                  finding in a disciplinary inquiry.
                  6.3             The Senior Counsel projects that a criminal case was also
                  registered against the respondent No.8 on account of the incident on 21.2.2009
                  and the trial in the criminal case is not yet concluded since the High Court
                  reversed the acquittal finding and remanded the case for recording fresh
                  evidence against the accused in the case.
                  7.              On the other hand, Mr. N. Sarma, the learned Standing Counsel
                  for the Education Department refers to the counter affidavit of the DEE and
                  submits that altercation was admitted by the delinquent in his reply dated
                  12.5.2009 and since he apologized for his lapses for the incident on 21.2.2009,
                  the disciplinary authority decided to close the chapter with a stern warning to the
                  delinquent. The departmental lawyer submits that all the circumstances were
                  taken into account before exonerating the delinquent.
                  8.              The procedure framed under Rule 9 are to be followed
WP(c) No.5287/2010
                                                                                Page 3 of 4

                                                            4
                  mandatorily if punishment is proposed to be imposed under Rule 7 of the
                  Discipline Rules. But when it is decided by the authority to not to punish the
                  delinquent, to conduct a departmental enquiry would obviously be a futile
                  exercise. In my considered view only when a delinquent is proposed to be
                  punished under Rule 7, the adherence to the procedural formalities under Rule 9
                  of the Discipline Rules is needed but such requirement cannot be insisted for a
                  situation, where the delinquent is exonerated by the employer.
                  9.              The steps indicated in Rule 9 are meant to protect a delinquent
                  from being punished without a fair opportunity and insistence on adhering to the
                  procedural requirement would hardly be justified when exoneration of the
                  delinquent is proposed.
                  10.             For the incident between the petitioner and the respondent No.8,
                  the disciplinary authority decided to conclude the DP by exonerating the A.R.O
                  and although the R.O was involved with the incident on 21.2.2009, as a witness,
                  the petitioner cannot insist on how the disciplinary authority should deal with the
                  situation since it is not prescribed in Rule 9 of the Discipline Rules that even for
                  exoneration, a formal inquiry is necessary. The petitioner as a witness to the
                  incident, cannot demand a formal enquiry into the charges only because, the DP
                  was closed with acceptance of apology. Therefore, I find no infirmity with the
                  impugned exoneration order dated 29.5.2009 (Annexure-K) and accordingly this
                  writ petition is dismissed. However this order will not have any impact in the
                  criminal trial stated to be pending against the respondent No.8. It is ordered
                  accordingly.
                  11.             With the above order, the case stands disposed of without any
                  order on cost.
                                                                                       JUDGE
                  Datta
WP(c) No.5287/2010
                                                                                 Page 4 of 4


