                                                                          WP(C) 6391/2016
           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
 (The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
           Case No:             WP(C) 6391/2016
       Shri Monuranjan Das,
       S/O Late Nripen Das,
       R/O: Vill: No. 1 Potapukhuri, P.O. Lilabari,
       P.S. Lakhimpur, District: Lakhimpur, Assam
                                                     ………..…… Petitioner.
                               -Versus-
       1. The State of Assam, through the Commissioner and Secretary, Department
           of Agriculture, Government of Assam, Dispur, Guwahati-6.
       2. The Director of Agriculture, Assam, Khanapara, Guwahati-22.
       3. The District Agriculture Officer, Lakhimpur, North Lakhimpur.
       4. The District Level Committee headed by the Deputy Commissioner,
           Lakhimpur, North Lakhimpur.
       5. The State Level Committee headed by the Chairman, Chief Secretary, Assam
           Dispur, Guwahati-6.
                                                           …........ Respondents.
                             BEFORE ::
          HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Writ Petitioner         :       Ms. N.S. Thakuria,   Advocate
For the Respondents             :       Mr. M. Phukan …    For respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
                                        Mr. M.R. Adhikary …..     For respondent Nos. 4 & 5.
Date of Hearing                 :       02.08.2017
Date of delivery of
Judgment & Order                :       02.08.2017
                                                                                 Page 1 of 3

                                                                     WP(C) 6391/2016
                 JUDGMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
        Heard Ms. N. S. Thakuria, the learned counsel appearing for the writ
petitioner and Mr. M. Phukan, the learned Standing Counsel, Agriculture
Department for the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3. Mr. M.R. Adhikary, the learned
Government Advocate appearing for the respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
2.      Considering the issue involved the case is taken up for final disposal with
the consent of the parties.
3.      The case of the petitioner is that his father died in harness on 20.07.2008
while he was appointed as Grade-IV employee under the Establishment of the
District Agriculture Officer, Lakhimpur, North Lakhimpur. According to the writ
petitioner he submitted an application for compassionate appointment before the
authorities concerned in the Month of August, 2008 and thereafter, his
application for compassionate appointment was forwarded by the District
Agriculture Officer on 27.05.2009 to the Director, Agriculture, Assam. As can be
seen from the communication dated 15.12.2009 (Annexure-9) the District Level
Committee which held meeting on 30.10.2009 recommended the petitioner and
forwarded his name for compassionate appointment to the State Level
Committee (SLC). The SLC thereafter on 30.10.2010 held its meeting whereby
the petitioner’s application was rejected on the ground that more than 1 (one)
year had lapsed since the date of death of his father. It is against this decision of
the SLC that the writ petition has been filed.
4.      Ms. N.S. Thakuria, the learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioner
submits that after the father of the petitioner expired on 27.05.2008, the
application for compassionate appointment was submitted by the petitioner
immediately    in   the   month   of   August,    2008    and   thereafter   on   the
recommendations of the District Level Committee, it was put up before the SLC.
No doubt more than 1 (one) year had lapsed from the date of death of his father
and the date of the SLC but the fact remains that application was submitted by
the petitioner well within time and therefore, the delay on the part of the
respondent authorities concerned cannot be attributed to the petitioner.
                                                                           Page 2 of 3

                                                                    WP(C) 6391/2016
Therefore, she submits that the SLC could not have rejected, the application of
the petitioner on the alleged delay.
5.       Mr. M. Phukan, the learned counsel appearing for the Agriculture
Department submits that although he is receive yet to instructions from the
Agriculture Department but fairly submits from the materials available on record
especially, the date of which the application of the petitioner was forwarded of
the petitioner, it appears that the petitioner application was filed on time and
under such circumstances, the application of the petitioner perhaps could not
have been rejected on account of delay.
6.       I have considered the submissions made by the parties and perused the
materials available on record, it appears that the application of the petitioner was
filed on time even by taking the date when the District Agriculture Department
forwarded the petitioner’s name to the Director of Agriculture on 27.05.2009 i.e
well within 1 (one) year from the death of his father on 27.05.2008.
7.       In that view of the matter, the findings of the SLC (respondent No. 5) so
far as the case of the petitioner is concerned cannot be sustained and the same
is accordingly set aside. The SLC shall now reconsider the case of the petitioner
in its next sitting for appointment on compassionate basis.
8.       The petitioner shall furnish a certified copy of this order before the
respondent No. 5 within a period of 2 (two) weeks from today and the
respondent No. 5 shall consider the case of the petitioner in its next sitting.
9.       With the above observation and direction, the writ petition stands
allowed. No cost.
                                                                     JUDGE
B. DEY
                                                                           Page 3 of 3


