                      IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
      (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                 PRINCIPAL SEAT AT GUWAHATI
                             (EXTRAORDINARY WRIT JURISDICTION)
                               WP(C) Nos.6964 of 2016
        Sri Sujit Sarkar                  …      ….     …      Petitioner
                         -Versus-
        The State of Assam & others.             …      …      Respondents
                                       BEFORE
                         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SUMAN SHYAM
For the petitioner         :      Mr. H. K. Das, Advocate.
For the respondents :             Mr. D. Nath,
                                  Addl. Sr. Govt. Advocate, Assam.
                                  Mr. T. J. Mahanta, Sr. Advocate.
                                  Ms. P. Bhattacharya, Advocate.
                                  Mr. N. Baruah, Advocate.
Date of hearing           :       27.07.2017.
Date of Judgment :                27.07.2017.
                             JUDGMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
1.      Heard Mr. H. K. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr.
D. Nath, learned Senior Govt. Advocate, Assam, appearing for respondent
Nos.1 to 6 as well as Mr. N. Baruah, learned counsel representing the
respondent No.7. Mr. T. J. Mahanta, learned senior counsel assisted by Ms. P.
Bhattacharya, learned counsel appears for respondent No.8.
2.      The brief facts of the case is that the Forest Department had issued a
notice dated 09.05.2016 inviting bids for settlement of the Dumnighat Mining
Area, NKD-B-3, North Kamrup Division, Rangia for a period of seven years. As
WP(C) No.6964/2016                                                        Page 1 of 6

per the NIT dated 09.05.2016 the reserve price of the said mining area was
fixed at Rs.54 lakhs (approx.). In response to the notice dated 09.05.2016, as
many as 8 (eight) tenderers including the writ petitioner herein and the
respondent No.7 had participated. On opening the bids it was found that
the highest bidder, who had quoted a price of Rs.1,11,55,999/-, was a
fictitious entity inasmuch, a subsequent enquiry revealed that no such bid
was submitted by the person concerned. The writ petitioner herein had
offered Rs.71,00,000/- but did not submit TIN particulars/certificate as per the
requirement of Clause 12(c) of the NIT dated 09.05.2016 as a result of which
the bid submitted by the writ petitioner, though second highest in terms of
the price offered, was rejected as technically invalid. The respondent No.7
was the third highest bidder who had quoted Rs.62,00,000/- and his tender
was found to be technically valid. Notwithstanding the same, taking note of
the revenue that is likely to be generated from the settlement of the market
through a fresh process of settlement, the concerned Additional Chief
Conservator of Forest had issued a communication dated 17.09.2016
addressed to the Principal Chief Conservator of Forest recommending that a
fresh sale notice be issued for settlement of the mining area inviting bids from
the genuine bidders.
3.       Since the respondent No.7 was adjudged as the technically valid
highest bidder, hence, the decision of the authorities to go for a retender
was challenged by him before this Court by filing WP(C) No.6019/2016
wherein, an interim order dated 04.10.2016 was passed by this Court
suspending the process of resale. Eventually, the aforesaid writ petition was
dismissed by order dated 09.11.2016 on being withdrawn by the petitioner.
WP(C) No.6964/2016                                                  Page 2 of 6

4.      It may be noted herein that the writ petitioner was also impleaded as
a party respondent in WP(C) No.6019/2016 filed by the respondent No.7 but
he did not challenge the communication dated 17.09.2016 till such time the
aforementioned writ petition was pending. It was only after disposal of the
WP(C) No.6019/2016 by order dated 09.11.2016 that the petitioner has
approached this Court by filing the present writ petition on 16.11.2016, inter
alia, contending that the decision of the authorities to adjudge his tender as
technically invalid was illegal. It is also the case of the petitioner that since
the highest bidder was found to be fictitious, there was no justifiable for the
respondents to go for retender by ignoring the price offered made by the
writ petitioner.
5.      The respondent No.2 has filed counter affidavit contesting the claim
of the writ petitioner, inter alia, stating that the tender of the writ petitioner
was defective due to non-submission of TIN and further that the department
had valid reasons to recommend issuance of resale notice in the facts and
circumstances of the case.
6.      Mr. Das, learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioner, has
strenuously argued that although the petitioner had not attached the TIN
certificate along with his tender, yet, the said document was subsequently
provided by his client. Since it is not the case of the respondents that the writ
petitioner did not have a valid registration with the Sales Tax department or
that he did not possess a TIN certificate, hence, the respondents were not
correct in holding that his bid was technically defective. By placing reliance
on a decision of the Supreme Court in the case of M/s. Poddar Steel
Corporation vs. M/s. Ganesh Engineering Works and others, reported in
(1991)3 SCC 273,       Mr. Das submits that the requirement of furnishing
WP(C) No.6964/2016                                                   Page 3 of 6

TAN/PAN/TIN       was   directory in nature and omission to enclose such
documents could not have been the sole ground for rejection of the tender
submitted by the petitioner.
7.      Assailing the decision to issue a resale notice, Mr. Das has further
submitted that since the highest bidder had turned out to be a fictitious
tenderer, hence, the offer of Rs.1,11,55,999/- made by the said tenderer has
to be held to be non-est. Under the circumstances, the expectation of the
departmental authorities of securing higher revenue through a retender
process was without a valid basis and hence calls for interference by this
Court.
8.      Mr. Nath, learned Additional Senior Govt. Advocate, Assam,
appearing for the State, submits that the authorities had rejected the tender
of the petitioner since the same was found to be non-responsive to the NIT
conditions. Since the petitioner has not denied the fact that the TIN
certificate was not produced by him along with the tender, the decision to
reject his bid on such ground cannot be held to be arbitrary and illegal
warranting interference by this Court.
9.      Insofar as the challenge made to the decision of the departmental
authorities to go for retender, Mr. Nath submits that merely because a
tenderer has participated in the process does not give him the right to
secure the settlement and it would be open for the authorities to go for a
retender if valid and justifiable reasons exists for the same. According to Mr.
Nath, the concern of the department to raise higher revenue is not only in
the best interest of the department but in public interest as well and hence,
no fault can be found with the impugned decision of the authorities to
WP(C) No.6964/2016                                                 Page 4 of 6

recommend issuance of resale notice as communicated by the letter dated
17.09.2016.
10.    Mr. N. Baruah, learned counsel for the respondent No.7, has also
supported the arguments advanced by Mr. Das to contend that the decision
to go for the resale notice was arbitrary and illegal.
11.    Mr. Mahanta, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent
No.8, submits that his client is an intending tenderer in the proposed
retendering process and therefore, supports the stand of the Government
that the writ petitioner does not have any enforceable right in the matter.
12.    I have considered the submissions advanced by the learned counsel
for the parties and have also gone through the materials available on
record.
13.    At the outset, it is necessary to point out herein that as per Clause
12(c) of the NIT dated 09.05.2016 the tenderers are required to furnish the
PAN, TIN, Bank A/C number, telephone number in the tender form and also
enclose self attested copies of the PAN, TIN certificate, Bank Passbook.
Clause 12 categorically mentions that the tender paper “must be
accompanied with the following documents”. A reading of the Clause 12 as
a whole makes it clear beyond any doubt that the tender paper must
necessarily be accompanied by the documents mentioned therein. If that
be so, it cannot be said that the same is a directory clause and non-
adherence to the same would not have a fatal bearing in the tender
process. The petitioner had admitted the fact that no TIN certificate was
produced by him neither the particulars of the TIN certificate were
mentioned in the tender document. It is on such count his tender was
WP(C) No.6964/2016                                                 Page 5 of 6

adjudged to be invalid. Under the circumstances, it cannot be said that the
decision of the authorities to adjudge the petitioner’s tender as technically
invalid is vitiated by arbitrariness. Rather, this Court is of the opinion that
accepting the bid of the petitioner as a valid tender would have been
contrary to the express terms and conditions of the NIT and therefore, illegal
in the eye of law. Although Mr. Das has placed reliance on the decision of
Poddar Steel (supra), yet, in the facts of the present case, I am of the view
that the ratio of the said decision would not have any application.
14.     Coming to the next objection raised by the petitioner pertaining to
the decision to go for retender, since this Court has already held that the bid
of the petitioner has been rightly held to be invalid, it would not be
necessary for the Court to examine the said aspect of the matter, since the
petitioner would not have any right to assail the decision of retender in such
circumstances.
15.     For the reasons stated herein before, I am of the view that there is no
merit in the writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed. It is, however,
made clear that in the event of a retender, it will be open for the petitioner
and the respondent No.7 to participate, if they meet the tender conditions.
        Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, there would be
no order as to cost.
                                                                JUDGE
T U Choudhury
WP(C) No.6964/2016                                                  Page 6 of 6


