                           IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                       WP(C) No.6204 of 2012
                                      Smti Pushpa Mahanta
                                                                     ............ Petitioner
                                              - Versus –
                                       The State of Assam and others
                                                                      ........ Respondents
                                              BEFORE
                         HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                        For the petitioner:       Mr. K.K. Mahanta, Sr. Adv
                        For the respondents:      Mr. N. Sarma, SC, Education Dept.
                        Date of Hearing :        07.06.2017.
                        Date of Judgment:        07.06.2017.
                           JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
               Heard Mr. K.K. Mahanta, learned senior counsel for the petitioner and
      Mr. N. Sarma, learned Standing Counsel for the Education Department,
      Assam.
      2.       The petitioner, who was the Headmistress in the Naobaicha Balika
      Prathamik Vidyalaya under North West Block of Jorhat had superannuated
      from her service on 31.01.2012. The provisional matriculation certificate
      issued to the petitioner by the Headmaster of the Jhanji Girls High School,
      where she had studied, indicates that her date of birth is 01.06.1956.
      Accordingly, when the petitioner had joined service, her date of birth was
      accordingly recorded as 01.06.1956. But on the other hand, the matriculation
      certificate indicates the date of birth of the petitioner to be 01.10.1949.
WP(C) No.6204 of 2012                                                              Page 1 of 4

      3.       Had the date of birth of the petitioner been considered as 01.10.1949,
      the petitioner would have superannuated from service on 30.09.2009.
      However, when such mistake was detected by the petitioner on or about
      27.01.2012, while she was serving as the Headmistress of the concerned
      school, the petitioner herself visited the office of the BEEO, North West Jorhat
      and informed him about the anomalies regarding her date of birth.
      Accordingly, the petitioner was verbally asked to continue for some more days
      till some alternative arrangement is made to appoint a new Headmaster.
      Thereafter, on 17.02.2012, one Ashok Goswami was appointed as the
      Headmaster of the school and he had accordingly joined. After the aforesaid
      Ashok Goswami was appointed as the Headmaster, the respondent No.4,
      being the Block Elementary Education Officer, had directed the petitioner to
      appear before him and give an undertaking in writing to refund the amount,
      which the petitioner had received for the period of her overstay in service. It
      is stated that the petitioner under duress had signed the said undertaking.
      Accordingly, the petitioner assails the aforesaid action of the respondent No.4
      in coercing her to sign the refund of the amount and prays that a direction be
      issued to the respondent authorities not to insist on the refund of the salary,
      which the petitioner had already been received.
      4.       In paragraph-10 of the writ petition, the petitioner makes a categorical
      statement that she had not withheld the actual date of her birth and on the
      other hand, when the petitioner was deputed to undergo the Basic Training
      Course in the year 1982, she had produced the original matriculation
      certificate before the authorities. Again when the service of the petitioner was
      confirmed in the year 1989 and also on 19.06.1999 when her stagnation
      increment was granted, the petitioner submitted her original matriculation
      certificate, which indicates that her date of birth was in the year 1949.
      5.       The averments made in paragraph-10 of the writ petition had not been
      denied by the respondent authorities and as such, under the law, the same
      has to be construed to have been admitted. In the above circumstance, it
      cannot be concluded that the petitioner had deliberately mislead the
      authorities as regards her date of birth and on the other hand it can be said
      that the correction of date of birth was not done by the respondent
      authorities because of any fault on the part of the petitioner.
WP(C) No.6204 of 2012                                                           Page 2 of 4

      6.      In Shyam Babu Verm a and others –vs- Union of India and
      others , reported in (1994) 2 SCC 521 , the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
      paragraph 11 was of the view that if an employee is paid certain excess
      amount due to no fault of theirs, it shall only be just and proper not to
      recover such excess amount, which had already been paid to them.
      7.      Again in State of Punjab and others –vs- Rafiq M asih (W hite
      W asher) and others , reported in (2015) 4 SCC 334 , in paragraph-18, it
      had been held that it is not possible to postulate all situations of hardship
      which would govern employees on the issue of recovery, where payments
      have mistakenly been made by the employer, in excess of their entitlement.
      One of the situation, which the Hon’ble Supreme Court had envisaged where
      recovery would be impermissible is that where the Court arrives at the
      conclusion, that recovery if made from the employee, would be iniquitous or
      harsh or arbitrary to such an extent, as would far outweigh the equitable
      balance of the employer’s right to recover.
      8.      In the instant case, the noticeable facts are that firstly, the petitioner
      had never mislead the authorities as regards her actual date of birth and nor
      she had refrained from producing the original matriculation certificate, which
      indicated her date of birth to be 1949. In fact, the said certificate was
      produced on three occasions, firstly, when the petitioner was deputed to
      undergo the Basic Training Course, secondly, when her service was confirmed
      and thirdly, when the petitioner was given her stagnation increment. On all
      such occasions, the respondent authorities had the occasion to verify the
      original certificate and also make necessary correction in the Service Book.
      But for reasons unexplained, the same had not been done. As such, no fault
      could be found in the conduct of the petitioner, inasmuch as, her date of birth
      had not been corrected in the Service Book. Further, although the petitioner
      as per the date of birth in the year 1949, would have retired in the year 2009,
      but the petitioner had rendered additional service and the respondent
      authorities had also utilized her service.
      9.      In the aforesaid circumstance, in the considered view of this Court, it
      would also be iniquitous and harsh on the part of the respondent authorities
      to insist that the petitioner refund the salary and allowances that she had
      received for the additional period for which she had served.
WP(C) No.6204 of 2012                                                            Page 3 of 4

      10.     In view of the aforesaid conclusion, it is directed that the respondent
      authorities shall not insist upon the refund of the salary that was paid to the
      petitioner for the period from the year 2009 till the date when she actually
      superannuated from service. In terms of the above, the respondent
      authorities shall act accordingly as regards the entitlement of the petitioner.
              In terms of the above, this writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                             JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.6204 of 2012                                                            Page 4 of 4


