                                    IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
               (HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                         WP(C) No.6497/2011
                    Prabhat Ch. Handique
                    S/o- Lt. Rameswar Handique,
                    Presently serving as Officer (Fire)
                    with the Assam Petro-Chemicals Ltd.,
                    Namrup, a Govt. of Assam undertaking,
                    Dibrugarh.                                         ……PETITIONER.
                             VERSUS
             1.     The Assam Petrochemicals Ltd. Namrup,
                    (Rep. by the Chairman, Board of Directors),
                    Namrup, Dibrugarh.
             2.     The Managing Director
                    Assam Petrochemicals Ltd.,
                    Namrup, Dibrugarh.
             3.     The Group General Manager
                    Assam Petrochemicals Ltd.,
                    Namrup, Dibrugarh.
             4.     The General Manager (HRM)
                    Assam Petrochemicals Ltd.,
                    Namrup, Dibrugarh.                                 …….RESPONDENTS.
             For the petitioner            : Mr. D Baruah              …. Advocate
             For the respondents           : Mr. N Deka
                                              Mr. D Deka.              … Advocates
             Dates of hearing              : 15.06.2017 & 19.06.2017
             Date of judgment              : 20.06.2017
                                                  BEFORE
                             THE HON’BLE MR JUSTICE HRISHIKESH ROY
                                        JUDGMENT AND ORDER
                    Heard Mr. D. Baruah, the learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner.
             Also heard Mr. N. Deka, the learned advocate for the respondents.
             2.     The challenge here is to the order dated 15.10.2011 (Annexure-G),
             whereby in pursuant to a Disciplinary Proceeding (D.P), the petitioner was
WP(c) No.6497/2011
                                                                                 Page 1 of 8

                                                               2
                  punished with reduction to the lower grade/post i..e Officer(Fire) w.e.f
                  17.10.2011 in the Assam Petrochemicals Limited, Namrup (hereinafter referred to
                  as “the APL”). The delinquent was serving as an Assistant Manager (Fire) and the
                  Charge Memo dated 27.7.2009 (Annexure-C) was issued against him with
                  allegation of refusal to perform his lawful duty, insubordination, improper and
                  disorderly conduct etc. On the night of the incident of 14.7.2009, the drainage of
                  Formalin in the Tanker Yard at the APL was noticed and the petitioner as the
                  Assistant Manager (Fire), was asked to attend to the emergency. But he failed to
                  discharge his duties and refused to obey the order of his superiors and exhibited
                  negative attitude. The charges of attempting to assault Atul Gogoi,              the G.M
                  (HRM) of the APL, being abusive and displaying riotous and disorderly behaviour
                  were also alleged against the delinquent, in the Charge Memo dated 27.7.2009
                  (Annexure-C)
                  3.       The contents of the Charge Memo dated 27.7.2009 are extracted
                  hereinbelow for ready reference :-
                     “STATEMENT OF ALLEGATION IN SUPPORT OF ARTICLES OF CHARGES.
                           Report has been received from General Manager (HRM) and Dy. General
                  Manager (MM) that on 14.7.2009 at about 9:30 p.m. Formalin was drained out at Tanker
                  Yard and as a result residents of the nearby area were facing serious problem. The matter
                  was informed to GM (HRM) by Shri Nobin Saikia, General Secretary, APWU over
                  telephone. To reduce the bad effect of Formalin, spraying of water through the company’s
                  Fire Tender was very much essential. Receiving the phone call, GM (HRM) immediately
                  informed the matter to DGM(MM) as he is the controlling head of the Fire Section.
                           As reported by DGM(MM), he asked Shri Prabhat Chandra Handique, Asstt.
                  Manager (Fire) to send the Fire Tender to the Tanker Yard to flush the water of the
                  affected area. But Shri P. Handique refused to obey his order and stopped the movement
                  of the Fire Tender. Also Shri Handique did not allow the drivers to ply the Fire Tender in
                  spite of the instruction of DGM(MM). Report has also been received that Shir Handique
                  refused to recognize Shri R.P. Neog, DGM(MM) as his Controlling Head. It was clearly
                  a wilful, insubordination and disobedience to the lawful and reasonable order of the
                  superior on the part of Shri Handique which is treated as misconduct as per Clause 25(i)
                  of the Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules for Officers of the Company.
                           Report has also been received that the employees who were present in the
                  affected area including GM (HRM), DGM(MM) and GS, APWU tried to make him
                  understand of the necessity of flushing out the area with the help of the Fire Tender. But
                  Shri Handique was totally in a negative attitude. GM (HRM) being a controlling head of
                  the administration tried to convince Shri Handique, but in return Shri Handique charged
                  him in a rude manner using some unparliamentarily words that he was not bound to
                  follow the instruction of Shri R.P. Neog, DGM(MM) and created an unhealthy situation.
WP(c) No.6497/2011
                                                                                     Page 2 of 8

                                                                 3
                  Shri Handique also clearly stated that he would not allow the Fire Tender to come out of
                  the factory premises as per instruction of Shir R.P. Neog, DGM(MM). While GM (HRM)
                  Sri A Gogoi, insisted him that it was obligatory on his part to obey the instruction of his
                  superior then he became furious and attempted to assault Sri A. Gogoi GM (HRM) in
                  front of other employees. While he was obstructed by the employees present there, he
                  shouted some un-parliamentary words and left the place saying that he would be coming
                  back immediately.
                           After some time, Shri P.C. Handique again came back to the place of incidence
                  with a sharp weapon (Da) with an intention to attach GM (HRM) but since GM (HRM)
                  was not present there he shouted with indecent words in front of the ladies and the
                  children present there and created an unhealthy situation. After some time, he left the
                  place by hitting his own bicycle with his weapon to express his anger.
                           Such a riotous and disorderly behaviour on the part of Sri P.C. Handique
                  constituted serious misconduct under Clause 25(v) of the Conduct, Discipline and
                  Appeal Rules for Officers of the Company.
                           Further, a representation from a group of house wives of the nearby area of the
                  Tanker parking yard was also received that Shri Handique uttered so many un-
                  parliamentary and slang words in front of the ladies and the children that the whole
                  situation became unhealthy and intolerable.
                           As per provision of the Clause-24 of the Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules”
                  An Officer shall at all times conduct himself soberly and temperately while on the official
                  premises and show proper respect and civility to all concerned and shall use his best
                  endeavours to promote the interest of the company and to maintain and promote the good
                  reputation thereof.
                           But Shri Handique by his above act of indiscipline violated the above provision
                  which is treated as misconduct under Clause-25(XIX) of the Conduct, Discipline and
                  Appeal Rules for Officers of the Company.
                           Shri Handique is a responsible officer and an incharge of an essential service like
                  Fire Section. Everybody is aware that Formalin is a hazardous chemical which is
                  injurious not only to human being but also to any of the living creature. Being the
                  incharge of Fire Section, he should play a very important role to protect the residents of
                  the locality from its bad affect. But, the attitude of Shri Handique was found to be quite
                  negative. He not only disobeyed the instruction of his superior but also neglect his duties.
                           As per Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules for officers, APL 1(i) “Every
                  officer shall, at all times, maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty and shall
                  conduct himself at all times in a manner which will enhance the reputation of the
                  company.” (ii) “Every officer shall also take all possible steps to assure the integrity and
                  devotion to duty of all company’s employees for the time being under his control and
                  authority”,
                           But Shri P.C. Handique by his act fails to maintain absolute integrity and
                  devotion to duty which constitutes serious misconduct under the provision of 25(XIX) of
                  the Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules for Officers of the Company.
                           Clause “D” of the Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules for Officers of the
                  Company provides that “Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly provided, the whole
                  time of an officer shall be at the disposal of the company and he shall serve the company
                  in its business in such capacity and at such place as he may from time to time be
                  directed”.
WP(c) No.6497/2011
                                                                                      Page 3 of 8

                                                              4
                          But Shri P.C. Handique, being the in-charge of an essential and emergency
                  service like Fire Section failed to realise that this service was at the disposal of the
                  company and he tried to run the section as per his own will without following the
                  direction of his superior which is a misconduct under Clause 25(XIX) of the Conduct,
                  Discipline and Appeal Rules for Officers of the Company.”
                  4.      In his reply dated 14.8.2009 (Annexure-D), the delinquent stated that the
                  Formalin leakage was at the Tanker Yard and the incident was outside the
                  factory gate and according to his perception, it was not the job of the Fire
                  Department to attend to the incident. Therefore, he asked for written order from
                  his superior. On account of the resultant heated exchange with Atul Gogoi the
                  G.M.(HRM), who allegedly abused the delinquent and also assaulted him in front
                  of everyone gathered at the site of the incident, the delinquent went to the
                  police station to lodge FIR against his boss, which led to the registration of the
                  Namrup P.S. Case No.48/2009 under Section 341/343/323 of the IPC. His failure
                  to attend to the Formalin leakage was attributed to the abuse and assault by the
                  G.M (HRM) of the APL and the countervailing necessity felt by the delinquent, to
                  report the matter to the police. In fact, the request for the written order to
                  attend to Formalin leakage at the Tanker Yard was projected to be a non-
                  negative act. He also questioned the efficacy of flushing water as suggested, to
                  deal with the situation and raised environmental concern. According to the
                  delinquent it was beyond the normal duty of the Fire Chief to attend to the
                  Formalin leakage and submitted that he was provoked by the conduct of the G.M
                  (HRM), at the site of the incident.
                  5.      Finding the reply of the delinquent to be dissatisfactory, an enquiry was
                  ordered into the Charges and when the delinquent was found guilty as charged,
                  the Inquiry Report was furnished to the petitioner on 27.2.2010 (Annexure-E). In
                  his reply dated 2.8.2010 (Annexure-F), the delinquent stated that the leakage of
                  Formalin at the Tanker Yard was a man-made disaster and that is why he asked
                  for written authorization to deal with the incident. Moreover he had in his mind, a
                  different strategy to deal with the chemical leakage. Therefore, the delinquent
                  questioned the assessment of the situation by the G.M(HRM) and others who
                  failed to see the delinquent’s point of view and abused and assaulted him, for
WP(c) No.6497/2011
                                                                                   Page 4 of 8

                                                              5
                  failing to deal with the incident at the Tanker Yard of the APL. However, the
                  authorities of the APL found the response of the delinquent to the 2nd show-
                  cause-notice to be inadequate and accordingly after considering the gravity of
                  the mis-conduct, under the Memorandum dated 15.10.2011 (Annexure-G)
                  ordered for the punishment of reduction to the lower grade/post            i.e. Officer
                  (Fire) from the post of Assistant Manager (Fire), in the APL.
                  6.1      Assailing the legality of the disciplinary action, Mr. D Baruah, the learned
                  Counsel strongly argues that the designated Disciplinary Authority of the
                  delinquent is the Head of the Department i.e. G.M (HRM) under the Assam Petro-
                  Chemicals Ltd. Conduct, Discipline and Appeal Rules for Officers’ (hereinafter
                  referred to as “ the APL Rules”) but here, the Managing Director (M.D), who is
                  the Appellate Authority, inflicted the punishment and therefore, the same is
                  contended to be in violation of the procedure in the APL. The petitioner contends
                  that since the Appellate Authority imposed the punishment, the delinquent was
                  deprived of the Appellate Forum and on this count, the impugned action is
                  contended to be vitiated.
                  6.2      The learned Counsel further contends that the punishment imposed on
                  the delinquent was disproportionate and was not warranted by the misconduct
                  with which, the delinquent was charged.
                  7.1      On the other hand, Mr. N. Deka, the learned Counsel for the APL submits
                  that the delinquent as the Assistant Manager (Fire), was irresponsible, defiant
                  and displayed negative approach in attending to the emergency emanating from
                  the Formalin leakage on the night of 14.7.2009. Moreover he did not focus on
                  attending to the problem and for other peripheral reasons, absented himself from
                  the accident site without attending to the incident, to lodge the FIR against his
                  superior. Therefore the Counsel argues that for a fire chief, it was a serious lapse
                  and thus it is argued that the punishment too was commensurate to the
                  misconduct.
                  7.2      The learned lawyer for the APL          refers to the inquiry proceeding to
WP(c) No.6497/2011
                                                                                   Page 5 of 8

                                                             6
                  demonstrate that full opportunity was afforded to the delinquent to defend the
                  charges and he actively participated in the proceeding by cross-examining the
                  PWs and also producing his Defence evidence. Therefore, guilty as charged
                  conclusion drawn by the Inquiry Officer, is contended to be in pursuant to a fair
                  and transparent process. Therefore, Mr. Deka argues that the Court should have
                  no reason to interfere with the D.P.
                  7.3      The APL lawyer points out that the G.M.(HRM) could not be the
                  Disciplinary Authority against the delinquent since he himself was involved and
                  was a witness to the incident on 14.7.2009 and therefore, the M.D. as a neutral
                  authority, took upon himself the responsibility to discharge the role of the
                  Disciplinary Authority. In that context, the loss of Appellate Forum as argued by
                  the other side is contended to be misconceived, since under the APL Rules, the
                  delinquent could have appealed the order of the M.D., before the Board of
                  Directors of the APL.
                  8.       In support of his first argument on loss of appellate forum, the petitioner
                  has relied upon Surjit Ghosh Vs. The Chairman and Managing Director, United
                  Commercial Company reported in (1995) 2 SCC 474 where the Supreme Court
                  held that if the Appellate Forum becomes unavailable for a delinquent, the
                  disciplinary action stands vitiated. But in my perception, the circumstances in the
                  present case are distinguishable and it will be illogical to blindly apply the ratio of
                  Surjit Ghosh (supra), to the present situation.
                  9.       Under the APL Rules the specified Disciplinary Authority for the delinquent
                  was directly involved with the incident on 14.7.2009 and therefore, the
                  designated Disciplinary Authority for his non neutral position, could not have
                  discharged his role in the present case. There was adequate justification for the
                  M.D to act as the impartial Disciplinary Authority and this cannot be faulted in the
                  given circumstances, by applying the ratio of Surjit Ghosh (supra). Moreover,
                  since the Board of Directors of the APL was competent to consider the Appeal
                  against the order of the M.D., there was no loss of Appellate forum for the
                  delinquent unlike the situation in the case cited by the petitioner. The alternate
WP(c) No.6497/2011
                                                                                   Page 6 of 8

                                                            7
                  approach was approved in Chairman A.P. State Electricity Board vs. M. Kurmi
                  Naidu reported in (2006) 8 SCC 62 and in my perception, the later decision
                  applies more logically to the facts of this case.. The Appellate Authority did not
                  cause any prejudice to the delinquent by acting as the Disciplinary Authority
                  since the Appellate Forum was still available against the order passed by the
                  M.D. In the domestic enquiry the G.M (HRM) Atul Gogoi was a material witness
                  (MW-8) and therefore, he could not have acted as the Disciplinary Authority in
                  the present matter. In such circumstance the imposition of the punishment by
                  the M.D. and not by the Head of the Department, as is contemplated under the
                  APL Rules, is held to be in order.
                  10.     In the inquiry proceeding, the management produced 9 witnesses and
                  also exhibited 7 documents. Whereas the delinquent examined one witness from
                  his side and produced 16 documents in support of the Defence. The delinquent
                  cross-examined the prosecution witnesses. The evidence of the D.W.1 in fact
                  corroborates the fact that the delinquent asked for a written order to attend to
                  the Formalin leakage since the location of the incident was just outside the
                  factory premises. The D.W.1 Khirod Sonowal was the senior leading Fireman in
                  the APL and most irresponsibly, the delinquent advised the key person of the
                  disaster situation team who had reached the site, to return back to the fire
                  station. The DW-1 waited at the fire station till about 10 p.m. and then the senior
                  fireman on his own, called up the delinquent who informed him that he was at
                  the police station to lodge the FIR. This reflects clear abdication of responsibility
                  by the delinquent in the face of an emergency situation.
                  11.     The inquiry officer considered all material and the conclusion reached by
                  him is based upon the evidences. Since a fair and adequate opportunity was
                  afforded to the delinquent to defend the charges, the legality of the inquiry is
                  not in doubt. Therefore, I find no reason to disagree with the guilty as charged
                  finding, rendered by the inquiry officer on 27.2.2010, against the delinquent.
                  12.     In so far as the proportionality of the punishment, it is important to bear
WP(c) No.6497/2011
                                                                                Page 7 of 8

                                                            8
                  in mind that the petitioner was the Assistant Manager (Fire) in the APL and was
                  expected to attend to all emergencies as called upon. But the response of the
                  officer left much to be desired. Instead of dealing with the crisis situation, the
                  delinquent diverted attention to other irrelevant aspects like man-made leakage,
                  jurisdiction of the incident, possible environmental impact if water is sprayed on
                  formalin leakage and so on and in fact the Fire Chief asked for written order from
                  his superior at 9:30 p.m., to attend to the emergent situation. This certainly
                  speaks volume of his mind set and also the negative commitment, to deal with
                  the situation. In fact, the delinquent personally directed his fire service team to
                  return back to the station, although they had rushed to the site of the leakage.
                  Moreover, most capriciously, on account of the confrontation with his
                  DGM(HRM), the delinquent abandoned his post disregarding the clear order of
                  his superior and went to the police station to file the FIR. To ask for a written
                  order at night to deal with the emergent situation and abdication of duty, reflects
                  immaturity level unbecoming of a leader of a crisis team. Therefore, in the
                  context of the misconduct, the punishment of demotion cannot be construed to
                  be unjustified. Thus the issue of proportionality of punishment is answered in
                  favour of the APL Management and against the delinquent.
                  13.     While demoting the petitioner under the impugned order of 15.10.2011
                  (Annexure-G), the period of suspension from 18.7.2009 till he was reinstated in
                  the lower post under the punishment order was ordered to be treated as absent
                  from duty for which the delinquent shall not be entitled to any remuneration. But
                  considering the nature of the penalty, and to prevent double punishment, the
                  interregnum period should in my view be counted as notional service only for the
                  purpose of superannuation benefits, which becomes available on retirement.
                  With such minor change of the impugned order, this case stands disposed of in
                  the manner indicated. No cost.
                                                                                       JUDGE
                  Datta
WP(c) No.6497/2011
                                                                                Page 8 of 8


