                                                                   WP(C) 6511/2011
          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(The High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
          Case No:           WP(C) 6511/2011
      Smti Seema Das
      W/o Subrata Kr. Deb
      Subhasnagar, Maibang
      District- Dima Hasao,
      Assam.
                                                        ………..…… Petitioner.
                            -Versus-
      1. North Cachar Hills Autonomous District Council represented by its
      Principal Secretary, Haflong,
      2. State of Assam represented by its Commissioner and Secretary to the
      Govt. of Assam, Hill area Department, Dispur, Guwahati-6,
      3. Commissioner and Secretary to the Government of Assam, Department
      of Finance, Dispur, Guwahati-6,
      4. Addl. Director of Industry and Commerce, North Cachar Hills
      Autonomous Council, Haflong,
      5. Commissioner of Industry & Commerce, Assam, Udyog Bhawan,
      Bamunimaidan, Guwahati-21,
      6. The Asstt. Director, Cottage Industries & Commerce, Dima Hasao,
      Haflong.
                                                           …........ Respondents.
                                                                         Page 1 of 6

                                                                  WP(C) 6511/2011
                            BEFORE ::
          HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Writ Petitioner        :       Mr. H. Talukdar, Advocate
For the Respondents            :       Ms. J. Gogoi …For respondent Nos. 1, 4 & 6
                                       Mr. P. Naik … For respondent No. 3
Date of Hearing                :       25.07.2017
Date of delivery of
Judgment & Order               :       25.07.2017
                 JUDGMENT AND ORDER(Oral)
        Heard Mr. H. Talukdar, the learned counsel for the writ petitioner as well
as Ms. J. Gogoi, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1, 4 and
6. Mr. P. Naik, the learned Standing counsel appears for the respondent No. 3.
None appears for the respondent Nos. 2 and 5.
2.      Considering the controversy in the instant case, the writ petition is taken
up for disposal with the consent of the parties.
3.      The case of the petitioner is that she was appointed as an instructress on
a fixed pay of Rs. 1000/- (Rupees one thousand) only under the establishment of
the Assistant Director of N.C. Hills, Haflong vide order dated 04.09.1992
(Annexure-3) with effect from 01.09.1992. Thereafter, her service was utilized on
ad-hoc basis vide order dated 30.03.2000 (Annexure-4) in the pay-scale of Junior
Instructress against the post vacated the previous incumbent on superannuation.
 4.     The ad-hoc appointment of the petitioner was thereafter regularized with
effect from 01.07.2008 in the pay-scale of Rs.3010-6075/- p.m. vide order dated
08.10.2008 (Annexure-6). Although, the petitioner was receiving her monthly
salary regularly since her regularization, her monthly salary with effect from the
                                                                         Page 2 of 6

                                                                      WP(C) 6511/2011
month of April, 2009, was stopped and therefore, the petitioner is before this
Court.
5.      Mr. H. Talukdar, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits
that no reason has been assigned as to why the salary of the petitioner has been
stopped from the month of April, 2009, while she was regularly paid her monthly
remuneration since her initial appointment and also after her regularization. The
learned counsel, however, submits that the petitioner upon making an enquiry
has come to learn that the recommendation of the Staff Inspection Unit (SIU) in
the Finance Department was not obtained prior to her regularization and
therefore, the petitioner’s salary could not be released with effect from the
month of April, 2009. The learned counsel submits that the petitioner is not
responsible for such lapses and since she has been rendering her service as an
Instructress, she cannot be deprived of her salary.
6.      The Finance Department against the writ petition filed their affidavit-in-
opposition on 12.06.2012, wherein, their stand amongst others is that after the
dissolution of the State Level Empowered Committee vide Office Memorandum
dated 04.07.2005 (Annexure-E of the counter), the administrative Department
concerned before filing up any vacant post invariably has to obtain prior approval
of the Finance (SIU) Department who shall examine the requirement for
continuing with the post in question and recommend for filing up of the same or
abolition of the post as the case may be. The task assigned to (SIU), is to be
carried out with assistance of the District Level Committee comprising of the
Deputy Commissioner as the Chairman, the Assistant Deputy Commissioner
(Development) as the Secretary, the Sub-Divisional Officer and the District Level
Officer of the Department concerned as members. Mr. P. Naik, the learned
Standing counsel appearing for the Finance Department submits that the
regularization of the petitioner was not preceded by the established norms
obtaining the approval of the Finance (SIU) Department and therefore, her
regularization being void ab initio, she is not entitled to salary as claimed.
7.      At this stage, the attention of this Court has been drawn by the parties to
the decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court on 08.06.2017 in Writ
                                                                            Page 3 of 6

                                                                  WP(C) 6511/2011
Appeal No. 45/2014 by which the appeal filed by the State Government in the
Finance Department was allowed. The issue that was considered in the writ
appeal was as to whether casual employees can claim regularization in service.
The Division Bench after considering the case in the light of the Apex Court’s
decision in this regard was of the opinion that the casual employees do not have
the right to be regularized in their service. However, considering the stand taken
by the State Government that they would not terminate the casual employees
working since the last more than 10 years, Court directed the State Government
to provide such benefits besides regularization as was projected without delay.
Further by taking into account the decision of the Apex Court rendered in the
case of     State of Punjab –Vs- Jagjit Singh, (2017) 1 SCC 148, the State
Government was directed to pay the employees the minimum pay-scale attached
to the post for those who were working since the last more than 10 years. In
order to appreciate the contents of the Judgment and order dated 08.06.2017,
paragraph No.22 of the said Judgment may be reproduced below:-
        “It is, however, heartening to learn that the State Government has
agreed not to terminate the Muster Roll, Work Charged and similarly placed
employees working since last more than 10 years (not in sanctioned post) till
their normal retirement, except on disciplinary ground or on ground of criminal
offences. The State Government has also agreed to enlist such employees in
Health and Accidental and Death Insurance Scheme, which will be prepared in
consultation with the State Cabinet. We appreciate this positive stand of the
State Government taken as welfare measures for the betterment and security of
the employees, in question. We, accordingly, direct the State Government to
implement the measures without further delay. Besides this, we, in the light of
decision of the Supreme Court in State of Punjab vs. Jagjit Singh, (2017) 1 SCC
148, also direct the State Government to pay minimum of the pay scale to
Muster Roll workers, work charged workers and similarly placed employees
working since last more than 10 years (not in sanctioned post) with effect from
01.08.2017”.
                                                                         Page 4 of 6

                                                                    WP(C) 6511/2011
8.      Upon hearing the learned counsels appearing for the parties and perusing
the materials available on record, it can be seen that prior to the regularization
of the petitioner vide order dated 08.10.2008, the relevant procedures and
guidelines in force as projected by the Finance Department contemplated in the
Office Memorandum dated 04.07.2005 was not observed. It is for this reason the
monthly salary of the petitioner has been stopped since the month of April, 2009.
Although, the petitioner may not have been regularized in service by following
the relevant guidelines and procedures formulated by the State Government in
that regard, the fact remains that the petitioner has been rendering her service
continuously till date as submitted by the learned counsel for the writ petitioner.
Considering the fact that as per the decision of the Apex Court in the case of
Jagjit Singh (supra) and also referred by the Division Bench, the entitlement of
the petitioner will have to be considered in the light of the said decision.
9.      Having regard to the fact that the petitioner has been continuously
working irrespective of her regularization under the establishment of the
respondent No. 6, I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner‘s
entitlement towards salary in the minimum scale of the post which she is holding
is covered in terms of the decisions referred in the case of Jagjit Singh (supra) as
well as Writ Appeal No. 45/2014. In that view of the matter, the respondents
shall pay the petitioner her salary as per her entitlement w.e.f 01.08.2017.
10.     As for the remaining period with effect from April, 2009 to July, 2017, the
respondents shall take a decision on the entitlement of the petitioner considering
the service she has rendered. Since, the petitioner works under the
establishment of the respondent No. 6 i.e., the Assistant Director, Cottage
Industries & Commerce, Dima Hasao, Haflong, the respondent No.6 shall within
15 days from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order process the
matter for decision by the appropriate authority. Considering the administrative
setup, the respondent Nos. 1 to 5 shall each play their role as expeditiously as
possible to arrive at a decision as directed. The entire exercise shall be
completed within a period of 3 (three) months from the date of initiation of
process by the respondent No.6.
                                                                           Page 5 of 6

                                                                   WP(C) 6511/2011
11.     It is needless to observe herein that payment of arrear salaries to the
petitioner to be decided shall be subject to proper verification that the petitioner
rendered her services for the period as claimed.
12.     With the above observations and directions, the writ petition stands
disposed of. No cost.
                                                                    JUDGE
B. DEY
                                                                         Page 6 of 6


