                     IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
 (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                      Writ Petition (C) No.6262/2010
Sri Deepak Das
Son of Late Ashok Das
Resident of village Silani Bengali
Po 18th Mile, PS Rangapara
Mouza Balipara, Sonitpur, Assam
                                                …….Petitioner
                  -Versus-
1.The State of Assam
Through the Secretary to the
The Public Heath Engineering Department
PHE Dispur, Guwahati-6
2.The Chief Engineer, (PHE)
Hengrabari, Guwahati-6
3. The Executive Engineer (PHE)
Tezpur Division No.I, Tezpur
Sonitpur, Assam
                                                      ……. Respondents
                                   BEFORE
                 THE HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
For the Petitioner                       : Mr. A Ganguly , Advocate
For the Respondents                      : Mr. MR Adhikari, Advocate
Date of Hearing                           :27.07.2017
Date of Judgment                          :27.07.2017
                                                            Page 1 of 6

                       JUDGMENT AND ORDER( ORAL)
        Heard Mr. A Ganguly, the learned counsel appearing for the writ
petitioner and Mr. MR Adhikari, the learned Government Advocate for the
respondents.
2.         The case of the petitioner is that the petitioner who was in
possession of a plot of land measuring 5 Bighas and 3 Kathas having Dag
No. 30 and patta No. 711 at Garmarah Buragaon under Charduar Mouza in
the district of Sonitpur, Assam had donated 3 Kathas land to the Public
Health Centre under the Garmarah Buragaon Scheme with the assurance
of the authority concerned that he would be given first preference against
an appropriate post as and when vacancy arose. The petitioner donated
his land in the year 1990 and the documents are in the possession of the
departmental authorities. The Executive Engineer, PHE Department of the
Tezpur Division vide his communication under Memo No. EE (PHE) Tez-
1/EG-28/96-97/214 dated 12.4.1996 had in fact written to the Chief
Engineer of the PHE Department stating that some verbal assurance had
been given to the land owners including the petitioner that job would be
offered against land donated and in view of such donation, he requested
smypathetical consideration of the land donors . However, pursuant to the
land donation in the year 1990 and the communication made by the
       WP (C) No. 6262 of 2010                           Page 2 of 6

Executive Engineer in the year 1996, the respondent authorities have not
considered the case of the petitioner and provided him a job under the
Department on account of the land donation.
3.          Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. A Ganguly submits that the
petitioner is only a simple villager and, in fact, on the verbal assurance
given by the authority concerned at the relevant time, he gave away his
land in the hope of getting a job as was promised to him. He submits that
many similar other persons had in fact donated their land as well and
pursuant to which they were offered appropriate jobs. Mr. A Ganguly
submits that the issue was under the consideration of the respondent
authorities as can be seen from the communication dated 26.3.1997
(Annexure-A of the counter affidavit) made by the Chief Engineer of the
PHE Department. He submits that though such instruction was issued not
to entertain claim for government job in lieu of land donation , the same
was only issued in the year 1997 whereas the petitioner donated his land
in the year 1990 and therefore, the same cannot be a bar for considering
the case of the petitioner.
4.         Mr. Ganguly further refers to the decision of this Court rendered
in the case of Jaharul Islam Borhuiya –vs- State of Assam & Ors. reported
in 2008 (2) GLT 773 which according to him squarely covers the case of
       WP (C) No. 6262 of 2010                             Page 3 of 6

the instant writ petitioner. He submits that this Court in the case of
Jaharul Islam Borhuiya (supra) considering the fact that the donation of
land by the petitioner therein was not disputed and also a deed having
been executed, directed the respondent authorities to consider his case
for appointment similar to those who were already appointed. He
therefore submits that the respondent authorities may be directed to
consider the case of the petitioner for his appointment against any
appropriate post under the Department.
5.           Appearing for the respondents, Mr. MR Adhikari, the learned
Government Advocate submits that the petitioner has not made out a case
for such direction as has been claimed. By referring to the communication
dated 12.4.1996, he submits that it is not clear as to whether any
assurance was in fact given to the land owners by the Departmental
officials concerned to provide job in lieu of land donation. He also submits
that the petitioner has also failed to substantiate that deed of agreement
was signed or the deed of land donation was executed between the
parties concerned by producing the same through his writ petition.
6.              The learned Government Advocate also by referring to the
communication dated 26.3.1997 issued by the Chief Engineer of the PHE
        WP (C) No. 6262 of 2010                            Page 4 of 6

submits that clear instructions have been issued to all the departmental
officials to avail government land for developing infrastructures of the
Department. The said communication clearly provided that no assurance
should be given for any government job in lieu of land donation. In that
view of the matter, he submits that the writ petitioner cannot have any
legitimate grievance with vested rights and under the facts and
circumstances, the same should be dismissed.
7.         I have considered the rival contention of the parties and perused
the materials available on record. On perusal of the communication dated
12.4.1996, it can be seen that the petitioner had donated his land to the
Departmental authorities and therefore, a recommendation was made by
the Executive Engineer of Tezpur Division under the PHE to consider the
petitioner for being provided a job under the Department. Although the
Chief Engineer of the Department on 26.3.1997 had issued instructions to
all the Executive Engineers of the Division not to give any assurance to
any land donors for government job in lieu of land donation. However, the
fact remains that the petitioner donated his land in the year 1990 and the
instruction of the Chief Engineer was issued only on 26.3.1997. I am
therefore of the considered opinion that the petitioner’s case should be
        WP (C) No. 6262 of 2010                            Page 5 of 6

considered by the respondent authorities fairly and compassionately when
there is no dispute on his land donation.
8.               In that view of the matter, the writ petition is disposed of
with a direction to the respondent No.1 i.e. the Secretary to the
Government of Assam, PHE Department to consider the case of the
petitioner for accommodating him in any post which is found suitable
subject to the condition that the petitioner is fit and eligible for such
appointment. The petitioner is directed to furnish a certified copy of this
order to the respondent No.1 within a period of 2(two) weeks and
thereafter, the respondent No.1 shall take necessary action and decide
accordingly within the outer limit of 3(three) months from the date of
receipt of a certified copy of this order.
9.            With the above directions and observations, the writ petition
stands disposed of. No cost.
                                                       JUDGE
Nivedita
         WP (C) No. 6262 of 2010                            Page 6 of 6


