                          IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
           (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                       WP(C) No.6602 of 2010
                                      Mukul Borah
                                                                   ............ Petitioner
                                              - Versus –
                                       The Union of India and others
                                                                    ........ Respondents
                                             BEFORE
                        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                        For the petitioner:       Mr. M.K. Sharma, Adv
                        For the respondents:     Mr. G.P. Bhowmik, Sr. Adv
                                                 Mr. S.S Roy, Adv
                       Date of Hearing :         19.07.2017.
                       Date of Judgment:        19.07.2017.
                           JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Mr. M.K. Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr.
      G.P. Bhowmik, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. S.S Roy, appearing for
      the respondent Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL). None
      appears for the respondent No.1 being the Union of India.
      2.      The respondent HPCL had issued an advertisement, as published in
      the local daily newspaper namely The Assam Tribune dated 24.12.2009,
      inviting applications for appointment of retail outlet dealers for dealing with
      petroleum products. The petitioner accordingly submitted his application for
      being considered for the retail outlet to be located in the Rangia town.
      Column-F of the said notice for appointment indicates that the retail outlet for
      the Rangia town was proposed to be developed on company own basis.
WP(C) No.6602 of 2010                                                            Page 1 of 5

      3.      It is the submission of the respondent HPCL that the aforesaid
      requirement indicates that the proposed retail outlet dealer would mandatorily
      have to lease out or transfer the concerned land in the name of the
      respondent HPCL.
      4.      The petitioner in this writ petition is aggrieved by a communication
      dated 09.07.2010 of the General Manager (EZ) of the respondent HPCL, by
      which the petitioner was informed that although as per the result declared on
      26.05.2010, the petitioner was the first empanelled candidate, but later on,
      after scrutiny as per Clause 18(C) of the Dealership Selection Guideline, it was
      revealed that the selection of the petitioner was not in accordance with the
      laid down guidelines and that it had resulted in a wrong selection.
      Accordingly, the petitioner was informed that the merit empanelled which was
      declared earlier, stood cancelled. The communication also provides that as
      there was no second empanelled candidate, the allocation would now be put
      up for re-advertisement.
      5.      The petitioner served a legal notice dated 23.08.2010 on the
      respondent authorities requiring the authorities to provide the petitioner with
      reasons for his empanelment being cancelled.
      6.      The respondent HPCL by their reply dated 03.09.2010 in paragraph-5
      had stated as under:-
              “Your client’s candidature was rejected as the following was observed
              during the scrutiny of the selection process:
              The land offered by your client was his late father’s property which still
              lies in his late father’s name. Furthermore, we have found that your client
              has not submitted any consent letter from his unmarried sisters and
              brothers for offering the said land to the Corporation. He has only
              submitted an affidavit stating that he is presently holding the right over
              the said land and that he has applied for the mutation of the same to his
              name.
              The said location has been advertised for opening a company owned
              retail outlet, whereas your client has categorically mentioned ‘NO’ to the
              question as to whether he is offering the land on lease to the corporation
              in the application submitted by him.”
WP(C) No.6602 of 2010                                                                  Page 2 of 5

      7.      The reason stated by the respondent HPCL is two fold. The first reason
      is that the land offered by the petitioner is a joint ownership land of the
      petitioner as well as two other unmarried sisters inasmuch as, it is an
      inherited land from their deceased father and there being no partition in the
      land, the respondent authorities require a No Objection Certificate from the
      said two unmarried sisters, which in fact, had not been provided by the
      petitioner in his application.
      8.      The second reason stated by the respondent authorities is that under
      the requirement of the advertisement, the petitioner has to transfer the land
      in question in favour of the respondent HPCL. But, in the instant case, as
      against the relevant clause, the petitioner had stated that he would not
      transfer the land in favour of the respondent HPCL by stating a “NO” against
      the said clause.
      9.      The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the bid submitted
      by the petitioner was a responsive bid in all respect and he has submitted all
      the documents that are required. But to a pointed query, as to whether the
      concerned No Objection Certificate was submitted or not, the learned counsel
      for the petitioner could not point out any material on record, which would
      indicate that such certificate was submitted along with the application form.
      The respondent authorities have made available the application submitted by
      the petitioner in original and allowed the learned counsel for the petitioner to
      inspect the same. But in spite of such inspection, it is found that the required
      two certificates were not provided along with the application form.
      10.     On the other hand, the learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
      the two unmarried sisters of the petitioner are not against issuing any such
      No Objection Certificate and therefore, if the petitioner is given an
      opportunity, such certificate can be produced even as of now.
      11.     Against the said proposal, the respondent authorities have raised an
      objection by referring to the guidelines for selection of retail outlet dealers,
      wherein in Clause-9, sub clause-g and h, it had been stated that no
      addition/deletion/alteration will be permitted in the application form after the
      cut-off date for submission of applications and that no additional documents
      whatsoever will be accepted or considered after the cut-off date for
      submission of application.
WP(C) No.6602 of 2010                                                           Page 3 of 5

      12.     On a perusal of the said two provisions of the guidelines, this Court is
      of the view that the said guidelines are to be read from the point of view that
      in the event, the applicant intends to submit a document, which would be
      within the realm of a curable defect, acceptance of such documents cannot be
      refused by referring to clause-9 (g) and (h) of the guidelines. Clause-9 (g)
      and (h) refers to, in the view of this Court, any such additional documents,
      which were otherwise not available with the proposed applicant at the time of
      making the application, but subsequently such lacuna is sought to be
      corrected by submitting documents at a later stage. But in the event, the
      nature of the document is such that the document was otherwise available
      with the applicant, but because of either wrong understanding of the clauses
      of the advertisement or for some other unavoidable reason, the applicant
      could not submit the document, it cannot be held that by invocation of
      Clause-9(g) and (h), such document can never be produced by the applicant
      at a subsequent date. The true purport of Clause-9(g) and (h) is that the
      applicant should not subsequently improve his case beyond what was
      available at the time of submission of the application.
      13.     But, be that as it may, the respondent authorities have also rejected
      the bid of the petitioner on the ground that in the application form relating to
      the Clause “are you willing to transfer the land on sale/long lease to the Oil
      Company”, the answer given by the petitioner is “No.”
      14.     As already noticed, it is a requirement of the advertisement itself that
      in respect of the proposed dealership outlet in Rangia, there is a mandatory
      requirement that the applicant would have to transfer the land to the
      respondent Oil Company in order to be eligible for the retail outlet dealership.
      In such view of the matter, the answer “No” given by the petitioner against
      the clause “are you willing to transfer the land on sale/long lease to the Oil
      Company” makes the application of the petitioner a non-responsive bid.
      15.     In such view of the matter, the respondent Company cannot be
      faulted with for cancelling the earlier selection made in favour of the
      petitioner. In such view of the matter, as the petitioner had categorically
      stated in his application that the petitioner does not intend to transfer the
      land in question to the respondent HPCL as required in the advertisement,
      this Court is of the view that the subsequent cancellation of the selection of
WP(C) No.6602 of 2010                                                          Page 4 of 5

      the petitioner by the respondent HPCL on a further scrutiny cannot be faulted
      with.
      16.    In such view of the matter, this writ petition is devoid of any merit and
      the same is accordingly dismissed, without any order as to cost.
                                                                             JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.6602 of 2010                                                          Page 5 of 5


