                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM : NAGALAND : MIZORAM & ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                                WP(C) 665/2011
                Md. Amad Uddin
                                                            ……..Petitioner
                        - VER SUS -
                State of Assam & Ors.
                                                            ………Respondents
                                          BEFORE
              HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
        Advocate for the petitioner    :-Mr. A.B.T. Hoque
        Advocate for the Education Department:- Mr. B. Talukdar
        Advocate for the respondent No.4:- Mr. B. Malakar
        Date of Hearing & Judgment       : 09.06.2017
                             JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
        Heard Mr. A.B.T. Hoque, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. B.
 Talukdar, learned standing counsel for the Secondary Education Department and Mr. B.
 Malakar, learned counsel for the respondent No.4.
 2.     By this petition, the petitioner is aggrieved by a set of guidelines issued under
 the signature of the Director of Secondary Education of Assam, wherein, in respect of
 graduate teacher, the minimum qualification is bachelor degree in Arts, Science and
 Commerce with B.T/B.E.d degree.
 3.     The petitioner is aggrieved by an advertisement under the signature of the
 Headmaster of Borgool Assamese High School, Anglarbazar under Karimganj District,
                                                                   Page 1 of 3

wherein, one post of teacher in Hindi was advertised by providing that the required
qualification is degree in Arts having Hindi as a subject with B.T/B.E.d degree.
4.      The petitioner by referring to minimum qualification for the post of Hindi teacher
as provided in the Schedule to the Assam Secondary Education (Provincialisation)
Service Rules, 2003, seeks to make out a case that the aforesaid requirement of
B.T/B.E.d is contrary to the provision of the said Rules, 2003.
5.      But notice also has to be taken that subsequent to the filing of this writ petition,
there is an amendment to the Rules 2003, whereby, Schedule II to the Rules 2003 have
been amended and the minimum educational qualification for the post of Hindi is
provided to be Pravin/Ratna in Hindi with 50% marks having degree qualification from
any recognized University or B.A. with Hindi as one of the subjects with 50% marks and
B.T./B.E.d degree from any recognized University.
        In view of such amendment to the Rules, 2003, the ground taken in the writ
petition is no longer available.
6.       Mr. Malakar, learned counsel for the school authorities also states that by a
letter dated 05.12.2016 of the Director of Secondary Education, the Inspector of School
had been instructed to initiate necessary process for filling up the post of Asstt. Teacher
in Hindi, Sanskrit and Arabic by strictly following the terms and condition reflected in the
letter dated 23.11.2016. The said letter 23.11.2016 provides the guidelines for such
appointment.
7.      It is agreed by the learned counsel for the parties, that in view of the
amendment to the Rules of 2003 and the subsequent process initiated by the
                                                                     Page 2 of 3

respondent authorities for filling up the post of Hindi teacher, no further adjudication is
required in this matter.
        In view of the above, this petition stands disposed of.
                                                                            JUDGE
Anamika
                                                                    Page 3 of 3


