                                                  WP(C) No. 7468/2016
                                                  WP(C) No. 7549/2016
                                BEFORE
                HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE NELSON SAILO
28.07.2017
         Heard Mr. H Buragohain, learned counsel for the petitioners
and Mr. MR Adhikary, learned Government Advocate, Assam appearing
for all the respondents.
         Since the issue involved in both the writ petitions are similar,
the same are being taken up together for disposal.
         In WP(C) No. 7468/2016, the petitioner’s father died in harness
on 2.6.2012 and pursuant to which, the petitioner submitted his
application before the Senior Assistant Settlement Officer, Hailakandi
(Respondent No.7) for his compassionate appointment in terms of the
relevant scheme formulated by the State Government.
         In WP(C) No. 7549/2016, the petitioner’s father died in harness
on 31.10.2012 and pursuant to which, the petitioner submitted his
application for compassionate appointment to the Senior Assistant
Settlement Officer (Respondent No.7).
         The cases of both the writ petitioners were thereafter
forwarded to the District Level Committee for consideration. The
District Level Committee in its meeting held on 7.6.2014, took up the
cases of both the writ petitioners along with another person for
compassionate appointment against the 14 vacancies in the post of
Chainman. However, upon examining the matter the District Level
Committee came to the conclusion that since there were no retention
orders for the vacant posts, no recommendation could be made.
Aggrieved, the petitioners are before this Court through their
respective writ petitions.

         Mr. H Buragohain, learned counsel for the petitioners has
drawn the attention of this Court to the sanction for retention of posts
for the on-going 3rd re-settlement operation of Cachar and Hailakandi
districts for further one year from 1.3.2014 to 28.2.2015, which has
been communicated to the Accountant General, Assam by the Under
Secretary to the Government of Assam, Revenue & D.M. Department
on 18.6.2014. The said communication has been annexed as
Annexure-12 in WP(C) No. 7468/2016 and Annexure-14 in WP(C) No.
7549/2016.
         Mr. Buragohain submits that the posts in question comprising
of Chainman, amongst others, have been regularly retained by
issuance of sanction for retention. The sanction for retention has also
been furnished to the Deputy Commissioner, Hailakandi and Cachar
Districts since a copy was marked to the two offices. Therefore, the
case of the petitioners could not have been rejected on account of
non-retention of the posts in question. He, therefore, submits that
under such circumstance, the respondent authorities be directed to
consider the case of the petitioners for their appointment on
compassionate basis in the next meeting of the District Level
Committee.
         After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioners and upon
perusal of the materials available, I am of the considered opinion that
instead of keeping the writ petitions pending and awaiting the
response of the State respondents, the respondent authority
concerned should be directed to consider the case of the petitioners
for compassionate appointment in view of the retention of the posts in
question.
         In that view of the matter, both the writ petitions are disposed
of with a direction to the petitioners to submit a copy of the writ
petition including all the annexures appended thereto along with a
copy of this order to the Deputy Commissioner, Cachar, Silchar

(Respondent No.4) within a period of three weeks from today and the
Deputy Commissioner, Cachar, Silchar shall thereafter place the same
before the next meeting of the District Level Committee for
consideration.
       Before parting with the records, it would be essential to
mention here that in WP(C) No. 7468/2016 this Court vide order dated
04.01.2017 had directed that one post in Grade-IV category should be
kept vacant until further orders. The District Level Committee shall
consider this aspect of the matter when the cases of the petitioners for
compassionate appointment are taken up for consideration.
       With the above observation and direction, the writ petitions are
disposed of.
                                                                JUDGE
skd


