                                                     WP(C) No.763 of 2017
                                      BEFORE
                       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SUMAN SHYAM
28.07.2017
        Heard Mr. A. K. Sarma, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also
heard Mr. D. Nath, learned Additional Senior Govt. Advocate, Assam,
appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos.1 to 5 and 7 as well as Mr. D.
Kalita, learned counsel representing respondent No.6.
        The brief facts of the case, giving rise to the filing of the writ
petition, is that the writ petitioner had earlier established a market in the
name of “Dakurbhita Hat and Go-hat” in the year 2010 over his own patta
land measuring about 5 bigha 4 katha 10 lechas situated at Fakirganj
under Nashkara Gaon Panchayat in the district of Dhubri. The petitioner
claims to have been operating the said market since the year 2010
without any interference from any local authorities. However, on
27.12.2016 the police from the Fakirganj Police Station arrived at the
market and instructed the petitioner to furnish order of settlement, if any,
issued by the Gaon Panchayat or Anchalik Panchayat permitting him to
operate the said market. When the petitioner stated that no such permit
was required for operating a private market, the police personnel did not
accept the same and on the contrary forced the closure of the market.
The    representation   made      by   the petitioner   before  the   Deputy
Commissioner, Dhubri on 09.01.2017 had also failed to evoke any response
as a result of which, the petitioner has approached this Court by filing the
present writ petition.
        By filing a counter affidavit, the respondent No.4 has practically
admitted that the market established by the petitioner is being operated
from his private land.
        Referring to a decision of this Court rendered in the case of Rupam
Talukdar vs. State of Assam and others, reported in 2009 (4) GLT 126 Mr.
Sarma submits that the case of the petitioner is covered by the said
decision of the Division Bench of this Court wherein it has been held that

the Gaon Panchayat or the Anchalik Panchayat would not have any
authority to interfere in the functioning of a market established on the
private land of a person. In view of the above, submits Mr. Sarma, the writ
petition deserves to be allowed by granting the relief prayed for therein.
       Mr. Nath, learned Additional Senior Govt. Advocate, Assam, has
invited the attention of this Court to the provision of Section 90(7)(i) of the
Assam Panchayat Act, 1994 to contend that the Gaon Panchayat and
the Anchalik Panchayat would have the power and authority to regulate
the development of any such market and it is in exercise of such power
vested under the Act of 1994 that instruction had been issued by the
respondent No.4 to stop operation of the said market.
       Mr. Kalita, learned counsel for the respondent No.6, has also relied
upon the argument advanced by the learned Govt. Advocate, Assam.
       The question as to whether Section 107 of the Assam Panchayat
Act, 1994 read with Rule 47 of the Assam Panchayat (Financial) Rules,,
2002 could be validly implemented so as to deny the right of a person to
carry on a trade or business on a piece of private property owned by him
was the question that came up for consideration before this Court in the
case of Rupam Talukdar (supra) wherein the learned Division Bench, after
considering the various decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, has
made the following observations in para 18 of the judgment which are
extracted herein below for ready reference :-
              “(18) Consequently Section 107 of the Assam Panchayat
              Act and Rule 47 of the Assam Panchayat Financial Rules are
              declared unconstitutional. The petitioner would be entitled
              to carry on his business of conducting a cattle market on his
              private land. The respondents did not bring to our notice any
              other provision which requires any kind of a permission or
              licence to be obtained for running of such a market, from
              any one of the authorities of the State including the
              respondents herein except the provisions of Section 107 of
              the Assam Panchayat Act and Rule 47 of the Assam
              Panchayat Financial Rules.”

        The law laid down in paragraph 18 of the decision in the case of
Rupam Talukdar (supra) leaves no manner of doubt that the respondent
No.4 did not have any authority or jurisdiction to interfere in the operation
of the market set up by the petitioner over his private land.
        A reading of Section 90(7)(i) of the Act of 1994 also goes to show
that the said provision relates to development of markets which are
regulated under the Act. Since a market established over a private land
does not belong to the category of regulated market, the said provision,
in my considered opinion, would not have any application in the facts of
the present case. The learned Government Advocate has failed to draw
the attention of this Court to any other provision of law which confers the
power and authority in the Zilla Parishad or Anchalik Panchayat to
interfere with the operation of a market set up over private plot of land.
        In view of the discussions made herein above, I am of the view that
the writ petition must succeed and is hereby allowed. The respondents
are, therefore, restrained from interfering in any manner with the
operation of the private market established by the petitioner. The said
direction is, however, subject to observance of provisions of the relevant
Rules and regulations that would normally be applicable in the operation
of the said market.
        The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
                                                               JUDGE
TUC


