             IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
(THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM AND
                    ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                         WP(C)No.7371/2016
   Daffodil Nursery (Old) a proprietorship firm,
   Having its registered office at Bherakuchi,
   N.H.37, Dhupguri, Kamrup, Assam
   Pin: 782 410, represented by its Proprietor
   Smt. Rekha Sarma
                                                            …Petitioner
                              -Versus-
   The State of Assam & 4 Others
                                                       … Respondents
                            BEFORE
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
   Advocates for the Petitioner        :     Mr. KN Choudhury
                                             Sr. Advocate
                                             Mr. J Patowary
                                             Ms. R Kakati
                                             Ms. A Baruah
   Advocates for the Respondents       :     Mr. S Chamaria
                                             Standing counsel
                                             Assam Seeds Corporation
   Date of hearing & Judgment           :    17.07.2017

                                         2
                      JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
       Heard Mr. KN Choudhury, learned Senior counsel for the petitioner. Also
heard Mr. S Chamaria, learned Standing counsel, Assam Seeds Corporation.
2.     The respondent, Assam Seeds            Corporation had     issued    an e-
procurement notice dated 01.09.2016 inviting bids from the eligible bidders
for supply of plant materials (plant, grafts & hybrid seeds of vegetables)
(Group-C) as mentioned in the bidding document. The petitioner being an
interested bidder, pursuant to the aforesaid e-procurement notice dated
01.09.2016 had participated in the said process. It is stated that the
petitioner is particularly interested for supply of plant, grafts & hybrid seeds
of Marigold, Tuberose etc., Mujaffarpur Litchi, Khasi Mandarin, Guava, Mango
and Hybrid Coconut (Kerala Dwarf variety).
3.     The petitioner is aggrieved in this writ petition to the effect that the
respondent authorities are resorting to some other method to arrive at L1
bidder in a manner which is contrary and de hors the provisions of the terms
and conditions of the e-procurement notice dated 01.09.2016.
4.     It is stated that as per Clause 19(c)(B)(iii), the purchaser will disqualify
and reject a bid if the bidder has quoted higher/lower price for a class/type of
seed offered by the bidder. It is further provided in the said Clause
19(c)(B)(iii) that the base price for determining higher/lower price shall be
the average purchase price of the respondent Corporation for the concerned
item for the last 3(three) years i.e. for the years 2015-2016, 2014-2015,
2013-2014 and any bid offering a bid price which is 15% above or below the
base price will be rejected.
5.     Accordingly, as per the provisions of the aforesaid clause 19(c)(B)(iii) of
the Indication for Bids (IFB), it is apparent that the respondent authorities are
required to first arrive at a base price of the previous 3(three) years i.e. of
the years 2015-2016, 2014-2015, 2013-2014.

                                          3
6.    In the absence of the appropriate data for the purchase price of the
aforesaid 3(three) years, the requirement of clause 19(c)(B)(iii) cannot be
implemented and no base price can be arrived at.
7.    It is stated by Mr. S Chamaria, learned Standing counsel, Assam Seeds
Corporation by referring to paragraphs 6 and 7 of the affidavit-in-opposition
of the respondent Corporation that the respondent authorities does not have
the data for the aforesaid in respect of the purchase price with the items
indicated above.
8.    In this respect, Mr. KN Choudhury by referring to the affidavit-in-reply
of the petitioner states that, in fact, the said datas are available.
9.    Be that as it may, if the respondent authorities are of the view that the
concerned data is not available, the appropriate base price cannot be arrived
at and if the appropriate base price cannot be arrived, the respondent
authorities cannot determine as to which of the bids are 15% below or above
the base price. Accordingly, the provisions for disqualification under clause
19(c)(B)(iii) becomes redundant and cannot be implemented.
10.   However, the second part of the said clause 19(c)(B)(iii) indicates that
in the event the data for the average purchase price relating to particular
item for the last three years by the Corporation is not available, the same
shall be determined by the respondent authorities on the basis of the
accepted tender prices of the similar items by the Directorate of Horticulture
or by the Directorate of Agriculture/Market Survey, including information from
other State Public Sector Agencies.
11.   In such view of the matter, if the stand of the respondent authorities is
accepted that they do not have the required base price of the previous three
years, it is for the respondent authorities to fulfill the procedure prescribed in
the second paragraph of clause 19(c)(B)(iii) and arrive at a base price either

                                         4
by accepting the tendered price of the Directorate of Horticulture, or the
Directorate of Agriculture or by making market survey, including information
from other State Public Sector Agencies in respect of the concerned items.
12.    In view of such provisions of the second paragraph of clause
19(c)(B)(iii), this writ petition is disposed of by directing the respondent
authorities to arrive at an appropriate base price by following the procedure
indicated in the second paragraph of the clause 19(c)(B)(iii).
13.    Upon the base price being determined, it shall be duly notified so that
all the intending tenderers have the knowledge as to what is the base price
that the authorities had arrived at. On being notified, the respondent
authorities shall proceed with the e-procurement notice and bring the same
to its logical end.
14.    It is made clear that without determining and declaring the base price
in respect of the concerned items i.e., Marigold, Tuberose etc., Mujaffarpur
Litchi, Khasi Mandarin, Guava, Mango and Hybrid Coconut (Kerala Dwarf
variety), the respondent authorities shall not further proceed with the e-
procurement dated 01.09.2016 and shall proceed only after notifying the
base price as indicated above.
15.    The respondent authorities would be at liberty to proceed with the said
e-procurement notice by accepting the tenders on the basis of the declared
base price or be at liberty to invite any fresh e-procurement notice by
indicating the base price.
16.    In terms of the above, this writ petition stands disposed of.
                                                                      JUDGE
Shivani


