                         IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
          (High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh)
                                     WP(C) No.901 of 2012
                                    Ms. Rasida Khanam Barbhuiya
                                                                   ............ Petitioner
                                            - Versus –
                                     The Union of India and others
                                                                    ........ Respondents
                                           BEFORE
                       HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE A.M. BUJOR BARUA
                      For the petitioner:       Ms. B. Devi, Adv
                      For the respondents:      Mr. P.J. Saikia, Adv
                                                Mr. P.P. Dutta, Adv
                      Date of Hearing :        26.07.2017.
                      Date of Judgment:       26.07.2017.
                         JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
              Heard Ms. B. Devi, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. P.J. Saikia,
      learned Counsel appearing for the respondent Bharat Petroleum Corporation
      Limited (BPCL) and also Mr. P.P Dutta, learned counsel appearing for the
      respondent No.4.
      2.      An advertisement was issued by the respondent No.2 being the BPCL
      dated 31.10.2010 inviting applications for appointment of dealers for retail
      outlet in the State of Assam. One such location mentioned in the
      advertisement was for a retail outlet at Lala Bazar in Hailakandi district.
      Accordingly, the petitioner submitted her application. Column-12 of the
      application requires the information to be provided as regards the details of
WP(C) No.901 of 2012                                                             Page 1 of 6

      the land. The petitioner had offered three plots of land and the owners of the
      respective plot were shown as Sifot Ali Barbhuiya, Imran Ali Barlaskar and
      Swhwakat Ali Barlaskar and one Hussain Ahmed Choudhury. In respect of all
      the three land owners, the petitioner indicates that the concerned lease deeds
      were enclosed. In course of its consideration, the respondent authorities
      ultimately considered the 3rd plot of land offered by the petitioner i.e. the land
      covered by Dag No.348, 350, 351, 352, 353 of Jalalpur Road. After such
      consideration, the respondent authorities found two persons to be qualified
      for being called for the interview i.e. the petitioner and the respondent No.4.
      Upon such interview being held, the respondent authorities prepared a
      comparative statement of the marks given to the two candidates.
      3.      From the comparative statement, it is seen that the petitioner Rasida
      Khanam Barbhuiya was allotted 20.5 marks in respect of land and
      infrastructure whereas the respondent No.4 was allotted 28 marks. In respect
      of the other criteria, different marks had been allotted, but the difference in
      the marks between the two candidates is so small that the same would not
      have an impact of its own and the entire selection is ostensively being made
      on the basis of the respective marks given for the category land and other
      infrastructures.
      4.      It is noticed that even if the marks given for other criteria are changed
      or to that extent it is considered to be equal, still if the marks given for the
      category land and infrastructures remains as it is, there would be no material
      effect in the end result. Consequent thereof, this Court makes its endeavour
      to examine as to whether the marks given for land and infrastructures to the
      two respective candidates are justified in the facts and circumstances or not.
      5.       Ms. B Devi, learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously argued that
      the land of the petitioner is not operationally less suitable in any manner than
      the land offered by the respondent No.4 and in fact the land of the petitioner,
      according to the learned counsel, is better suitable for the purpose of retail
      outlet.
      6.      Mr. P.J. Saikia, learned counsel for the respondent BPCL on the other
      hand agrees to the said submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner
      and states that on an inter-se comparison of the suitability of the respective
WP(C) No.901 of 2012                                                             Page 2 of 6

      plots of land, the petitioner was given 82 marks out of 100, whereas the
      respondent No.4 was given 80 marks out of 100 and therefore, it is a
      recognition on the part of the respondent corporation that the land of the
      petitioner otherwise, would have been more suitable. But the learned counsel
      for the respondent BPCL submits that the procedure for allotting the final
      marks renders is such that the petitioner gets 20.5 marks whereas the
      respondent No.4 gets 28 marks. The basis of the calculation of the
      corporation is that the land offered by the petitioner is a firm land whereas
      the land offered by the respondent No.4 is an own land. In case of own land,
      the assessment is made on the basis of maximum 35 marks and whereas in
      case of firm land, the assessment is made on the basis of maximum 25
      marks.
      7.      It is stated that admittedly the land offered by the respondent No.4 is
      an own land to the extent that the respondent No.4 had provided a registered
      sale deed of the concerned land and therefore, as per the application of the
      respondent No.4, it is the prima-facie indication that the respondent No.4 is
      the owner of the land. On the other hand, the writ petitioner had offered a
      land which is stated to have been obtained by her on a lease. Although
      otherwise a lease land is also to be construed to be own land as per Clause-
      14 of the procedure for selection of petrol/diesel retail outlet dealers dated
      15.09.2008, which is in short referred as the selection brochure, but upon
      scrutiny it was found that the lease deed submitted by the writ petitioner was
      not a registered lease deed and on the other hand, it was a notarized lease
      deed.
      8.      Accordingly, it is the submission of Mr. P.J. Saikia, learned counsel for
      the respondent BPCL that the land offered by the petitioner would be a firm
      land and not an own land.
      9.       In this respect, Ms. B. Devi, learned counsel for the petitioner refers
      to a decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court rendered in M oum ita Poddar –
      vs- Indian Oil Corporation Lim ited and another , reported in (2010) 9
      SCC 291 , wherein in paragraph 37, it had been held that non registration of
      a lease deed as required u/s 107 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 may
      affect the legal rights of the parties inter-se. But in a matter, where a non-
      registered sale deed is submitted towards offer of land for allotment of a retail
WP(C) No.901 of 2012                                                           Page 3 of 6

      dealership outlet, the concerned person does ot seek to enforce any such
      legal right and accordingly the Hon’ble Supreme Court was of the view that
      such land, the lease deed which is not registered, would also be acceptable
      for the purpose of the settling authority for its consideration.
      10.      By relying upon the views of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, as found in
      para-37 of the said judgment, Ms. B. Devi, learned counsel for the petitioner
      makes a submission that in such view of the matter, the offer of the land by
      the petitioner through a notarized lease deed was also a land to be
      considered as own land.
      11.     In order to adjudicate upon the same, the provision of Clause-14 of
      the Selection Broacher is referred as hereunder:-
              “Evaluation of the side offered by the applicants:
              Availability of suitable site for setting up of retail outlets at the
      advertised location is the essence of the project. Accordingly, applicants who
      ‘owns’ or have registered long lease for a minimum period of 15 years for
      suitable land at the location will be given weightage over applicants who have
      only a firm offer from third parties for obtaining suitable land either on
      ownership or on lease basis. The technical/commercial suitability of the land
      will be decided by BPCL based on the parameters and this will be done only
      for the land offered/details submitted along with the application form. If an
      applicant, after selection is unable to provide the land indicated in the
      application within a period of two months from the date of Letter of Intent
      (LOI), BPCL will have the right to cancel the allotment of dealership made to
      the applicant.”
      12.      As noticed, Clause-14(i) of the selection broacher clearly states that
      an applicant who owns or have registered long lease for a minimum of 15
      years for suitable land at the location will be given weightage over applicants
      who have only firm offer from third parties for obtaining suitable land either
      on ownership or on lease basis. In such view of the matter, it is noticed that
      the selection brochure makes a clear distinction between a land offered on
      lease through a registered long lease and land offered on the basis of a firm
      offer from third parties. In any view of the matter, both categories of land i.e.
      the land offered on the basis of a registered sale deed as well as a land on a
WP(C) No.901 of 2012                                                           Page 4 of 6

      firm offer from a third party are acceptable to the respondent authorities. In
      such view of the matter, the view of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in paragraph-
      37 of the aforesaid judgment, is clearly satisfied by the respondent authorities
      in this case, inasmuch as, the land offered by the petitioner through a
      notarized sale deed has also been taken into consideration.
      13.     But, at the same time, although the notarized sale deed has been
      taken into consideration, what remains to be decided by the respondent
      authorities is as to whether the said land offered through a notarized sale
      deed, would be a firm offer or it would be an offer of own land as
      distinguished in Clause-14(i) of the selection brochure. Clause-14(i) having
      clearly provided that own land means a land either owned by the concerned
      person or having a registered long lease for a minimum of 15 years through a
      lease deed, therefore, a lease deed offered through a notarized sale deed
      would not come within the purview of such classification. On the other hand,
      a notarized sale deed would indicate that the concerned person is having a
      firm offer from the purported leaser that in the event the land is required for
      the purpose of the retail outlet, such land would be made available. In such
      view of the matter, this Court is of the considered view that a land offered
      through a notarized sale deed would be classified to be a firm offer rather
      than that of an own land.
      14.     Having held as such, the question for determination now would be as
      to what procedure of marking is required to be followed by the respondent
      authorities. It is also noticed that Clause-14 clearly provides that applicants,
      who have own land will be given weightage over applicants, who have only
      firm offer. Pursuant thereto, the respondent authorities had arrived at a
      procedure whereby the maximum marks to be allotted to an applicant having
      firm offer would be 25 marks for the purpose of land and other infrastructure,
      whereas for an applicant having own land a maximum mark allotted would be
      35 marks, which in fact is clearly provided in Clause14 (ii) of the selection
      broacher itself.
      15.     In view of the above, the 82% marks awarded to the petitioner in
      respect of land and infrastructure would have to be calculated on the basis of
      it being a maximum of 25 marks. Accordingly 82% of 25 marks comes to
      roughly about 20.5 marks. On the other hand, the respondent No.4 having
WP(C) No.901 of 2012                                                         Page 5 of 6

      offered an own land and the percentage of marks had been allotted to the
      respondent No.4 being 80%, the said 80% would have to be calculated on
      the basis of maximum marks being 35. Accordingly, 80% of 35 marks roughly
      comes to about 28%.
      16.     In view of the above, this Court is of the view that the 28 marks given
      to the respondent No.4 in respect of land and infrastructure and the 20.5
      marks given to the petitioner in respect of the said criteria is not found to be
      incorrect in any manner and as such the same does not call for any
      interference of this Court.
      17.     As already noticed that even if the marks given for the other criteria
      are interfered to some extent, still such interference will not lead to a
      situation where the petitioner would be able to overcome the difference of 7.5
      marks as had been allotted for the criteria of land and infrastructure.
      18.     In such view of the matter, this Court does not find any reason to
      interfere with the appointment of the respondent No.4 as the retail outlet
      dealer at Lala Bazar pursuant to the advertisement of 31.10.2010. It is stated
      that the advertisement provides that the appointment of retail outlet dealer
      for Lala Bazar would be on the basis of open category for woman. In the
      instant case, it is noticed that both the petitioner as well as the respondent
      No.4 belongs to the open category and both are women and therefore, both
      are otherwise qualified to be appointed subject to their result of the selection
      procedure.
      19.     As already held that the selection procedure is not vitiated in any
      manner, therefore, from the aforesaid point of view also, this Court does not
      find any reason to interfere with the appointment of the respondent No.4.
              In view of the above, this writ petition is devoid of any merit and
      accordingly the same stands dismissed. No cost.
                                                                             JUDGE
      Alam
WP(C) No.901 of 2012                                                           Page 6 of 6


