                  IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
  (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                             PRINCIPAL SEAT AT GUWAHATI
                         (EXTRAORDINARY WRIT JURISDICTION)
                            WP(C) No.904 of 2016
        Gangadhar Fishery Co. Op. Society Ltd.
                                                   ….   …    Petitioner
                      -Versus-
        The State of Assam & 3 others.             …    …    Respondents
                                    BEFORE
                    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SUMAN SHYAM
For the petitioner       :     Mr. D. K. Sarmah, Advocate.
For the respondents :          Mr. Y. Doloi,
                               Addl. Advocate General, Assam.
                               Mr. I. Choudhury, Sr. Advocate.
                               Mr. A. K. Baruah, Advocate.
Date of hearing        :       30.05.2017.
Date of Judgment :             09-06-2017
                          JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV)
1.      Heard Mr. D. K. Sarmah, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also
heard Mr. Y. Doloi, learned Additional Advocate General, Assam,
appearing on behalf of respondent Nos.1, 2 and 3 as well as Mr. I.
Choudhury,       learned      senior   counsel    appearing on    behalf    of
respondent No.4.
WP(C) No.904/2016                                              Page 1 of 20

2.     In this writ petition the decision to grant settlement of the “Gr.
No.15/101- Torsa River Fishery” of Dhubri district in favour of the
respondent No.4, as conveyed by communication dated 22.01.2016
issued by the respondent No.2, has been put under challenge.
3.     The case of the petitioner, in brief, is that on 27.05.2015 the
respondent No.3 had issued an NIT inviting tenders from the interested
Fishermen     Cooperative      Societies/Self Help  Groups   and    NGOs
comprising of 100% actual fishermen of the Scheduled Caste (SC)
community or Maimal community of the Barak Valley for awarding
the settlement of the aforementioned fishery for a period of seven
years. As per the NIT, the tender papers would be accepted till 2.00
p.m. on 26.06.2015 and the bids would be opened on the same day at
3.00 p.m.
4.        A four member Fishery Advisory Committee headed by the
Additional Deputy Commissioner (Fishery), Dhubri was constituted for
the purpose of evaluation of the tenders. The Assistant Registrar of
Cooperative Societies, Dhubri; the DFDO, Dhubri and Sri Ramesh Das,
in his capacity as a member from the scheduled caste community
(fishermen), were the other members in the said Committee.
4.          In total, four tenders were received. The petitioner society
became the second highest bidder by quoting the price of
Rs.9,10,000/- whereas the respondent No.4 had emerged as the
WP(C) No.904/2016                                           Page 2 of 20

highest bidder by offering an amount of Rs.18,24,025/-. The bids
submitted by the other two bidders were found to be technically
defective and hence, rejected.
5.          The case of the writ petitioner is that in the minutes of the
Fishery Advisory Committee meeting dated 26.06.2015 it has been
categorically observed that the Bakijai Clearance Certificate dated
23.03.2015 enclosed by the respondent No.4 had lapsed and since the
list of members of the society enclosed with the tender paper was not
approved by the Assistant Registrar of Cooperative Societies (ARCS),
Dhubri, hence, the tender of the respondent No.4 was liable to be
rejected. Notwithstanding the same, the respondent No.3 had issued
a communication dated 05.12.2015 addressed to the respondent No.1
depicting that the bid of the respondent No.4 was valid. Taking note
of such illegal projection made in the communication dated
05.12.2015 the impugned decision to issue the order of settlement had
been taken in favour of the respondent No.4. According to the
petitioner, as per the minutes of the Advisory Committee dated 2606-
2015 the bid submitted by the writ petitioner was the only technically
valid bid and therefore, the settlement ought to have been awarded
in favour of the writ petitioner.
6.      The respondent No.1 has filed counter affidavit, sworn by the
Joint Secretary to the Government of Assam, Fisheries Department,
inter- alia, stating that on the basis of a communication issued by the
WP(C) No.904/2016                                            Page 3 of 20

Deputy Commissioner, Dhubri, the Additional Deputy Commissioner,
Dhubri had conducted an enquiry and thereafter, submitted a report
vide letter dated 18.11.2015 informing that there was no Bakijai
proceeding pending against the respondent No.4 i.e. M/s Dhubri
Disabled Men Jhagra Dohar and Soulmari Beel Fishery Development
Cooperative Society Ltd. It has further been stated that the members
list of the respondent no. 4 society enclosed with the tender paper
was found to be counter signed by the ARCS, Dhubri. It has further
been mentioned that the respondent No.4 had also submitted
documents        such  as  Neighbourhood     Certificate    and     Fishing
Experience, Actual Fishermen Certificate, Registration Certificate of
the Society, Audited balance sheet of the society as well as the
resolution of the Board for submission of tender on behalf of the
society. Considering the fact that the price quoted by the respondent
No.4 was the highest, a decision was taken to settle the fishery with the
respondent no 4 since there was no valid ground to reject the bid of
the said respondent.
7.      The respondent No.3 i.e. the Circle Officer, Agomoni Revenue
Circle, Dhubri, has filed a separate affidavit stating that since the
Bakjijai Certificate dated 23.03.2013 annexed with the tender papers
was found to have expired, hence, on receipt of communication from
the office of the respondent No.3 an enquiry was conducted
whereafter, it was found that there was no Bakijai proceeding
WP(C) No.904/2016                                            Page 4 of 20

pending against the respondent no 4 society. In his affidavit the
respondent No.3 has also stated that the list of members submitted
along with the tender papers was duly counter-signed by the ARCS,
Dhubri.
8.     The respondent No.4 has also filed counter-affidavit, inter -alia,
stating that the respondent No.4 society was established for the socio-
economic growth of persons with physical disability belonging to the
scheduled caste community through development of fishery. As per
the Certificate of       Registration, the areas of operation of the
respondent No.4 society are Durahati, Bhetakoba, Soulmari Pt.I,
Dimakuri Pt.II, Silaipar, Bishkhowa Pt.II, West Kanuri Pt.I, South
Tokrerchora      Pt.II, North  Tokrerchora,  Koimari,  Harinchara      Kuti
(Palanghat), Kumargang, Debotar Barundang and Panchghat. While
generally denying the averments made in the writ petition, the
respondent No.4 had stated in the affidavit that the tender submitted
by the respondent No.4 society was in total compliance with the
mandatory clauses of the NIT. Since the price offered by the
respondent No.4 was the highest, hence, the settlement has been
rightly offered in its favour. Under the circumstances, there was no
scope for interference with the order of settlement by this court.
9.     Mr. Sarmah, learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioner,
has assailed the order of settlement by taking various grounds. By
referring to the notification dated 19.09.2008 issued by the respondent
WP(C) No.904/2016                                           Page 5 of 20

No.1 Mr. Sarmah submits that in the present case the order of
settlement has been issued without verifying as to whether the
respondent No.4 society is comprised of 100% actual fishermen or not
and was located in the vicinity of the fishery as per requirement of the
said notification. According to Mr. Sarmah, the members of the
respondent No.4 are not 100% actual fishermen nor are their members
located in the vicinity of the fishery. Under the circumstances, the
settlement of the fishery with the respondent No.4, according to Mr
Sharma, was in violation of the notification dated 19.09.2008 and
hence, unsustainable in law .
10.     By referring to the minutes of the Fishery Advisory Committee
meeting held on 26.06.2015 Mr. Sarmah submits that admittedly, the
Bakijai Clearance Certificate furnished by the respondent No.4 had
lost its validity on 26.06.2015 i.e. the date on which the tenders were
opened. That apart, there is also no approved list of members
furnished by the respondent No.4 and taking note of the aforesaid
anomalies the Fishery Advisory Committee had held that the tender of
the respondent No.4 was invalid. However, the said opinion of the
Fishery Advisory Committee has been illegally reversed by the
respondent No.3 based on which the respondent No.2 has issued the
order of settlement in favour of the said respondent.
11.     Besides the above, submits Mr. Sarmah, the tender of the
respondent No.4 was liable to be rejected on account of the fact that
WP(C) No.904/2016                                            Page 6 of 20

the tender form submitted by it was not counter signed by a gazetted
officer nor did it contain signatures of witnesses. Not only that, submits
Mr. Sarmah, even the security deposit of 15% was submitted by the
respondent No.4 in the form of Demand Draft whereas, as per Clause
4(e) of the NIT , the same ought to have been tendered in the form of
“Call Deposit”.
12.     Mr. Y. Doloi, learned Additional Advocate General, Assam, has
submitted that the Bakijai Certificate annexed by the respondent No.4
along with the tender papers dated 23.03.2015 was valid for three
months but the same had lapsed only three days before opening of
the tenders. However, in order to ascertain as to whether any Bakijai
claim is pending against the respondent No.4 society, necessary
enquiry was made through the Additional Deputy Commissioner of the
District pursuant whereto, it was found that there was no Bakijai claim
pending against the respondent No.4. Mr. Doloi submits that the
decision to award the settlement in favour of the respondent No.4 was
taken keeping in mind the interest of the Government revenue and
also the fact that the bid of the respondent No.4 was the technically
valid highest offer.
        Mr. Doloi has produced the records in support of his aforesaid
contention.
13.     Mr. I. Choudhury, learned senior counsel appearing for the
respondent No.4, has submitted that the notification dated 19.09.2008
WP(C) No.904/2016                                            Page 7 of 20

issued by the Commissioner and Secretary to the Government of
Assam, Fishery Department, addressed to the Deputy Commissioners
and Sub-Divisional Officers (C) of the Districts, Sub-Divisions in Assam, is
in the nature of an Inter-Office Memorandum meant for laying down
certain guidelines and the same does not have the force of a statute.
According to Mr. Choudhury, since there was no Bakijai case pending
against the respondent No.4, hence, the mere fact that the certificate
produced by it had lapsed three days before the tender was opened
would not have any bearing on the fate of tender submitted by the
respondent No.4.
14.     As regards the plea of the writ petitioner that the members list
furnished by it was not approved by the ARCS, Mr. Choudhury, besides
inviting the attention of this Court to the pleaded stand of the
respondent Nos.1 and 3, has also pointed out to the endorsement of
the ARCS made in the list of members of the respondent No.4 society
annexed to the writ petition to contend that the aforementioned plea
of the petitioner is completely untenable on the face of the record.
15.       As regards the objection pertaining to the submission of the
security by means of Demand Draft instead of Call Deposit, Mr.
Choudhury has placed reliance on a decision of this Court in the case
of Bidhubhushan Chowdhury and another vs. Union of India and
others, reported in 2000 (1) GLT 341 to contend that the purpose of
securing the bid is achieved both by Call Deposit as well as by
WP(C) No.904/2016                                             Page 8 of 20

Demand Draft. Since deposit of the security money through Demand
Draft was not a defect affecting the substance of the tender the
respondent authorities have rightly accepted the same.
16.        As regards the objection raised by the petitioner regarding
absence of signature of gazetted officer in the tender paper, Mr.
Choudhury submits that the NIT does not lay down any condition for
submitting a tender paper which is counter-signed by a gazetted
officer. In such view of the matter, the bid of the respondent No.4
could not have been rejected on the said ground since the same did
not violate the conditions of the NIT. In support of his aforementioned
argument, Mr. Choudhury has relied upon a decision of this Court in
the case of Raja Das vs. Assam Fisheries Devp. Corpn. And others
reported in 2005(3) GLT 544.
17.      Finally, Mr. Choudhury has argued that the tender of the
respondent No.4 having offered the highest price, acceptance of the
same would be in the public interest . As such, this Court in exercise of
discretionary power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
would not interfere with the settlement even if some legal point is
made out by the writ petitioner. In support of his aforesaid argument
Mr. Choudhury has relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in
the case of Air India Ltd. vs. Cochin International Airport Ltd. and
others reported in (2000) 2 SCC 617.
WP(C) No.904/2016                                            Page 9 of 20

18.    In his reply argument, Mr. Sarmah, has added that one of the
members of the respondent No.4 society, namely, Kekaru Biswas was
the member of another society viz., M/s Raidak Gurarchora Fishery
Cooperative Society Ltd. and therefore, the respondent society had
incurred disability to participate in the bidding process under Section
23(e) of the Assam Cooperative Societies Act, 2007. Mr. Sarmah has
further argued that since the AGM of the respondent society had not
been held regularly, hence, it had lost its character of a Cooperative
Society thereby incurring disqualification from participating in the
tender process.
19.    I have considered the submissions of learned counsel for the
parties and have also perused the materials available on record.
20.    From the pleadings of the parties it appears that the settlement
awarded in favour of the respondent No.4 has been assailed by the
petitioner on the following grounds :-
       (1)     That the Bakijai Clearance Certificate dated 23.03.2015
submitted by the respondent No.4 had lapsed on the date on which
the bids were opened.
       (2)     The list of members of the society furnished by the
respondent No.4 was not counter signed by the ARCS.
       (3)     The order of settlement had been issued by the
respondent      No.2   without  complying    with  the requirement      of
notification dated 19.09.2008.
WP(C) No.904/2016                                          Page 10 of 20

        (4)    The members of the respondent No.4 society are not 100%
fishermen.
        (5)    The respondent No.4 society is not located in the vicinity
of the fishery.
        (6)    The security deposit was not submitted in the form of Call
Deposit as per Clause 4(e) of the NIT.
        (7)    The Tender Form was not counter signed by a gazetted
officer or witnesses.
        (8)    One of the members of the respondent No.4 society had
acquired membership of another fishery society.
21.     Let me now deal with each of the aforesaid points on the basis
of materials available on record. From the perusal of the record it is
seen that the respondent No.4 had submitted a Bakijai Clearance
Certificate dated 23.03.2015 which was valid for three months. The
certificate had lost its force on 23.06.2015 i.e. the date on which the
bids were opened.           I find from the record that the Deputy
Commissioner had sought clarification from the concerned revenue
authorities as to whether any Bakijai Case is pending against the
respondent No.4. In response to the said query a report was submitted
by the concerned Additional Deputy Commissioner on 18.11.2015
clarifying that there was no Bakijai Case pending against the
respondent No.4 society. It is also not the case of the petitioner that
any Bakijai Case was pending against the respondent No.4 society at
WP(C) No.904/2016                                           Page 11 of 20

the relevant point of time. By referring to the information furnished
under the Right to Information Act, 2005, Mr. Sarmah, learned counsel
for the petitioner, has made an attempt to contend that Bakijai cases
were pending against Shri Dhiren Sarkar who was the Secretary of the
respondent No.4 Society at the time of its incorporation/registration
but from a perusal of the said information furnished under the RTI Act I
find that the same refers to pending Bakijai proceedings in connection
with GR No.40160 – Bhellamari; GR No.64180 – Bhimdaha Beel and GR
No.16/102 – Gobererchora Fishery which are evidently not the
constituent members of the respondent No.4 society.
22.    Mr. Doloi has relied upon a decision of the Division Bench of this
Court dated 29.09.2011 rendered in Writ Appeal No.294/2011 [Abu
Talib vs. The Assam Fisheries Development Corporation Ltd. and others]
to contend        that requirement of submitting Bakijai Clearance
Certificate is not a rigid requirement under the tender clause. The
observation made by the Division Bench in the case of Abu Talib
(supra) is quoted herein below :-
                       “Learned    counsel   for   the writ  petitioner    has
               submitted that the requirement of submitting Bakijai
               clearance certificate was required to be rigidly followed
               as rightly held by learned Single Judge.
                       After considering the rival contentions we are of the
               view that the requirement of submitting Bakijai clearance
               certificate could not be taken as a rigid requirement. It is
               not a case where level playing field has been denied nor
WP(C) No.904/2016                                               Page 12 of 20

               a case where loss has been caused to public revenue. In
               exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution
               of India this Court does not sit in appeal over the decision
               of an administrator in giving a contract unless there is
               illegality, irrationality or procedural irregularity as laid
               down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Tata Cellular vs.
               Union of India, AIR       1996 SC 11.      If after taking into
               account all relevant considerations a decision has been
               taken to award contract, the Court has to be slow in
               interfering with the decision. In the present case, there
               was no compelling need for interference in absence of
               any illegality, malafides or loss of public revenue.”
23.    From a bare reading of the above observation made by the
Division Bench, it is clear that a tender cannot be rejected merely on
the ground of non-availability of Bakijai Clearance Certificate. The
respondent no 4, in the present case, had              submitted the Bakijai
Clearance Certificate but since the same had expired on the date of
opening of the tenders,          necessary verification was     made by the
authorities so as to ascertain that there was no Bakijai Case pending
against the said respondent whereafter, it was found that no such
proceeding was pending. Therefore, the challenge made to the order
of settlement on the aforesaid ground lacks merit and is accordingly
rejected.
24.    As regards the objection pertaining to list of members furnished
by the respondent no 4, I find that the aforesaid statement has been
WP(C) No.904/2016                                                 Page 13 of 20

categorically denied in the affidavits filed by the respondent Nos.1, 3
and 4. That apart, the record reveals that the list of members
submitted by the respondent No.4 was duly countersigned by the
ARCS. If that be so, the aforesaid ground urged by the petitioner is
without any substance and is liable to be held so.
25.     In so far as the plea taken by the writ petitioner on the ground
that the respondent No.4 is not constituted by 100% fishermen and
that it is not located in the neighbourhood of the fishery, I find from the
record that the respondent No.4 society had annexed a certificate
issued by the competent authority certifying that its members
constitute 100% fishermen. There is also a certificate dated 23.03.2015
enclosed with the tender document showing the distance of each of
the 44 constituent members of the respondent No.4 society from the
Torsa Fishery. By referring to the fact that 24 numbers of its members
have been shown to be placed at a distance of 16 Km. to 22 Km. from
the Torsa Fishery, Mr. Sarmah submits that the said 24 members cannot
be said to be located in the vicinity of the fishery. Therefore,
according to Mr. Sarmah, the respondent No.4 society cannot be
treated to be located in the neighbourhood of the fishery.
26.     The question as to what would constitute the neighbourhood in
the context of proviso to Rule 12 of the Fishery Rules came up for
consideration before this Court in the case of Brahmaputra Part-II
Mach Mahal Samabai Samity Limited vs. State of Assam & others
WP(C) No.904/2016                                              Page 14 of 20

reported in 2003 (1) GLT 155 wherein this Court had made the
following observations :-
               (14)    The term ‘neighbourhood’ does not express any definite idea
               of distance. A few feet or several 100 yards or even a greater
               distance from an object would be in its neighbourhood.
               (15)    Thus, no mathematical formula has been devised to define
               and measure neighbourhood. Within the meaning attributed to the
               word as above, there is evidently an element of flexibility and,
               therefore, while dealing with the proviso to Rule 12 as above, it
               would, in our opinion, neither be permissible nor desirable to
               ascertain the neighbourhood by a measuring tape. If the residence of
               the members of an otherwise eligible fishery co-operative society is in
               the vicinity and proximity of the fishery as is understood in common
               parlance, they are deemed to be in the neighbourhood thereof. Any
               attempt to measure the neighbourhood in terms of inches, feet,
               yards or centimeters and metres, would render the proviso outiose in
               a given fact situation.”
27.     From the aforesaid observations made by the Division Bench it is,
thus, clear that the expression ‘neighbourhood’ cannot be confined
to a particular physical distance measurable in terms of quantity.
Viewed from that angle, the mere fact that some of the members of
the respondent No.4 society are located between 16 km to 22 km, by
itself, would not be a good enough ground to hold that the
respondent No.4 society is not in the neighbourhood of the fishery.
28.     Coming to the question of implementation of the office order
dated 19.09.2008, although the said notification is not a part of the
WP(C) No.904/2016                                                      Page 15 of 20

record, yet, the same has been produced by the learned counsel for
the petitioner during the course of hearing. From perusal of the same I
find that the purpose of the notification is to ensure that all relevant
verifications including the constituent members of the society in
question, its neighbourhood position and the orders of the Court in
force were required to be analysed by the respective Deputy
Commissioners/Sub-Divisional Officers before forwarding the proposal
to the Government. In the present case, I find from the record that
there were materials produced by the petitioner so as to permit the
authorities to verify the aforementioned facts. Although the petitioner
has urged that the members of the respondent No.4 society are not
100% fishermen, yet, the said plea could not be substantiated by the
petitioner by placing relevant materials on record.
29.    In the case of Bidhubhushan Chowdhury (supra) this Court was
confronted with a case where the earnest money was deposited by
the tenderer in the name of the wrong person which had led to
rejection of his bid on technical ground. Disapproving such a course of
action adopted by the employer, this Court had held that the purpose
of depositing the earnest money is to bind the bargain and defect, if
any, in the same would be curable in nature. Security money deposit is
a matter of satisfaction of the employer and therefore, it would be
upto the employer to decide whether the amount has been tendered
in acceptable form or not. In the present case, the respondents have
WP(C) No.904/2016                                          Page 16 of 20

accepted the Demand Draft submitted by the respondent No.4
without raising any objection. Under the circumstances, no prejudice
can be said to have been caused to the writ petitioner in the matter.
30.    In the case of Raja Das (supra) a question of similar nature had
arisen as to whether tender papers submitted by the petitioner not
counter-signed by gazetted officer would render the same as invalid.
While answering the said question, the learned Single Judge had
made the following observations :-
                   “14.   The tender papers submitted by any tenderer
                   can be invalid only, if any of the conditions of the
                   NIT or the guidelines issued for that purpose has
                   been    violated.   The  tenderers     and   also    the
                   Corporation are bound to adhere to the terms and
                   conditions of such NITs and also the guidelines. The
                   Corporation cannot put any condition to treat a
                   tender paper invalid, unless such condition is
                   reflected in the terms and conditions of the NIT or in
                   the guidelines issued for that purpose by the
                   Corporation. The terms and conditions of the NIT
                   must also stipulate that in case of violation of such
                   condition, the tender paper submitted by any of
                   the tenderer is liable to be rejected as being not
                   valid. As discussed above, there is absolutely no
                   condition either in the NIT or in the guidelines issued
                   by the Corporation for that purpose requiring any of
                   the tenderer to put his signature in presence of a
                   gazetted officer and the counter signature of such
                   tender paper by any of the gazetted officer.”
WP(C) No.904/2016                                            Page 17 of 20

31.    In the present case, there is no clause in the NIT which requires
that the tender paper should be countersigned by a gazetted officer
or that the same needs to be signed by the witnesses. The signature of
the Secretary of the respondent No.4 in the tender paper is not in
dispute nor is it in dispute that the tender has been submitted on
behalf of the respondent No.4. If that be so, in view of the law
declared by this Court in the case of Raja Das (supra) it is held that the
respondent authorities have rightly accepted the tender submitted by
the respondent No.4.
32.            Settlement of a Fishery, it must be borne in mind, is
required to be made as per the mandate of the Assam Fishery Rules,
1953. Rule 12 of the Fishery Rules provides as follows:-
               “12.   Except those referred to in sub-rule 8(b) above, all
               registered Fisheries shall be settled under tender system of
               sale in place of sale auction :
                      Provided that the Government shall settle a 60%
               category fishery with special category of co-operative
               Societies, Non-Government Organizations and Self Help
               Groups consisting of 100% actual fishermen in the
               neighbourhood of the fishery concerned by the Tender
               System.
                      Explanation 1:-     For the purpose of this rule, the
               words “special category” means and includes the
               Cooperative       Societies,    Self-Help   Groups,      Non-
               Governmental Organisations comprising of 100% actual
               fishermen of the Scheduled Caste community or Maimal
               community of erstwhile Cachar district. Who cannot
WP(C) No.904/2016                                              Page 18 of 20

               participate in competitive bidding because of poor
               financial condition due to famine, flood, draught,
               epidemic of any other circumstances which are beyond
               control of the society, non-Governmental Organisation or
               Self Help Groups as the case may be;
                      Explanation 2:-    For the purpose of this rule “a
               60% category fishery” means 60% of registered fisheries
               available in a Civil Sub-Division eligible for settlement in a
               particular year.”
33.     A perusal of the aforementioned Rules would go to show that
the same has a benevolent object which is to promote the interest of
the group of people mentioned therein. Proviso to Rule 12, therefore,
clearly enjoins a duty upon the Government to take proper care that
the 60% category Fishery is settled with the special category of co-
operative societies mentioned there-in. Unlike in the case of an open
commercial tender, in case of settlement of a fishery under the Rules,
there is a statutory duty cast upon the Government to ensure that the
objective of the Fishery Rules is realized in its letter and spirit. In doing
so, it would not only be open but also incumbent upon the
Government to make such relevant enquiries so as to reach a
satisfaction that not only the most deserving group is conferred with
the settlement but also to ensure that the interest of government
revenue is adequately protected. Therefore, subject to fulfillment of
the NIT conditions, the price offered by the highest bidder must
receive utmost priority and should normally be accepted, unless there
WP(C) No.904/2016                                                Page 19 of 20

are very good and compelling reasons to deviate therefrom. As long
as the authorities provide a level playing field to all the bidders, mere
technical defects not affecting the substance of the tender should
not be permitted to defeat the underlying objective of the Fishery
Rules.
34.     In the case in hand, I find that the respondent authorities had
good and sufficient reasons to recommend the settlement in favour of
the respondent no 4 society. Once it is found that the respondent No.4
was the highest bidder, and it did meet the eligibility norms both as
per the NIT as well as the Fishery Rules, the decision to award the
settlement cannot be interfered with merely because there is some
technical defect in the form in which the tender has been presented.
35.      For the reasons stated herein above, I am of the opinion that
there is no merit in this writ petition. Consequently, the writ petition fails
and the same is accordingly dismissed.
       Parties to bear their own cost.
       Send back the records.
                                                          JUDGE
T U Choudhury
WP(C) No.904/2016                                              Page 20 of 20


