                              WP(C) No. 977 of 2010
13.07.2017
                                          BEFORE
                  HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE MANASH RANJAN PATHAK
             Heard Mr. Tanmay Jyoti Mahanta, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. B
     Sarma, learned counsel for the petitioner. Also heard Mr. Tarun Chandra Chutia,
     learned Standing Counsel, Board of Secondary Education, Assam (SEBA) for
     respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and Mr. Narayan Sarma, learned Standing Counsel,
     Education Department for respondent No. 4.
             The daughter of the petitioner, Ms. Mrigakshi Sarma appeared in her High
     School Leaving Certificate Examination, 2009 conducted by the Board of Secondary
     Education, Assam (SEBA) and obtained 538 marks out of total 600 marks. Being
     not satisfied with the marks of General Science, English and Social Science obtained
     by the petitioner’s daughter in her said HSLC Examination 2009, the petitioner by
     depositing the necessary fees, sought for re-examination of her answer scripts in
     those three subjects and after such re-assessment made by SEBA, it remained
     unchanged. Thereafter, the petitioner through RTI obtained the answer scripts of
     those three subjects and found that in her General Science answer script, she was
     given 8½ marks less, whereas in her Social Science answer script, she was given 7
     marks less which according to the petitioner, his daughter is entitled to.
             The contention of the petitioner is that had the SEBA duly checked the
     answer scripts of his daughter and had given those 8 & ½ marks in her General
     Science answer script and 7 marks in Social Science answer script, in addition to
     which she had already obtained, she would have been within the top 20 positions
     of the merits list of HSLC Examination, 2009.
             It is also contended by the petitioner that he obtained the Memorandum of
     Instructions/Guidelines issued by the SEBA for HSLC Examination, 2009 for each of
     the subjects and after comparing with the said Instructions of SEBA with regard to
     General Science and Social Science answer scripts, it is claimed that his daughter is
       WP(C) No. 977 of 2010                                                    Page 1 of 5

entitled for 8 and ½ more marks in General Science and 7 more marks in Social
Science.
        The respondent SEBA filed its affidavit in the matter and submitted that
though instructions and guidelines are issued to the examiners by SEBA to award
marks to the answers of the question papers of HSLC Examination, such
instructions/guidelines are issued to its examiners/scrutinizers so as to award marks
according to the performance of the candidates and to be careful not to deprive a
candidate of the marks what he/she deserves. SEBA further submitted that
instructions and guidelines do not constitute the complete answer and such
Memorandum of Instructions/Guidelines are issued in each subject to the
examiners so that they can use such instruction as guidance, while examining the
answer scripts and apply their mind uniformly in evaluation of answers of questions
for awarding same standard of marks to the students. It is also submitted by SEBA
that such guidelines are advisory in nature and are not mandatory nor it is as per
the statutory rules, but for the use of the examiners who can assess the answer
scripts of the candidates at his/her own wisdom and knowledge.
        The respondent SEBA also submitted that the marks which the petitioner is
asking to increase as is as per the own assessment and evaluation of the petitioner
on the basis of the performance of his daughter and, therefore, on such self
assessment, the marks obtained by the petitioner’s daughter cannot be enhanced.
        Perused such guidelines issued by the SEBA, annexed with the writ petition
and it clearly spells out that it is only a guideline to answers and do not constitute a
complete answer; but it observe that if a student in response to a very short
answer type question, writes a single word answer, which constitutes the core of
the answer, the same should be accepted and full marks should be awarded. By
the said guidelines, SEBA also instructed its examiners not to hesitate to award full
marks, if the answer deserves it.
        The respondent SEBA has also filed an additional affidavit in the matter
stating that the answer script of General Science of the daughter of the petitioner
was re-examined for the satisfaction of the Court, though not permitted by the
Board’s Rule and for that it engaged a subject expert for re-checking of the said
 WP(C) No. 977 of 2010                                                      Page 2 of 5

answer script and after re-checking, it has been found that with regard to the
Question No. 6(a) of General Science, the said answer of the petitioner’s daughter
did not incorporate with the mathematical explanation an therefore, 1 mark was
not awarded by the examiner to the said examinee. With regard to the answer to
Question No. 8(a)(b), it is found that 3 out of 4 marks is justified. With regard to
the answer to Question No. 11(a), marks were already awarded to her. With regard
to the answer to Question No. 13(c), mark was already awarded but the examinee
did not write the difference as required. With regard to the answer to Question No.
14(b), the examiner awarded 1 mark out of 2 since the first part of the answer was
not satisfactory. Similarly, with regard to the answer to Question No. 15(b), 1 mark
was awarded out of 3 marks as the answer was found to be partially correct. Again,
with regard to the answer to Question No. 16(b), 2 out of 3 marks were awarded
since the second part of the answer is not satisfactory and in the second part only
1 mark was awarded out of 2 marks. Further, with regard to the answer to
Question No. 22(b), the examinee was awarded 1 mark out of 2 marks and it was
found that 1 mark is more than sufficient, since the answer is completely
unsatisfactory.
        As the respondent SEBA has already re-examined the answer script of
General Science of the petitioner’s daughter by a subject expert, specially engaged
by the concerned Board, the Court without entering into the merit of the case
directs the respondent SEBA to issue fresh mark sheet for the HSLC Examination,
2009 to the daughter of the petitioner as per the marks that she deserves, if not
already given earlier after re-examination of her answer scripts.
        The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of President, Board of Secondary
Education, Orissa & Another -Vs- D. Subhankar & Another, reported in (2007) 1
SCC 603 have observed that –
        “6. Award of marks by an Examiner is to be fair, and considering the fact that
        revaluation is not permissible under the Statute, the Examiner has to be careful,
        cautious and has a duty to ensure that the answers are properly evaluated. No
        element of chance or luck should be introduced. An examination is a stepping-stone
        on career advancement of a student. Absence of a provision for revaluation cannot
        be a shield for the Examiner to arbitrarily evaluate the answer script. That would be
        against the very concept for which revaluation is impermissible.
 WP(C) No. 977 of 2010                                                           Page 3 of 5

     7. The learned counsel for the Board has stated that due proper care is taken in the
     matter of selection of Examiners. Procedure followed by the Board was stated to be
     as follows:
         Names of teachers teaching different subjects are obtained from the schools in a
         prescribed form named Teachers Index Form. The data supplied by the schools in
         the Teachers Index Form are entered in the Computer. Circle-wise/subject-wise
         seniority list of Chief Examiners/Assistant Examiners/ Scrutinisers is prepared.
         After the Unit Chart of the valuation centre is finalised, allotment of Chief
         Examiner/Asst. Examiner/Scrutiniser made by the Computer basing on the
         guidelines framed by the Examination Committee, keeping in view the distance
         of schools from valuation centre. After selection of Examiners, the Computer
         print of the subject-wise and Unit-wise list of Chief Examiners/Asst. Examiners
         and Scrutinisers is finalised, and thereafter the appointment orders are issued.
         Criteria fixed are stated to be as follows:
         (i)   Minimum teaching experience for Chief Examiners and Assistant Examiners
               is stipulated.
         (ii) Chief Examiners are appointed on rotation and Assistant Examiners on
               seniority basis.
         (iii) In case of shortage, the experience restriction can be relaxed.
         (iv) Scruitnisers are appointed from among the subject-teachers with particular
               years of teaching experience.
     8. It has to be ensured that the Examiners who make the valuation of answer
     papers are really equipped for the job. The paramount consideration in such cases
     is the ability of the Examiner. The Board has bounden duty to select such persons as
     Examiners who have the capacity, capability to make valuation and they should
     really equipped for the job. Otherwise, the very purpose of evaluation of answer
     papers would be frustrated. Nothing should be left to show even an apprehension
     about lack of fair assessment. It is true that valuation of two persons cannot be
     equal on golden scales, but wide variation would affect credibility of the system of
     valuation. If for the same answer one candidate gets higher marks than another
     that would be arbitrary. As indicated above, the scope for interference in matters of
     valuation of answer papers is very limited. For compelling reasons and apparent
     infirmity in valuation, the Court step in. Care should be taken to see that the
     Examiners who have been appointed for a particular subject belong to the same
     faculty. It would be a mockery of the system of valuation of a teacher belonging to
     Arts stream is asked to evaluate answer papers of Science stream. It may be that a
     teacher had Physics. Chemistry or Biology at the Intermediate Level, but at
     Graduation stage he had special paper in Zoology. To ask such a teacher to
     evaluate Botany paper would not be proper. Similarly in the case of a teacher
     having Mathematics in Intermediate Level while he took his high studies in Physics,
WP(C) No. 977 of 2010                                                          Page 4 of 5

       or Chemistry, or Botany at the Graduation Level, evaluation of answer paper in
       Mathematics by him would not be proper. May be that he has working knowledge
       in the subject. But the valuation should be done by an Examiner who is well
       equipped in the subject. That would rule out the chance of variation improper
       valuation. Board authorities should ensure that anomalous situations as pointed
       out above do not occur. Additional steps should be taken for assessing the capacity
       of a teacher before he is appointed as an Examiner. For this purpose, the Board
       may constitute a Body of Experts to interview the persons who intend to be
       appointed as Examiners. This process is certainly time-consuming but it would
       further the ends for which the examinations are held. The Chief Examiner is
       supposed to act as a safety-valve in the matter of proper assessment.
       9. One thing which cannot be lost sight of is the marginal difference of marks which
       decide the placement of candidates in the merit list.”
       Before parting with the case, the Court expresses it view that the
respondent SEBA shall take due care and shall be diligent enough to take proper
care for evaluation of the answer scripts of the students appearing in the Class-X
Final Examinations conducted by it, keeping in mind the observation made by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the above noted case by complying with the observations
made in it.
       With the aforesaid observation and direction this writ petition stands
disposed of.
                                                                         JUDGE
Pb/-
 WP(C) No. 977 of 2010                                                          Page 5 of 5


