                       IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
       (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM: NAGALAND: MIZORAM AND
                             ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                              WP(C)No.961/2015
       Md. Naizuddin Ahmed and 44 Others
                                                                          …Petitioners
                                      -Versus-
       The State of Assam & 5 Others
                                                                       … Respondents
                                    BEFORE
        HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE ACHINTYA MALLA BUJOR BARUA
       Advocates for the Petitioners         :       Mr. G Uddin
       Advocates for the Respondents         :       Mr. N Sarma
                                                     Standing Counsel
                                                     Education Department
                                                     Assam
       Date of hearing & Judgment             :      08.06.2017
                        JUDGMENT & ORDER (ORAL)
       Heard Mr. G Uddin, learned counsel for the petitioners. Also heard Mr. N
Sarma, learned Standing counsel, Education Department.
2.     The petitioners after having participated in the selection process, pursuant to
an advertisement dated 28.12.1996, were appointed in the year 1999 as Assistant
Teacher of the respective schools in the Mangaldoi Sub-Division of the erstwhile
Darrang district. It is the case of the petitioners that although they were duly
appointed, their services were not regularized.

                                             2
3.       Per contra, it is the case of the respondents that in the present Darrang
district there were many numbers of illegal/irregular appointments. Therefore, it was
difficult for the respondent authorities to distinguish between the genuine candidates
and illegally/irregularly appointed candidates. Accordingly, the authorities by the
Office Memorandum dated 15.11.2011 had constituted a Screening Committee for
examining the cases of such illegally/irregularly appointed teachers in various
districts of Assam, including the Darrang district. Subsequent to the said Office
Memorandum, the respondent authorities by the letter dated 14.08.2014 had
referred the cases of certain number of teachers before the Committee once again,
inasmuch as, those teachers were not given due consideration in the earlier round of
consideration, as per the Office Memorandum dated 15.11.2011.
4.       It is the case of the petitioners that their cases were not considered even in
the    subsequent     round   of  the   examination    by   the  Screening  Committee.
Consequently, they preferred this writ petition for a direction to the respondent
authorities for verification/enquiry/scrutinizing of their cases by the Screening
Committee.
5.       Mr. N Sarma, also refers to another Notification dated 03.11.2016 by which it
has been provided that the Government in the Elementary Education Department
had decided for re-verification of the particulars for some of the applicants by the
Committee which was earlier notified by the Notification dated 04.06.2014. It is
provided in the said Notification that the re-verification would be carried out only in
respect of those candidates who had been examined during the Screening. As it is
the case of the petitioners that their cases were never examined by the Screening
Committee, even the subsequent Notification of 03.11.2016 do not mitigate their
grievances, inasmuch as, the said Notification merely provides that the re-verification
will be carried out in respect of such applicants, who were earlier examined during
the Screening.
6.       On the other hand, the State respondent through the Commissioner, Lower
Assam Division has filed an affidavit, wherein in paragraph 10, it is stated that in the
earlier process, a procedure was adopted that the DEEO would open the trunk in

                                            3
presence of one ADC and complete the preliminary work under the supervision of the
ADC. But, however, in respect of Darrang district, the said procedure was not
followed and the DEEO had opened the trunk in the absence of the ADC and had
completed the preliminary work of verification in his own supervision.
7.      It is also stated that although the date of verification of the teachers was
fixed on 10.11.2014, but the DEEO was not found present on the date of hearing. It
is also stated that on the day of hearing, altogether 238 Nos. of teachers were called
for verification, although the DEEO had provided a list of only 58 teachers.
Accordingly, it is stated that the Screening Committee had conducted the verification
process only in respect of such 58 applicants which was provided by the DEEO and
rest 182 applicants were not given its due consideration.
8.      It transpires from the above, that the cases of the petitioners were included
in those 182 applications, which were not examined by the Screening Committee.
The said affidavit also provides that the Commissioner, Lower Assam Division
apprehends that the DEEO had tampered with the records of the candidates that the
trunk containing the documents of the candidates as the same was opened by the
DEEO in the absence of the ADC.
9.      In view of such anomalies indicated in the affidavit of the Commissioner,
Lower Assam Division, this Court deems it appropriate that the petitioners have a
legal right that their cases be also examined by the Screening Committee as regards
the authenticity and genuiness of their appointment.
10.     The claim of the petitioners for an examination by the Screening Committee
cannot be rejected, merely on the ground that the DEEO had not forwarded the
names of those petitioners before the Screening Committee.
11.     In such view of the matter, in the interest of justice, it is provided that the
cases of the present petitioners be also placed before the Screening Committee and
further their cases be accordingly examined as per law.

                                             4
12.     The aforesaid exercise be carried out within a period of 3(three) months from
the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
13.     In terms of the above, this writ petition stands closed.
14.     Copy of the Notification dated 03.11.2016 be kept as part of the records.
                                                                              JUDGE
Shivani


