                  IN THE GAUHATI HIGH COURT
  (THE HIGH COURT OF ASSAM, NAGALAND, MIZORAM AND ARUNACHAL PRADESH)
                        AIZAWL PERMANET BENCH AT AIZAWL
                        (EXTRAORDINARY WRIT JURISDICTION)
                           WP(C) No.215 of 2016
        Sh. K. Hema & 22 others                  ….    …     Petitioners
                     -Versus-
        The State of Mizoram & 4 others.         …     …     Respondents
                                  BEFORE
                    HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SUMAN SHYAM
For the petitioners :        Mr. C. Lalramzauva, Sr. Advocate.
                             Ms. Priya Zohmangaihi, Advocate.
For the respondents :        Mr. Rosangzuala Ralto,
                                    Government Advocate, Mizoram.
                                    (For respondent Nos.1 to 4)
                             Mr. K. Lalchhainliana, Advocate
                                    (For respondent No.5).
                                    ,
Date of hearing       :      04.07.2017.
Date of Judgment :           04.07.2017.
                         JUDGMENT AND ORDER (Oral)
1.      Heard Mr. C. Lalramzauva, learned senior counsel appearing for
the writ petitioners. Also heard Mr. Rosangzuala Ralte, learned
Government Advocate, Mizoram, representing the respondent Nos.1
WP(C) No.215/2016                                               Page 1 of 13

to 4 as well as Mr. K. Lalchhanliana, learned counsel appearing for the
respondent No.5.
2.      This is the third round of litigation arising out of the Government
Notification dated 01.08.1994 by means of which all the Government
and non-Government Middle Schools in existence as on 01.08.1994 in
the Chhimtuipui District were transferred and placed under the control
of   the    respective      Autonomous      District  Councils  within    whose
jurisdictions, they were located and the services of the existing
incumbents serving under the aforesaid schools were also placed
under the control of the Autonomous District Councils in terms of the
terms    and      conditions    appended       as   Annexure-B   to    the  said
Notification. The teaching and non-teaching staff of the Government
Middle Schools located in the aforesaid area were affected by the
Notification dated 01.08.1994 to the extent that their services had
been placed at the disposal of another autonomous body without
obtaining their consent in the matter. Situated thus, the affected
employees had earlier approached this Court by filing WP(C)
No.136/2000 which was disposed of by the learned Single Judge by
making the following observations and directions :-
                “5.      Therefore, this Court, for the time being, is disposing
                of this petition with the following direction:
                (i)     The petitioners will have the right to agitate the
                        matter if and when an acceptable solution is not
WP(C) No.215/2016                                                 Page 2 of 13

                     invented or evolved by the Govt. or at least a
                     reasonable solution is not effected.
               (ii)  The Respondents will consider within a reasonable
                     period from the date of disposal of this petition
                     whether    it  is possible   to  remove    the    word
                     ‘deputation’ from the transfer orders or to modify
                     the transfer orders in such way as to benefit the
                     petitioners so that their services condition before
                     the transfer was effected.
               (iii) The respondents Govt. shall also take necessary
                     steps to amend the terms and conditions of the
                     transfer in such away as to remove all types of
                     doubts and confusions and with a view to ensure
                     that the petitioners are not deprived of the privilege
                     enjoyed by them prior to their transfer to the
                     Autonomous District Council, the said modification
                     will  also   suggest  the   authority who     will   be
                     competent to grant such benefits to the petitioners
                     as and when they become eligible for such
                     benefits.”
3.     In the wake of the order dated 15.05.2002 passed in WP[(C)
No.136/2000 the Government had issued a Notification dated
05.03.2003 revising the terms and conditions for absorption of the
teaching and non-teaching staff of Government Middle Schools, who
had earlier been transferred on the basis of the original Notification
dated 01.08.1994. According to the Notification dated 05.03.2003, the
services of the teaching and non-teaching employees of the
Government of Mizoram serving under the Middle schools under the
WP(C) No.215/2016                                             Page 3 of 13

jurisdiction of the three Autonomous District Councils were placed at
the disposal of the respective District Councils for permanent
absorptions with effect from the date and as per the terms and
conditions as indicated in the Annexure-A appended to the
Notification. The effect of the Notification dated 05.03.2003 was that
instead of transfer, the services of all these Government employees
had now been placed at the disposal of the Autonomous District
Councils for permanent absorption.
4.      Since the teaching and non-teaching staff of the Government
Middle Schools were originally appointed under the Department of
Education, State of Mizoram, they were aggrieved by the decision of
the State to put their services at the disposal of the Autonomous
District Councils for permanent absorption more particularly since the
prior consent of these employees were never obtained by the
Department before doing so. As such, the affected teaching and non-
teaching staff of the Government Middle Schools were compelled to
approach this Court once again in a representative capacity by filing
WP(C) No.115/2003 agitating their grievances in the matter. Taking
note of the stand of the petitioners therein as well as the official
respondents, the learned Single Judge had disposed of WP(C)
No.115/2003 by the order dated 10.08.2007 by making the following
directions and observations contained at paragraph 10 of the said
order which is quoted herein below for ready reference :-
WP(C) No.215/2016                                          Page 4 of 13

       “10.    The upshot of the above discussions may now summed up
       for decisions as follows:-
       (i)     By notification dated 1/8/1994 only the Government
               Middle Schools had been legally transferred. The part of
               the notification transferring non Government Middle
               Schools is not in terms of para 6(2) of the Sixth Schedule
               and, therefore, the same is set aside and quashed. All
               such non Government Middle Schools and the teaching
               and      non-teaching     staff including  the   petitioners
               concerned herein shall stand restored to their earlier
               position before 1/8/1994.
       (ii)    The teaching and non teaching staff of the Government
               Middle Schools so transferred including the petitioners
               concerned working in those institutions shall enjoy the
               status of Government servants on deputation to the
               District Councils without any deputation allowance;
       (iii)   The period of deputation cannot be indefinite. The State
               respondents shall obtain their consent and gradually
               withdraw them (at the first phase those who are unwilling)
               from deputation within a definite time frame. If there exist
               no vacancy in the Govt. Middle Schools to withdraw and
               post the petitioners, incumbents of other Govt. Middle
               Schools may be sent on deputation by rotation in their
               places to create required vacancies. If, however, there
               exist vacancies to withdraw them from deputation, the
               vacancies created in the transferred Middle Schools due
               to such withdrawal shall be filled up by the respective
               district councils only in accordance with their recruitment
               procedure;
       (iv)    If it is considered necessary so to do for the purpose of
               gradual withdrawal of the petitioners from deputation, the
WP(C) No.215/2016                                             Page 5 of 13

               State Government may issue a direction that vacancies
               which may arise in the Government Middle Schools should
               be filled up only by the deputationist and till the
               withdrawal process is completed no fresh recruitment to
               those vacancies shall be made.
       (v)     The notification dated 5/3/2003 providing terms and
               conditions for permanent absorption in the district
               councils of the teaching and non-teaching employees
               including the petitioners of Govt. Middle Schools placed
               on deputation is unsustainable in law and, therefore, the
               same is set aside and quashed.”
5.     As would be apparent from the narrations made herein before,
the learned Single Judge had clearly held that the policy decision of
the Government of Mizoram to place the services of the teaching and
non-teaching staff of the Government Middle Schools at the disposal
of the Autonomous District Councils on the basis of permanent
absorption was unsustainable in law. The notification dated 05.03.2003
was accordingly set aside. In the order dated 10.08.2007, it was further
observed that there cannot be an indefinite period of deputation and
therefore, the State respondents were directed to obtain the consent
of the employees and gradually withdraw them from deputation
within a definite timeframe.
6.     Pursuant to the judgment and order dated 10.08.2007 passed in
WP(C) No.115/2003, the Director of School Education, Mizoram, Aizawl
had also issued a communication dated 16.07.2009 addressed to the
WP(C) No.215/2016                                           Page 6 of 13

Secretary, Government of Mizoram, Department of Education and
Human Resources Development (School Education), recommending
that the order of this Court dated 10.08.2007 be implemented.
Thereafter, a meeting was convened under the chairmanship of the
departmental Minister in presence of the affected persons so as to find
a solution to the vexed issue in the light of the judgment and order
dated 10.08.2007 passed by this Court. After a threadbare discussion
of the issues, the meeting held on 14.10.2014 under the chairmanship
of the departmental Minister adopted a resolution to place the matter
for appropriate discussion with the departmental Secretary and for
consultation with the legal expert so as to find appropriate means for
implementation of the Court order. Thereafter, on 20.10.2014 a
meeting was held in the office chamber of the departmental
Secretary in presence of the representatives of all the affected parties
whereby it was categorically agreed that the judgment and order
dated 10.08.2007 passed by this Court shall be implemented to the
extent possible and steps to that effect shall be taken immediately.
7.     The grievance of the writ petitioners, numbering 23 in total, who
are the teaching and non-teaching staff of the Government Middle
Schools under the Mara Autonomous District Council (MADC), is that
despite the categorical directions contained in the order dated
10.08.2007 passed in WP(C) No.115/2003 and notwithstanding the
resolution dated 20.10.2014 adopted in the meeting held with the
WP(C) No.215/2016                                           Page 7 of 13

departmental Secretary unanimously agreeing to implement the
Court order, no effective steps have been taken by the authorities till
date for rotating the services of the writ petitioners even after the
expiry of nearly 10 (ten) years since the order dated 10.08.2007 had
been passed.
8.      Mr. C. Lalramzauva, learned senior counsel representing the writ
petitioners, submits that it is not in dispute that the writ petitioners are
all Government servants and hence, their terms and conditions of
service would be governed by the rules and regulations applicable to
such Government employees. After the judgment and order dated
10.08.2007 passed by this Court it is now apparent that the petitioners
will have to be treated as Government servants and they will have to
be offered rotational posting outside the schools placed under the
control of the Autonomous District Council. Notwithstanding the same,
the Government has failed to take appropriate measures for effective
implementation of the Court order as a result of which the writ
petitioners are suffering immensely in as much as they have been
denied the benefit of medical reimbursement, GPF and pension
facilities which is available to the employees working under the
Mizoram Government.
9.      To buttress his argument Mr. C. Lalramzauva has also invited the
attention of this Court to para 4.2 of the Office Memorandum dated
02.07.2014 which makes it clear that in case of those employees who
WP(C) No.215/2016                                              Page 8 of 13

are transferred on deputation to posts outside the Government
department, payment of leave salary and pension contribution by the
borrowing department to the State Government shall not be required.
Notwithstanding the same, submits the learned senior counsel, the
department has not redressed the grievances of the petitioners as a
result of which they have been compelled to approach this Court
once again by filing the present writ petition.
10.    Mr.    Rosangzuala    Ralte,   learned      Government     Advocate,
Mizoram, submits that the decision of the Government is to implement
the order of this Court dated 10.08.2007 to the extent the same is
possible and therefore, the petitioners do not have any reason to feel
apprehensive about their entitlement under the Rules. The learned
counsel submits that the writ petition itself is liable to be held to be not
maintainable since the purpose of the present writ petition is nothing
but to implement the earlier judgment and order dated 10.08.2007 in
a manner which is impermissible in the eye of law.
11.    Mr.    K.  Lalchhanliana,    learned    counsel     representing    the
respondent No.5, has also questioned the maintainability of the writ
petition on the ground that in the absence of any contempt
proceeding, the petitioners cannot allege violation of the Court order.
The learned counsel submits that since, the petitioners are guilty of
laches and negligence, no equitable relief can be granted to them in
the facts and circumstances of the case. The learned counsel has
WP(C) No.215/2016                                               Page 9 of 13

further argued that the writ petitioners are all employees of the State
Government and therefore, the MADC is not liable to pay medical
reimbursement, GPF or pension to the writ petitioners.
12.     I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel
for the parties and have also perused the materials available on
record.
13.     As has been mentioned herein before, the entire controversy in
the matter was triggered by the Notification dated 01.08.1994 by
means of which the Government of Mizoram had not only transferred
the existing Government Middle Schools and non Government Middle
Schools and place them at the disposal of the respective Autonomous
District Councils but even the services of the Government employees
were placed under control of the Autonomous District Councils
without obtaining their consent. The employees who had joined
service as State Government employees did not agree to such
decision of the Government and resisted the transfer on the ground
that their services could not have been transferred to another
Autonomous body without obtaining their consent thereby altering the
conditions of their service. Taking note of the aforesaid position, the
learned Single Judge had rightly declared the entire exercise as illegal
by the judgment and order dated 10.08.2007.
WP(C) No.215/2016                                          Page 10 of 13

 14.    The State has not preferred any appeal against the judgment
and order dated 10.08.2007 and hence, the said order has attained
finality in the eye of law. Therefore, it was incumbent upon the
departmental authorities to implement the order dated 10.08.2007 in
its letter and spirit. But it is sad that despite the lapse of nearly ten years
since the order dated 10.08.2007 was passed and notwithstanding the
decision of the Government to implement the Court order, the
respondent authorities           have   apparently not initiated      effective
measures to redress the grievance of the petitioners as per the
mandate of the order dated 10.08.2007. As a result of such inaction of
the departmental authorities, not only have the petitioners been
made to suffer unduly but also a considerable amount of confusion still
persists amongst the affected employees as to the rules and
regulations that would govern the conditions of their services.
15.     It is no doubt correct that ordinarily a writ petition would not be
the proper recourse for implementation of an earlier order passed by
the Court on the same subject matter. But in the present case, I find
that considerable amount of discussions and deliberations has taken
place over the past few years centering around the question of
implementation of the order dated 10.08.2007 passed in WP(C)
No.115/2003 and a decision was finally taken by the authorities to
implement the Court order dated 10.08.2007 which is reflected in the
resolution dated 20.10.2014. In the present writ petition the prayer of
WP(C) No.215/2016                                                 Page 11 of 13

the    petitioners  is for  issuance   of  a   writ  of  mandamus       for
implementation of the decision adopted on 20.10.2014 as well. Hence,
the Writ Petition is held to be maintainable in the facts of the present
case.
16.     I have noticed that the petitioners had earlier submitted a
representation on 14.09.2015 ventilating their grievances in the matter
but no action has been taken till date on the said representations.
Under the circumstances and having regard to the submissions
advanced by the learned counsel for the parties I am of the view that
the present is a fit case where a direction can be issued to the
respondents for redressal of the petitioners’ grievances in light of the
order dated 10.08.2007 as accepted by the decision adopted on
20.10.2014. This writ petition, therefore, stands disposed of with a
direction upon the respondent Nos.1 to 4 to take note of the
grievances of the petitioners and pass appropriate orders giving
rotational postings to the petitioners as per the order dated 10.08.2007
passed by this Court in WP(C) No.115/2003. For the above purpose,
the department shall take necessary steps for calling options from the
petitioners so as to decide on their future posting if the same has not
been done already. The above process shall be completed within a
period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of
this order.
WP(C) No.215/2016                                           Page 12 of 13

17.    It is further made clear that with effect from their respective
dates of appointments in the Government Middle Schools till their
retirement from service on attaining the age of superannuation, all the
petitioners shall be treated to be in continuous Government service
and they hall be entitled to all the benefits and privileges that may
accrue under the rules and regulations applicable to the Government
servants of equal rank and category.
       With the above observation this writ petition stands disposed of.
       No order as to cost.
                                                         JUDGE
T U Choudhury
WP(C) No.215/2016                                            Page 13 of 13


